Thursday, 12 November 2009

Parliament met at 2.48 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting. I know that there is a function at Nakasero, a requiem service for the late Kazini, but I thank you for finding time to come here. 

We have a delegation from Lagos State House of Assembly in the gallery. They are hon. Ibisola Ogayemi, the Deputy Clerk of the House; hon. Kolapo Osunsanya, Chairperson House Committee on Economic Planning and Budget, and Mr Idris Baruwa, an officer in the Parliament. Join me in welcoming them here. (Applause) 

There are other guests who have arrived, when I get their particulars, I will formally introduce them to you.

I have received a letter and it reads as follows: 

“Hon. Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda 

Subject: Thank you. 

Mr Speaker, on the eve of my retirement from Supreme Court duties, I wish to thank you and through you, the honourable members of the august House for the generosity, courtesy and favourable consideration you and your predecessors and honourable members, both present and past, have always extended or given me. 

I particularly enjoyed the periodical interactions I have had with honourable members of the House and look forward to continuing to be of use in similar situations, otherwise, for the good of our nation. I thank you and thank you all.

Signed:
Hon. Justice George W.G. Kanyeihamba, Justice of the Supreme Court.”

That is the message. We wish him well.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWERS

QUESTION 86 TO THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT

2.53
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Mr Speaker, question 86.

“Would the minister inform the House:

(i) 	Why government has failed to implement or enforce the Rent Restriction Act Cap 231 Laws of Uganda 2000 whose primary object is to regulate rent payable by tenants in respect of commercial and dwelling premises in Kampala and other urban areas?

(ii) 	Whether government has plans to come up with other alternative policy measures to protect tenants occupying commercial structures within the central business district of Kampala against unconscionable rent charges that are being hiked by property owners from time to time?” 

2.54 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HOUSING (Mr Werikhe Kafabusa): Mr Speaker, the response to the question raised by hon. Lukwago is as follows: 

The Rent Restriction Act Cap 231, Laws of Uganda 2000, as it is known today, is a very old law and previously cited as Cap 210 of 1949, with the object to consolidate the law relating to the control of rent of dwelling units and business premises.

The Rent Restriction Act provided for control of rental levels in certain residential dwelling units and commercial premises. Certain premises, especially belonging to government, were exempted as the rent levels were fixed by government and in most cases were highly subsidised. 

Following the adoption of the economic liberalisation policy where the market forces of supply and demand were freed to determine the price levels, including rent, the Rent Restriction Act was, therefore, rendered obsolete as rent control would only interfere with the market forces to distort the rent levels. 

Besides, government also adopted the National Shelter Strategy, which provided a policy framework that guided developments in the housing sector. Under this strategy, government plays the role of an enabler rather than a provider. 

In its effort to meet the housing needs of the increasing population, government sold the pool houses, which were only benefiting less than five percent of the public servants and consolidated housing allowances into the salaries of all workers. 

Government also used the proceeds from the sale of pool houses to capitalise Housing Finance Bank so as to increase its capabilities in contributing to the mortgage industry. 

These policies were intended to encourage the private sector to invest in the housing industry to meet the housing demand. Indeed, there is evidence that attests to this as investment has responded to where there is demand.

It is envisaged that increased housing supply will ultimately create competition, which will translate into affordable rent levels. 

However, the key issue, which calls for government intervention is the need to regulate the relations between the landlords and tenants to safeguard the parties against practices that may be exploitative or injurious to either of them. 

The second part of the question is as to whether government has plans to respond to this situation. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is aware of the need for a law to regulate the landlord-tenant relations in order to promote equity and justice between the parties involved. It is for this reason that the ministry has drafted a Landlord-Tenant Relations Bill soon to be discussed by the stakeholders to clearly determine rights and obligations of landlords and tenants including remedies to possible disputes under a rental agreement for dwelling units and commercial premises. This law will provide a framework within which rental agreements will operate. 

Furthermore, the proposed law will make provisions for resolution of conflicts or disputes should there be any illegal provisions in the rental agreements that deny either party of their rights. I beg to submit.

2.57
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have some few supplementary questions. I do not know why the minister did not have the courtesy of indicating that this document originates from the ministry because it does not have a heading or signature and I wonder why he did not deem it necessary to own up to it because as it appears right now, it is merely a loose paper.

Having said that, I also wish to know whether the honourable minister standing here on the Floor of the House can tell us that the law in question is obsolete? Is the minister aware that these laws were updated by Uganda Law Reform Commission and we have a new compendium of laws of this country 2000? Has the minister ever seen volumes of this nature? These are the Laws of Uganda, which are up to date. This is Volume 9, hon. Minister, and I do not know whether you have ever seen it. If you have ever seen it, how dare you come to the Floor of the House and pronounce yourself on a law that exists on our statute books as obsolete? I find it rather queer!

Secondly, the minister in the second paragraph is quoted as having said: “Following the adoption of economic liberalisation policies, where the market forces of supply and demand were freed to determine the price levels, including rent, the Rent Restriction Act was, therefore, rendered obsolete as rent control would only interfere with the market forces.” Should we take this as the policy of government that as far as commercial ventures and property and even dwelling premises, including land, are concerned, it is the policy of government not to interfere with the prices of rent or busuulu? Is non-interference now the policy of government because this is a free market economy? Is that the position, hon. Minister?

Finally, on this issue of the pool houses, I do not know why the minister thought that it was fit to bring it here because it raises a number of questions, especially in the way it was handled; the number of structures which were divested or sold off; it was done in a manner which was not very clear. How does this come in here in this particular case because we are talking about the Rent Restriction Act whose primary object was very clear? I thank you.

3.01
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): By way of another question, I want to find out from government whether they are aware that this question of rent has gotten out of hand. It has become so personal that in this country some owners of buildings want their rent in dollars or other foreign currencies. Is this acceptable to government? Do they think that kind of situation is tolerable?

Secondly, the question of rent restriction under the Rent Restriction Act was largely a matter for Kampala as it was then. Is it meant to keep this law on the statute books and also extend it to other urban authorities in the country particularly when others are being raised –(Mr Mutuluuza rose_) 

THE SPEAKER: Let him continue with his question and if you have a question as well you will ask later.

MR KAWANGA: Finally, there is reference to consultations being made with stakeholders and amending the Rent Restriction Act to read something else. I would want to know how far this process has gone and which stakeholders have so far been consulted on this proposed new law?

3.03
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you for the opportunity, Mr Speaker. The reason why we liberalised our economy was to allow the forces of demand and supply prevail and government benefits in form of taxes. Landlords are supposed to pay what is called tax on rental income and research shows that maybe about one percent of landlords pay this tax. I would like to know from the minister whether he is aware of this; that despite the day-to-day hiking of rent to dollars or euros or some other currencies, government continues to get almost no revenue from that business. And if so, what measures are in place to improve revenue collection. Maybe this could be a measure of regulating the relationship.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine is not a question but just information – 

THE SPEAKER: No, this is not a session for information. 

3.04
MR MICHAEL NYEKO (FDC, Kilak County, Gulu): Mr Speaker. The argument being brought out by the minister that -  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, question time is for question time. It is not for discussion or giving information; either you have a question or a supplementary and you expect answers, or you do not.

MR NYEKO: Mine is a question, Mr Speaker. The minister is arguing that the Rent Restriction Act is now obsolete because of liberalisation. The minister is also aware that the policy of liberalising the economy in this country was started way back in the early 90s and this law that we are talking about is of 2000. The question I am putting across to the honourable minister is that are you saying that government came up with this law in 2000 well knowing that it was already obsolete and brought it to Parliament to be passed? Is that what you mean?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HOUSING (Mr Werikhe Kafabusa): Hon. Lukwago was asking about the “oldness” of the law. It is true this law was initially put in place in 1949. Most of us were not born then, including you, and when you look at this law and you look at the law under Cap 231, there is – I know it is still on the statute books but the reason why I said that it is a very old law, implementing it is almost difficult because this law refers - under Section 3, for example, it talks about district commissioners appointing rent boards. They are talking of Shs 10,000 as a penalty; we are now actually using currency points. There are so many sections, which are difficult. For example, as we talk now, we do not have district commissioners; so how would you operationalise this section? 

So, having realised that this law is very old, it is not in tandem with the challenges of this age, we proposed a new law as a ministry, called the landlord–tenant relationship law. That is the law we are working on now to cure these problems. And in my understanding, this old law is going to be repealed once we have this one in place. There are a few sections in it which are okay but we are working on the law, which will cure most of these loopholes that this law leaves behind. 

On the liberalisation policy, we are not saying that there are no interventions from government in liberalisation. I know you were referring to the Land Bill; I know hon. Lukwago is referring to –(Interjections)– anyway, I know that the policy is in place. There are interventions here and there where necessary. You cannot say that because it is a liberalised economy, you can have everything free.

THE SPEAKER: Please, answer the question. 

MR WERIKHE: Okay, Mr Speaker. On pool houses, this is also a policy, which had its own procedures and guidelines as to how houses were given. Houses were given to sitting tenants who happened to be public servants, and that policy still stands up to now. In fact, as I talk now, we are in the process of having public servants access the available houses and sub-divided plots in the country. 

Hon. Kawanga said that rent is in dollars. We appreciate that rent is high in certain areas and that is why we are having this Bill at this point because of the rent fares, which are out of control. 

According to the law, for us we charge in Uganda Shillings. Whether they charge in dollars that can be converted, but the law says you should charge in Uganda Shillings. So, if you pay in dollars that could be the arrangement between the landlord and tenants. I do not know who is still charging in dollars, but the situation is that whether it is in dollars or Uganda Shillings, these are all convertible currencies. Even if you got Shs 20,000 you can still change that into dollars.

Now you asked, “Who has been consulted for the Landlord–Tenant Relationship Bill?” I stated in my answer that we have drafted the Bill and we are going to consult all the stakeholders, including honourable members here in the House. 

Hon. Tumwebaze asked the measures in place to ensure that income is realised by government from the transaction of rent payable for commercial – 

THE SPEAKER: That is not your question; you are not the Minister of Finance.

MR WERIKHE: Having been advised by the Speaker, I will leave that to the Minister of Finance. 

Hon. Ocula; this question of liberalisation was also asked by some other colleagues. The liberalisation policy was for the control of prices, including rental levels. The new law will ensure that government intervenes so that people are saved from exaggerated rental fees that are being charged in certain instances. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, before we proceed to the other questions, in the distinguished strangers’ gallery we have participants of the Fourth Conference on Women in Leadership and Management organised by Africa Renaissance Centre based in Mbabane, Kingdom of Swaziland. The delegates are from Tanzania, Kenya, Swaziland and Uganda. Please join me to welcome them. (Applause)

And in the public gallery, we have pupils and teachers of Kiwoko Church of Uganda Primary School Luwero, Nakaseke District represented by hon. Syda Bbumba. You are also welcome. (Applause) 

QUESTION 85 TO THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT

3.15
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti) Mr Speaker, question No.85.

“What is the Land Tenure Reform Project in the Ministry of Lands?

What does it do and what has it achieved in the past five years?”

3.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HOUSING (Mr Werikhe Kafabusa): Mr Speaker, this is a question – 

THE SPEAKER: But as I had said before, answers to questions should be limited to three minutes. Therefore, they should be brief. Those are the rules. 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Speaker, the Land Tenure Reform project is a government-funded project implemented by the Ministry of Lands, Planning and Urban Development, which started in the year 2001 and is expected to be completed in 2012. 

The project aims at reforming the land sub-sector by implementing the land sector strategic plan which provides the institutional, operational and financial framework for the implementation of sector-wide reforms including the implementation of the Land Act. 

The specific objectives are:

1.	Creating an inclusive and pro-poor policy and legal framework for the legal sector.
2.	Putting land resources to sustainable productive use.
3.	Improvement of livelihood of poor people through equitable distribution of land, access and ownership.
4.	Greater tenure security for venerable groups.
5.	Increasing availability and use of land information.
6.	Establishing and maintaining transparent, accessible institutions and systems for decentralised delivery of land services.
7.	Mobilising and utilising public and private resources effectively for the development of the land sub sector. 

What does the land reform project do? 

1.	Policy and legislative review, development and implementation of a comprehensive national land policy – here we have a number of issues that show up as achievements.
2.	The development and implementation of a national land use policy. These are outputs that emerge out of the land reform project.
3.	 Development and implementation of a national land use plan.
4.	Review and revision of all land related laws.
5.	Support the policy for protection of land rights for women and other venerable groups. Here we have included facilitating decentralised land administration systems; that is district land boards, area land committees, recorders, land tribunals and LC courts.
6.	Land information management, which includes development of a national land information system, rehabilitation of land registry, systematic adjudication demarcation, survey and certification and registration of land rights.
7.	 Provision of public information on land rights.
8.	Operationalisation of the Land Fund.
9.	Facilitation of ranch restructuring.
10.	Training and capacity building. 

So, Mr Speaker, I submit that these are the achievements and what the Land Reform Project does in the Ministry of Lands. Thank you.

3.20
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Mr Speaker, I find this answer a little difficult to follow because it is a whole paper on land reforms and it makes it difficult to even ask –

THE SPEAKER: Yes, it should not be such a long paper. Questions should be answered in brief, as you did at first. If he is not convinced, then he can ask you supplementary questions. But you do not make a ministerial statement. 

MR KAWANGA: In future, we should not have this kind of thing for an answer. But I would like to ask the Ministry of Lands whether it is comfortable for them to do this before this country gets a land policy. We have already had a land use policy without a national land policy. We have got a Physical Planning Bill with us without a land policy. 

Now this paper on tenure system also indicates that you are working towards a national land policy. Does the Ministry of Lands find it appropriate for us to continue handling land matters without a land policy?

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HOUSING (Mr Werikhe Kafabusa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did my best to summarise, but I had already provided details with answers. I believe my colleagues can sieve and follow what is enshrined in the submission that I brought. 

To answer hon. Kawanga’s question, whether it is comfortable to produce Bills without having a land policy in place, the land policy is actually being worked on, and it started long time ago. It takes a bit of time; consultations, studies and that is why we thought it was important to have some of these laws in place. For example, Physical Planning Bill; really, the situation in urban places was running out of control; we cannot wait for the land policy, it is going to take a little bit longer. 

For example, the Land Act, as prompted by the Constitution under Article 237 – I think under sub-article 908, we had to put a law in place because there were certain issues that had to be addressed as stipulated in the Constitution. It is true we should have had some of these Bills before, but we are not at the right course; we are going to actually have the land policy soon and, therefore, these other Bills will certainly fall in place. 

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE LAND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007

3.24
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Omara Atubo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Land (Amendment) Bill, 2007 be read a second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, seconded. 

MR ATUBO: Mr Speaker, on 13 March 2007 – (Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a matter of procedure. I have received a copy of this report and the report indicates that it is a joint committee report; it indicates that the Bill was committed to two committees –

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you wait for the report to be tabled? The report is not from the Minister on the Floor.

MR LUKWAGO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

MR ATUBO: I would like to thank hon. Erias Lukwago for putting the cart before the horse. (Laughter)

On 13 March 2007, Parliament chaired by the Deputy Speaker discussed the issue of illegal evictions of occupants by landlords on mailo land and district land boards leasing out customary land without the consent of the customary land owners.

Parliament at that time requested me to respond to the following issues: 
a)	The insufficiency of the law on the protection of occupants and customary owners against evictions.
b)	The adequacies of court remedies through land tribunals, local council courts and customary courts, to solve the problem of evictions. 
c)	The roles of the law enforcement agencies and other authorities such as the police, resident district commissioners, the army and local councils in effecting illegal evictions.

My ministry established that the main causes of land evictions are:

1.	The lack of adequate knowledge of the law on the rights of the registered land owners and tenants.
2.	Registered land owners not disclosing to the purchasers the presence of tenants on the land to be purchased.
3.	Unscrupulous landlords conniving with some individuals in the law enforcement agencies to unlawfully evict tenants.
4.	Inadequacies in the Land Act (Cap 227) regarding district land boards’ functions on customary land and penalties for those carrying out illegal allocations and evictions. 
5.	The lack of a national land policy to address the impasse between the landlords and tenants in the long run.

On average, the media have reported 64 eviction-related cases on a monthly basis. Sixty-four cases were reported in June, 82 in July, 56 in August, 45 in September and 77 in October 2007. One act of a landlord has disrupted between 300-500 households and on average about 1,000 people have been affected.

The most recent areas affected include: Luzira in Nakawa Division, Kasubi in Rubaga, Kisamula in Mpigi, Busaabala, Bulamu in Nangabo, Buziga, Kyamula and Kkonge in Ggaba, Nono, Magongo, Mawanga and Bulira in Busunju, Kataka Zone in Busega - Natete, Quata Zone and Ndejje in Kanyanya, Kawempe, Mutungo in Nakawa, Namulanda in Katabi, Kyanja in Nakawa, and Malongo in Mayuge.

Eviction matters have also been reported in areas with customary tenure. It is crucial to note that the media only reports a fraction of the entire land conflicts in the country. This shows that the problem of evictions is still with us and that it requires immediate intervention before the national land policy is put in place.

As a consequence of the evictions, many people have been left both landless and homeless, with no means of fending for themselves. Their economic productivity and livelihood have also been disrupted leading to insecurity in the affected localities and beyond.

In circumstances where people are threatened with evictions, landlords issue notices with unrealistic conditions and timeframes sentencing them to uncertainty characterised by no means of production and hence abject poverty.

The Land (Amendment) Bill was gazetted on 28 December 2007. It was read for the first time before this House on 05 February 2008. Thereafter, the Bill went through extensive and intensive debates and consultations at all levels throughout the country. If there are any Bills that have had the widest consultations, this is one of them.

Consultations, speared-headed by Cabinet and coordinated by my ministry, were held in all regions and some districts of Uganda. There were others held by the Presidential Land Task Force, which visited all sub counties in the central region; that is Buganda. There were also consultations spearheaded by the Rt hon. Prime Minister together with religious leaders and another with the Buganda local government political leaders. All these consultation supported the spirit and substance of the Land Bill. 

The President also consulted LC V, Members of Parliament, religious leaders and the Mengo establishment sometimes called Mengo Government or cultural institution.

The purpose of the Land (Amendment) Bill is a special social protection intervention that seeks to enhance the security of occupancy of tenants on registered land in order to create harmony. It also protects customary land owners from unlawful evictions hence eradicating the untold suffering and landlessness. 

The Bill provides for:

1.	The Minister in charge of Lands to prompt district land boards to determine nominal annual ground rent payable by tenants to landlords.
2.	Tenants on registered land can only be evicted by order of court on grounds of non-payment of the nominal annual ground rent after a grace period of not less than six months.
3.	Land owners who wish to sell land, which is occupied by tenants are to give the first option to the sitting tenants and likewise for tenants. 
4.	It is criminal for tenants to sell without giving first option to the landlords. However, anybody buying land with tenants has to respect the land rights of the tenants.
5.	Protection of customary owners from unlawful leasing of their land by district land boards.

The penalty for any person who attempts to evict, evicts or participates in eviction of Bibanja tenants shall be liable, on conviction, to imprisonment not exceeding seven years – hon. Erias Lukwago is proposing an amendment on punishment to read life imprisonment - that is welcome; we shall look at that proposal. I think he is very patriotic by the way. (Laughter)

Enhancement of penalties under Section 92(1)(c) and (4) for persons convicted for unlawful occupation that is trespass of another person’s land.

For purposes of clarity, the Bill does not deal with issues of restitution of assets and properties of traditional leaders. Neither does it deal with the issue of the 9,000 square miles, otherwise known as “mailo akenda”, and “federo”; the Balaalo movements, environmental degradation and anti-social behaviour as has been mentioned are opponents to the Bill.

There is nothing in the Bill that mentions the above and, therefore, all those issues cannot be affected or effected by the amendment of the Land Act. Those areas mentioned are, therefore, not subject to this Bill.

In addition, the Bill does not protect person(s) who settle on some people’s land without their knowledge or consent. Such unlawful acts are criminal. 

I also would like to correct the misinterpretation that the Bill is intended to grab people and kingdoms’ land or that it protects cattle keepers who will benefit from clause 32(b) by claiming interest on customary land. While the former allegation is not true, in the latter, clause 35(b) has since been deleted and substituted with a new clause 59 to emphasise protection of customary land owners. The deletion of clause 32(b) came after wide consultations whereby it was felt that sections 88 and 89 of the Land Act dealing with customary dispute settlement and mediation by traditional authorities, should not be superseded by courts of law.

A landlord who does not intend to unilaterally evict lawful and/or bona fide occupants will not be affected by the provisions of this Bill. But the landlords interested in illegal evictions, including driven by economic reasons, will be affected by the amendments.

In Uganda, the registered land owners are estimated to be 600,000 while tenants and customary owners are estimated to be over 20 million - 600,000 are people like you and I who have registered land titles. The majority of Ugandans – nearly 90 percent are those without any certificate of title and without any registration. And those are the people to be protected by this law. I would like to say that on the basis of this, government cannot afford to turn a blind eye when the majority of the population is suffering. 

Since Uganda is made up of many tribes that live together in harmony – the list in the Constitution Schedule talks of about 65 tribes – it is important that the mature pro-people attitude of co-existence, which promotes integration of all Ugandans, is strengthened. This is because it is essential for harmonious development and growth of the economy. I encourage Members of Parliament, as the people’s leaders to shoulder this spirit of nationalism because it provides the basis for national unity and a positive, harmonious way of living.

The various colonial agreements introduced a land tenure system with multiple rights, but did not give sufficient protection to the tenants until the enactment of the “Busuulu” and “Envujo” Law of 1928, which in Section 11 provides as follows: “No tenant may be evicted by the mailo owner from his kibanja save for public purposes or for other good and sufficient cause, and unless a court having jurisdiction shall have tried the case and made an order of eviction. Such order of eviction must be in writing and in triplicate. One copy shall be given to the mailo owner, one copy to the tenant or his representatives, and one copy shall remain in the file of the case.”

However, by a stroke of a pen, this important legal protection was removed by Idi Amin’s Land Reform Decree of 1975, thereby creating a very dangerous vacuum?

It is my sincere hope that the object of the Bill is maintained so as to amend the Land Act to enhance the security of occupancy by tenants on registered land, and protect customary land owners whose land is not surveyed and titled, from the growing and aggressive land market in the country. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to procedurally find out whether the copy of the Bill, which is being distributed now, is the final Bill that the committee considered given the fact that the minister has pointed out that there were subsequent amendments after the Bill was taken back to the committee for consideration. So, what is being distributed? Is it a copy of the final Bill that was discussed?

Secondly, if this is the final copy, my copy does not have the new clause 59, which the minister is talking about. I thought that could be sorted out first before we get to the report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think the minister may not answer this. The person to provide the answer is the committee by telling us what they considered; that is when we shall know. Let us hear from the chairperson of the committee.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Speaker, I procedurally would like to request the minister – so that we do not rely on the revised version of the Bill because as she has said, the minister talked about issues affecting customary land owners, but the copy of the Bill I have deals with customary land - it is an old Bill. I do not have the new Bill. So, it would be very difficult for me to debate on a matter whose document I do not have. The attached Bill does not deal with that issue of customary land ownership. Can we have copies of the new revised Bill from the ministry?

MR OMARA ATUBO: The Speaker has definitely guided this House - the stage in which we are is to move to the second reading and I have informed you in my statement that when the Bill was read for the first time on the 5th of February, it went through intensive debate. You know very well, legislators, that when a Bill is brought to the public attention and to the House in terms of the first reading, the Bill goes through a lot of democratic discussions, public hearings and so on. A government that listens will definitely make some amendments and I am informing you in advance after the committee has presented its report, I will be able to give you this. Since the Speaker has guided you, do not put the cart before the horse.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is for the second reading and, therefore, it presupposes that there was a first reading. So, what we are going to deal with is the second reading of the Bill that had its first reading. As far as I know, it was published on 28 December 2007.

MR ISHAA OTTO: I am still confused just like many of our Members here. I want to know from you whether it is procedurally correct to debate a Bill, which we were told by the minister was changed.

THE SPEAKER: I am not talking about what the minister did. I am talking about a document, which I received, gazetted on 28 December 2007. When it comes to debate, debate that one whose copy you have. I am only concerned with the document, which received a first reading because this is a motion for the second reading. Whether that document can be amended, we shall see as we proceed.

Let the chairperson tell us which document they will consider because the minister only moved a motion for the second reading and then we shall come to consider the Bill. For instance, if it received a second reading, then we shall go to the Committee Stage and we shall deal with that document, which we received in this House. Of course, it may be amended during the debate.

MR KAWANGA: Members have received a copy of a document and because the minister has made reference to amendments, they do not know whether what has been distributed contains the amendments. I just want to inform the Members on the Floor that what has actually been distributed is the original Bill which was presented in the House. He may be trying to assist the House to remember what the original document is; his amendments perhaps will come subsequently.

3.47
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Abraham Byandala): I have the honour of presenting the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the Land (Amendment) Bill, 2007. The Bill was read for the first time on 05 February 2008.

MR ERIAS LUKWAGO: Before the chairperson of the committee presents this report, I do not think it would be correct for this report to be presented when it purports to be a report of two committees. It is on the record of Hansard that this Bill was committed to two committees; one, was Infrastructure and the other was Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee.  I, for one, as a member of that committee, my chairman, hon. Tashobya and others who are here did not attend. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukwago, give yourself time, you will be given an opportunity. Let the report be presented and then you raise your objection to the report, which will have been presented.

MR LUKWAGO: I thank you for that guidance, but will proceed with my objection without making reference to that page. The issue I am raising is that I have not been requested to sign.

THE SPEAKER: What you should know is that the relevant committee to deal with this subject is the Committee on Infrastructure, but that committee is free to co-opt other people who are not members of that committee and, therefore, if you went to that committee or if they co-opted the members of another committee, that is fine. But the relevant committee is that on Infrastructure and I think Rule 182 allows a committee to co-opt other members.

So, you could only be there as a co-opted member. If you are not members of the infrastructure committee, you are there as a co-opted members and you would be free to walk in and out.

MR LUKWAGO: I would like to make the record straight; we have never been co-opted as members. We were given this mandate to scrutinise the Bill as members of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee.

THE SPEAKER: If you were given the mandate and did not attend, the proceedings of the committee, then you merely failed to attend as many members have failed to attend their committees - may be you are one of those. I think we should end that interaction and just listen.

MS NANKABIRWA: I want to know whether it is procedurally right to continue listening to my brother hon. Lukwago who was in Ghana on official duties of trying to see the future of his party in Ghana and probably some other countries and that is why he was not able to concentrate on the committee work?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukwago, let us do business. Do not do this for the press – but anyway, for the press I think you have made it. 

MR BYANDALA: I really clarified about co-opting, which is clearly stated in rule 182. 

The Land (Amendment) Bill, 2007 was read for the first time on 05 February 2008 and was referred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. In accordance with rules 116 and 113(a) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the joint committee considered the Bill and wishes to report to this august House.

Background

The Land (Amendment) Bill, 2007 tries to address one of the current biggest land problems which are evictions, and this attracted public attention where some critics view it as a Government scheme to steal people’s land, while Government insists that the intention of the Bill is to protect helpless, lawful and customary occupants of land who face incessant evictions every day. 

Article 237 of the 1995 Constitution vests land to the citizens of Uganda and it specifies four systems of land holdings; that is, Customary, Leasehold, Mailo and Freehold. 

Under Article 237(9), the Constitution directed Parliament to enact a law regulating the relationship between land owners and bona fide/lawful occupants. Parliament then enacted the 1998 Land Act. Despite this law that regulates the relationship between tenants and registered owners, evictions have been rampant. At the height of the rampant evections and the legal gaps, the only option left to handle the evictions is to amend the existing law by inserting the provisions that can address the problem.

The principle objectives of the Bill are:

To amend the Land Act Cap. 227 to enhance the security of occupancy of lawful and bona fide occupants; and not trespassers, but lawful occupants on registered land.

To regulate and define the relationship between the bona fide occupants and registered owners of land.

To enhance the protection of lawful and bona fide occupants, and occupants on customary land, from widespread evictions on land without due regard to their land rights and as conferred by the Constitution and the land Act.

Methodology

The committee held meetings and received memoranda from the following stakeholders. The list is in the report as Members can see. Some of these stakeholders and individuals listed requested to meet the committee on their own initiative because of the significance of this Bill. The committee wishes to register its appreciation to these stakeholders.

The committee received other written submissions from several other stakeholders who did not get the opportunity to appear before the committee. We wish also to report that with the support of USAID-Strengthening Democratic Linkages Project, the committee conducted a countrywide consultative exercise to solicit views on the Bill.

The committee specifically conducted visits to Masaka, Mpigi, Kayunga, Mubende, Kiboga, Mukono, Arua, Koboko, Adjumani, Nebbi, Moroto, Kotido, Mbarara, Kibale, Fort Portal, Masindi, Kabale, Soroti, Kapchorwa, Iganga, Tororo and Mbale. That represents over 25 districts of Uganda. It is important to note that districts were visited after we had received the amendments by the minister. Forty percent of the listed groups also came to us after receiving the amendments.

The committee made reference to the following documents: the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda; the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda as amended in 2006; the Land Act of 1998; the Land (Amendment) Act of 2004; the 1975 Land Decree; the 1928 “Busuulu” and “Envujjo” Law; the Registration of Titles Act Cap. 230; and the Forum for Promoting Democratic Constitution.        
 
Observations

No sufficient consultations were done to precede the drafting of the Bill; this was evident from the public outcry and criticism of the proposed law. This was also voiced when the Prime Minister met the religious leaders on this Bill. To correct this anomaly, Government through the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development did the following:

They conducted countrywide sensitisation meetings in all regions of Uganda. Hon. Urban Tibamanya went to the western axis; hon. Omara Atubo was in the northern axis; hon. Werikhe went to the eastern axis; and honourables Kinobe and Nankabirwa were in Buganda.

Government put in place parallel institutional arrangements to conduct consultative exercises on the Bill; for instance, the Presidential Taskforce on the Land (Amendment) Bill, 2007.

Government submitted new amendments on the Land Act (Amendment) Bill, 2007. This arose out of the public outcry and consultations made by the minister. These new amendments were accepted and considered by the committee.

When you look at rule 113, sub-section 3, this is accepted and this is what we followed. This answers what hon. Lukwago and others were talking about. The parent ministry is free, according to our rules, to come and submit in the committee.

The Land (Amendment) Bill comes in as a stop gap measure due to the public outcry and land grabbing, forceful evictions and grave associated crimes as we wait for the National Land Policy, which the ministry has started working on.

The 1998 principal Act and the 2004 Amendment Act have several provisions, which were not operationalised for several reasons. Stakeholders expressed concern about enacting another amendment law, which shall serve no purpose but rather lie archived in the shelves. However, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development assured the committee that this time, funds will be availed to operationalise the Principal Act and the Amendment Act.

The budget for the ministry for this financial year was substantially increased and the subsequent ones are going to be increased even more; so there is no reason we should doubt what the minister told us.

The Bill introduces an amicable relationship between land owners and lawful and bona fide occupants, users and occupancy rights.

Whereas the Bill emphasises security of occupancy of the lawful and bona fide occupants, it talks less on the entitlements, rights and freedoms of land owners.

The Bill attempts to codify and legislate on matters pertaining to customary land tenure system. Presently, most matters relating to customary land are governed by the traditional norms, beliefs and practices specific to a cultural group.

There is currently no policy on land in Uganda. The committee raised this matter with the ministry and the committee was assured by the minister that there is a draft National Land Policy, which is about to be submitted to Parliament.

Many evictions have already been carried out. If this law is enacted at this time and cannot operate retrospectively, then many people will have suffered.

In Northern and Eastern regions of this country, the consultations indicated that the people wanted clause 32(b) deleted from the Bill.

The committee noted that there were landlords who were stubbornly refusing to receive ground rent (busuulu) in order to create legal grounds for evicting the tenants.

There are some “bibanja” held by child-headed families, who may not be able to pay ground rent before they are of age. This scenario is common in Rakai where heads of families died leaving only minors to fend for themselves. Such families should not be evicted from their “bibanja” for failure to pay ground rent.

In normal circumstances, the national land policy should be in place before the relevant laws. However, we were informed and assured, by the experts that we met, that in peculiar circumstances like one where people are being evicted, you can start with a law to arrest the situation before the national land policy is in place.

The committee learnt that district land boards were not given adequate guidelines by the ministry regarding determination of annual ground rent (busuulu).

Recommendations

Government should find a way of assisting people who were evicted before the enactment of this law the same way the departed Asians and bona fide occupants were helped. There should, therefore, be a legal provision in the law to provide redress to those who will have been evicted for reasons other than failing to pay ground rent.

The committee urges government to expedite the national land policy and bring it to Parliament.

Government should avail adequate funds to the enforcement bodies and institutions. The committee expressed reservations about the commitment of government in implementing this law, the same way it failed to facilitate the implementation of the 1998 Land Act.

Government should, even after passing this law, continue with countrywide consultations on the Land (Amendment) Act and the attendant law policy. This shall alleviate the fears and anxieties that the public may develop on this legislation.

Government should provide adequate money to the land fund to compensate all land owners in order to remove dual ownership and competing rights on the same piece of land by both the tenants and the land owners.

Government should get involved in the survey, demarcation and opening of boundaries of land in areas with land disputes other than leaving it to the liberalised sector or private surveyors. The poor people in the villages cannot afford to pay the surveyors’ fees.

There is need to specify the courts that will be handling land matters in the Bill so that these cases are disposed of fast.

The law should provide for a neutral office where ground rent should be paid in the event that the landlord stubbornly refuses to receive it, in order to create legal ground for evicting the tenant. The same office should be utilised when the landlord or tenant wants to sell his land or “kibanja” to ensure that the law is followed.

The law should provide for adequate compensation for the developments, where the “kibanja” holder is to be evicted for failure to pay “busuulu”.

Exparte judgements should not apply on land conflicts.

The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should, with the passing of this Bill into law, give guidelines to district land boards on determining the annual ground rent.

As I conclude, this Bill is highly supported in all areas of the country and I have been anxiously waiting for it. There were a few amendments suggested by the public and we have incorporated most of them. The most controversial clause was Article 32(b), which has been redrafted. I hope it is acceptable now.

I beg to move -(Interjections)- you will come to my house.

4.09
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Mr Speaker, at the end of the submission, hon. Byandala was raising issues that did not seem to be in the report. It is in my interest and I am sure a number of Members that we see, which page of the report that information came from. 

He even said that, “You come to my house.” So, we were wondering -(Interjections)- which part of the report has that bit of information that we, as a House, go to his house? We need to be helped to know that part of the report. This is a very serious matter.

THE SPEAKER: What is your question? 

MS ALASO: Which part of the report talks about issues that were of concern and have been deleted? I want that clarified. Then the last bit of his statement was that, “You come to my house.” So, which part of the report -(Laughter)- has that aspect of going to his house?

THE SPEAKER: I think they are proposing deletion in their proposed amendments. This is what he means. If he talks about deletion, it can only be found in the proposed amendments because he has not read out the amendments. That is where it can be done. It cannot be done now. Maybe it will be done if we go to the committee stage. That is when they can propose amendments by deletion. 

MS ALASO: But he also said and the Hansard should have it that, “You come to my house” -(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, protect me from Members because I have every right in this House to raise objection, especially to statements that seem to insinuate and demean my presence in this House. I am an elected Member and I am a woman and I cannot be sexually harassed in my workplace. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: What do you have to explain?

MR BYANDALA: Actually, Mr Speaker, I did not know that hon. Alaso was talking to me or referring to any – she was not on the Floor and so I did not even get what she was saying.

I said, “You come to my house” to anybody who wants anything he/she has not understood -

THE SPEAKER: This is causing a problem. Can you withdraw it?

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, it was a slip of the tongue. I apologise.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification on - 

THE SPEAKER: Are you saying there is a minority report? Did you mention it?  

MR KATUNTU: Can I seek some clarification?

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I am looking at the introduction to the report and the first paragraph states correctly that this Bill was referred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for consideration, meaning that it was referred to both committees for consideration.

The minority report also states the same. I am a member of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. I am very uncomfortable because I have no knowledge of this report. We were not even invited to discuss this report, yet it is even supported by signatures. It is only members of the Physical Infrastructure Committee who saw it. What happens under these circumstances?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yesterday, we passed a Bill and strange enough, the chairman of the committee had not signed the report. So, signing a report may or may not be done. I am just giving you an example. According to the copy I had, the chairman who presented the report had not signed it. But now when you say that none of the members of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee signed the report - you do not stand up when another person is talking, hon.  Lukwago. Please, behave. (Laughter) You are trying to make headlines in the newspapers. That is not our business. Please, sit down. I have said so. Yes, you want media coverage. We are not dealing with that. We are doing serious business. You come to me if you cannot obey the rules.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, let me be clearer. I am not talking about just signatures. I am talking about the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee getting involved in the preparation of this report because this was a business of both committees.

THE SPEAKER: Did they participate in the deliberations? 

MR KATUNTU: No.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, if you did not, consider yourself as having been co-opted under rule 182 and if you are co-opted under rule 182, you do not need to sign. You read rule 182.

MR KATUNTU: Can I clarify, Mr Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: I know, hon. Members, that we are dealing with a very sensitive law, which has attracted a lot of debate, but some people are utilising this opportunity to show how agitated they have been.

MR BAKKA: Mr Speaker, I am a Member of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee and I want to be on record that I was consulted by the committee and I was even put on programme to travel upcountry for the consultations. I was even invited for two workshops; one was in Colline Hotel and another I do not remember. So, on the issue of signing, I do not have a problem and my views are already reflected in the committee as a member. Thank you.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking for your indulgence in as far as this simple interpretation is concerned. I am not comfortable with the statement in the introduction of the report and I beg to read the part, “In accordance with Rules 116 and 113(a) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the joint committee considered the Bill and wishes to report to this august House ….” 

I would want your guidance, Mr Speaker, on the specific meaning of the joint committee. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: As I have said, the committee in charge was that on physical infrastructure, but it was recommended that they co-opt the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. And, therefore, if it was a joint meeting, it was that they sit together and consider the recommendations. You have also heard one of the members who participated although others might not have participated. Do you get Police to force them?  

Hon. Members, let us not play politics on this Bill. Let us consider the merits of the law and help to have a fair law, but for doing this because you have been agitating will not help us. Let us help each other to have a good law by making good amendments where they are necessary, other than straining for nothing since you are free to reject the report. It does not mean that the report or recommendations given in the report are binding us; we may reject them. But do not think that on the first day when the Bill came we agitated; that is not the issue. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I still seek further guidance. We are aware that the issue at hand is very sensitive and as we have kick started, there is a lot of inconsistence which we need to be guided on so that we can make a harmonised law which will bring us together as a House and not divide us. 

According to what is presented here, the two committees were summoned and I would have expected the chairperson of that committee who is here to give us clarification on whether the committee was consulted as a committee other than relying on individuals who could have been invited in their individual capacity. That way, we shall proceed to make a law which creates harmony and agreement rather than frustrating all efforts. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do not know what my colleague wants me to do because Members made questions and sought clarification, to which the Speaker also made clarification as to the status of the committee. I do not think I will have anything useful to add. (Laughter)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I think this House enjoins me in respecting your decision on the matter. I only wish to add one thing that there is no joint or single committee of this House that is larger than this House in plenary. The matter is before us; and the only flexibility that I would propose is that since normally members of a committee presenting a report ordinarily are not allowed to contribute to the Floor of this House, you could be more flexible, Mr Speaker, and allow the Members of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee to be given an opportunity to contribute on the Floor of the House. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But I think we came prematurely because as I see, there is an attachment of a minority report. Don’t you think we should hear the minority report before we proceed? Let us get the minority report and also, would the chairman bring the minutes of the proceedings of the committee to assist us? 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, unfortunately my clerk is in the field now; they left this morning. 

THE SPEAKER: But is the file available?

MR BYANDALA: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: We should also get it. Can we get the minority report and then we look at the reports together? I can see the report was signed by hon. Mabikke, hon. Peter Omolo, hon. Elijah Okupa, hon. Amuriat Patrick Oboi and hon. Moses Kabuusu Wagaba.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, hon. Amuriat, as you know, is out of the country attending a science and technology workshop. Hon. Omolo went with a committee to western Uganda, and hon. Okupa is in Arusha for football. I am begging that you permit a member of the Opposition to present this report on their behalf. 

THE SPEAKER: The chairman can read it. Chairman, read the minority report.

4.28
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Abraham Byandala): Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, this is a minority report on the Land (Amendment) Bill 2007 as tabled before this august House on 05 February 2008 and has since been under consideration by the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and the Committee on Physical Infrastructure.

Declared Purpose of the Bill

(i) 	To enhance tenure security.
(ii) 	To protect lawful and bona fide occupants under customary tenure from unlawful evictions. 

The Bill has generated heated and controversial debate and has been faced with hostility from several quarters.

Fears
 
1. 	General suspicion towards government policy on land matters arising from the manner in which the Uganda Land Commission and other agencies like Kampala City Council have been allocating land to individuals.

2. 	Protection of lawful and bona fide occupants under customary tenure from unlawful evictions. The Bill has generated heated and controversial debate and is faced with hostility from several quarters.

3. 	The Bill is a ploy by government to grab Buganda land.

4. 	Government is aware of illegal evictions since most are carried out with the compliance of Police and RDCs, and many other security and paramilitary agencies like Wembley, Kalangala Action Plan, SPCs and LDUs are used in eviction.

Opposition to the Bill

The report glosses over the key issues at stake and does not give adequate consideration to the submissions received by the committee from the bodies and persons listed in paragraph 3 of the main report. 

It is also important to note that the majority of the submissions that were received by the committee were opposed to the Bill. This is, however, not reflected in the main report. 

Opposition to the Bill came from the following stakeholders: Buganda Government, Uganda Law Society, Uganda Bankers Association, Uganda Joint Christian Council and Uganda Law Reform Commission. Other stakeholders who publicly opposed the Bill include MPs from Acholi, Lango, Teso and Karamoja. 

Submission of the Revised Bill by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development 

Parliament invited submissions and comments from the public and indeed the submissions received by the committee were based on the original Bill submitted to this august House by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development on 05 February 2008. However, in July 2008, the minister resubmitted a revised version of the Bill (See Appendix 1). The report suggests that the government’s amendments were in response to suggestions from the people. 

The committee equally abandoned the original Bill submitted to this august House and proceeded to consider the revised version of the Bill submitted by the ministry. Stakeholders and the civil society were not given an opportunity by the committee to submit their views on the revised version of the Bill despite our pleas to the committee chairpersons to seek more input from the stakeholders.

Consideration by the Joint Committees

When the Bill was read for the first time in this House, you referred it to the two Committees on Physical Infrastructure and Legal and Parliamentary Affairs (See Appendix 2). It is our considered position that the final report should have been approved by the two committees. This matter was raised in the committee and the chairperson, hon. Byandala, in his own words said, “The hon. Members on the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs were just support staff to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure in as far as this Bill is concerned.” (Laughter) Of course, that is not right. (Laughter) 

It is important to point out to this House that when the Bill was referred to the two committees, the meetings were jointly chaired by the two chairpersons at the time, hon. Nathan Byanyima and hon. Peter Nyombi. Invitations to stakeholders were signed by the two chairpersons and correspondences to the committee on the Bill were addressed to the two chairpersons. Even the Prime Minister in one of his correspondences – Appendix 3 – addressed it as such. Submissions from the civil society and the general public were also received by the joint committees. However, the final report is only of the physical infrastructure committee. Having worked jointly, it was only in order that the final report got the approval of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

Parallel Consultations of the Bill

Before the Bill was drafted, debated and tabled in this august House, adequate consultations on the subject had not been carried out by the Executive. On realising the trend of discussions on the Bill soon after the Bill was tabled, the Executive hurriedly put in place parallel groups and commissions to embark on a sensitisation campaign all in the name of collecting people’s views on the new version of the Bill even before it was submitted to the committee. While the government teams were in the fields on vigorous sensitisation campaigns, the parliamentary committees were at the same time collecting people’s views on the same Bill. Notable groups commissioned by the Executive included the Kinobe group, the Presidential Task Force headed by Maj. Jacob Asiimwe and the Task Force on the Land Bill set up by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. 

The action of the Executive amounted to interfering with the work of Parliament and exposed clear inadequacies of the Bill, leading the public to perceive the committee as one operating under extraneous pressure being brought to bear by the Executive for political expedience. 

Existence of Sufficient Legislation to Protect Lawful and Bona fide Occupants

The Bill appears to have been drafted without exhaustively considering the existing legislation on land matters. The 1995 Constitution of Uganda and the 1998 Land Act guarantee security of tenure and in fact the Bill does not introduce any new rights for tenants but restates what is already in the current law. The problem is not lack of law but impunity and corruption. 

The cause of evictions is not absence of laws protecting occupants, but rather the following:
a) 	Legal regime, which creates conflicting rights over land.

b) 	Lack of a coherent national land policy to guide land administration.
c) 	Land bonanza against the increasing commercial value of land especially in Buganda. 
d) 	The new landlords who are different from the heirs of beneficiaries of land under the 1900 Agreement. They are engaged in the booming real estate business and buy land as an investment expecting high and quick returns.
e) 	Flawed court judgements.
f) 	Lack of functioning land boards and tribunals.
g) 	Laxity in the land registry, creating room for criminals to forge land titles. 

The concern of members is that existing legislation to tackle the problems that lead to the drafting of the Bill has not been enforced. Over legislation on land matters may end up being counterproductive and may only aggravate the situation especially when it cannot be effectively enforced. 

Lack of a National Land Policy

Uganda has no national land policy. This is also a fundamental observation in the main report, which goes to the root of the matter in question. Article 79 of the Constitution mandates Parliament to enact laws, not stop gap measures, which promote peace, order, development and good governance. Such laws must therefore be based upon sound national policies built on consensus and not simply ad hoc measures allegedly as a stop gap response to outcries. A national land policy should be enacted first and other laws governing land should be moulded to the policy, and not the other way round. 

Criminalisation of Land Disputes

Instead of the Bill introducing an amicable relationship between lawful and bona fide occupants on one side and land owners on the other, it inserts criminal offences into what has been civil relations. This is a condition that could cause very serious tension between land owners and their occupants.

Codification and Legislation on Matters of Customary Land

The Bill attempts to codify and legislate on matters of customary land contrary to the definition of customary tenure under section 3 of the principal Act. 

The provisions of 32 B are discriminatory against the Buganda region because the position of customary land of Baganda, known as the 9,000 square miles, to this day is unclear. There is no justifiable reason for handling customary land in Uganda selectively. The government must have a uniform and universal approach to customary land tenure issues in the country.

Funding of Land Tribunals

By not funding land tribunals, government is in breach of National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy No. VIII, which provides for the provision of adequate resources for organs of government and which states that, “The distribution of powers and functions as well as checks and balances provided for in the Constitution among various organs and institutions of government shall be supported through the provision of adequate resources for their effective functioning at all levels.”

Recommendations

1. 	Government must enact a national land policy, which will detail land tenure reforms in Uganda. Land tenure reforms must provide a legally secure system of land holding, help to resolve land tenure disputes and make funds available and accessible to provide people with secure land tenure. 

2. 	Government should create a national land compensation scheme to assist lawful bona fide occupants to buy out their interest in land as has been the case in Kibaale, Singo and Bunyoro.

3. 	The stakeholders and civil society should be given another opportunity by Parliament to make submissions on the new proposals by the ministry in the Bill. The Bill should, therefore, be taken back to the committee for discussion.

4. 	The final report on this Bill should be approved and signed by the honourable members on the Committee of Physical Infrastructure and the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. They too need to own this report.

5. 	The Executive should desist from interfering in the work of Parliament. Adequate consultation should be done by government before legislation is brought to the House.

6. 	All laws related to land management should be comprehensively reviewed and overhauled. The Bill should not be passed because it seeks to amend an Act that as not been effective.

7. 	Government should facilitate the operation of the land tribunals in order for them to fulfil their constitutional mandate. 

Mr Speaker, they beg to move. (Laughter) You can also see that the report was signed by members of one committee, and that is the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for presenting this report. My observation from this report is the fact that there was joint chairing of the committee, which a number of members had denied. They said that they never had notification, but here we are told that this was not the case. Even those who came to give evidence did so before the two committees. I think that has been resolved especially by the report whose members are not here. That is what they wrote. Now we are free to debate the majority report and the minority report.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. You earlier on said this is a very important report and we need to pay close attention to the details and the various amendments as proposed. I would like to request that we sleep over this, like we have done previously, and then we come back here and then we can pass it.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, my intention is to allow as many members to make their contributions as possible. If we start maybe tomorrow and then go on to Monday or Tuesday, as the case may be, that will afford you opportunity to be heard.

MR KAWANGA: Mr Speaker, there is an amendment which is being referred to in the report, which was introduced by the minister. We request that it should be circulated to enable us debate this matter. It is on page 6 of the report. Surely, I do not know whether the minister will be able to circulate it by tomorrow to enable us debate with it.

THE SPEAKER: In the Sixth Parliament I chaired two committees, a standing committee and a sessional committee, for two years. What happens is that when a Bill is taken to the committee, ministers are invited and they exchange views with the committees and sometimes they agree. I do not know whether this was done or whether a formal document was presented. What happened?

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, a formal document was presented to the committee.

THE SPEAKER: In form of a Bill or a formulation?

MR BYANDALA: No, it was a formulation at that time.

THE SPEAKER: Did you consider it and did you adopt it or you did not?

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, we went through it as a committee. It was presented and explained to us and we accepted it as a submission from the minister.

THE SPEAKER: I think it will help us if you brought the file of the minutes here, because that document should be there. We should get photocopies of it so that members can see it. I think that will help us.

THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Omara Atubo): Mr Speaker, I have enough copies of the final proposal from the government side. It will assist us all. Members can take the copies so that when you debate, you will be able to refer to them. What I believe is that as we go on, some better formulation may be done but we shall cross the bridge when we reach there.

THE SPEAKER: So members, because of the number of members interested in the debate, I think we can start tomorrow for a few hours. We can start at 10.00 a.m. up to 1.00 p.m. 

MR OTADA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you and I want to thank honourable members. You will realise that I am a member of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and I did not sign both reports. Next week I will not be available so I am seeking your indulgence to allow me say a few things.

THE SPEAKER: Ok.

4.50
MR OWOR AMOOTI OTADA (NRM, Kibanda County, Masindi): Thank you for your wise guidance. I do not want to be seen as somebody who is decision-less, neither here nor there. My mind is very clear. I have been involved in these proceedings but I have certain reservations in regard to this Bill.

I just want to point out a few things that I found difficulty with. As is already stated on page 5 of the majority report, in understanding why consultations where not done before the drafting of the Bill, because the majority report concedes on that point, I found myself at a loss. It then appeared to me that this was a Bill that was conceived and the prescriptions of the problem were more or less Kampala based.

Page 3 of the minister’s statement says, among other things, that those interested in land economically will suffer the consequences of this Bill. I remember many people were invited to the committee. On page 3 and page 4 of the majority report, we read that one of those invited were the Uganda Bankers Association. In fact, they came with some people from the World Bank and they told us that if we are to proceed like this on the Land Bill, then we should be sure that matters related to the economics of land shall be forfeited. They warned us to be cognisant of that particular fact. Personally, I hold land as a factor of production and I think that encumbering land to a great extent, and especially economically, will only cause some serious problems that we may want to think about.

Mr Speaker, I do not want us to render land titles mere pieces of paper. The committee’s own report on page 6 also wonders why emphasis of rights was put on the part of the tenant and no attention was paid to the rights of the landlord. I thought that it was also unfair to legislate in a manner that does not strike a win-win situation. 

With due respect to my chairman, I would like to say this, because it is public knowledge, and when we were split into groups to go out and consult the population this issue was brought out in the media. In fact I also heard hon. Byandala’s own voice, before we even started the consultations as a committee, proclaiming that the Bill was being supported by over 90 percent of all Ugandans. I thought that was not very correct -(Interjections)- and opposition to the Bill -(Interruption)

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, I think my colleague, hon. Otada, misunderstood me. I said, “… where we have consulted”. I put it very clearly that it was where we had gone. Ninety percent of the people in all the stations where we were gave overwhelming support to this Bill. I said, “… where we visited.”

THE SPEAKER: I think what you needed to do was to give clarification and you have done so. 

MR OTADA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take that for information. I want to say that the many people we met, who are listed here on page 3 and page 4, expressed reservations on the Bill. I prefer to be honest than to gloss over issues, and I think that matter should be attended to. 

I want to thank government for conceding on some of the clauses like 32(b) and others. I thought that was good. 

The other problem and reservation that I have is the act of attempting to criminalise a civil matter. There were also certain ambiguities, which I thought needed to be dealt with. Here there is arbitration by court but then you do not define which court, especially given the fact that the Bill was talking about the court which has jurisdiction visiting the low cast -(Interruption)- thank you, Mr Speaker, just to wind up, on the issue of court we all know that court can stretch from the lowest of the lowest up to the highest. If you are conditioning that the court must visit the low cast, then you must envisage that circumstance very well.

Finally, I did not sign the report, that is true, but I have my reservations which I want to lay on the Table. Thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, this issue of consultation or no consultation prior to drafting the Bill should not now be an excuse for you. This Bill was published in the Gazette on 28 December 2007. You have been with it since then and therefore you ought to have made consultations in respect to the provisions. Our work here is not to pass the Bill as drafted by the minister. It is to scrutinise it, repair it or even reject it. So, now do not dwell on the fact that when it was drafted in 2007 there was no consultation. You have now made your consultations. Please, tell us the results of your consultations so that the law is amended, adjusted and panel-beaten to suit their consultation. So, do not refer to 2007. Now the Bill is here and it is your work, and I charge you to do your work candidly. I will give you time to make your submissions.

MR OTADA: Mr Speaker, I was not so sure if I should actually lay this on the Table, but it was on second thought. I had addressed my concerns to my party and since I have seen no chance for me anymore to have this matter internally sorted out, and in any case it is now not a personal issue but a national one, I wish to lay on the Table my thoughts and those of some other colleagues with whom we had thought together. I want to lay this on the Table so that probably the Parliament can make use of this because this is not a personal thing. Thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. 

5.01
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daniel Omara Atubo): Mr Speaker, it is not my interest to have a ping pong debate at this stage with my good friend, hon. Otada. However, since he will be away, I thought it was also good for him to have a rested mind with preliminary comments from me. I am definitely happy that he has raised this issue, which is a democratic process of legislation. However, I want to say a few things to him so that when he is out of the country, he can be sure that we are going to end up making a good law for him. 

The first one is about the banks. It is true the banks or financial institutions did meet us, but I want to assure this House that the encumbrances which hon. Otada is talking of are not a new thing in any law. In fact, the existing Land Act already has a number of restrictions. I will just rush through them.

If you look at section 26 of the Land Act, it talks of the basic rights and duties of members of the community using common land. Section 27 talks of the rights of women, children and persons with disabilities regarding customary land. It goes further on and in section 39 it provides for restriction on transfer of land by family members and it also provides for consent of family members, consent by the wives and so on before you can mortgage. 

We did go in depth when we were debating the Mortgage Bill, and hon. Otada should remember that. In fact, the Mortgage Bill even goes deeper to encumber the banks from mortgaging family land or a house anyhow. All these are provided for. So, this is to protect people because land is so basic to living that family members, wives and so on should all be involved in these matters. 

I, therefore, want to assure hon. Otada that the encumbrances you are talking of have not been brought into the Bill with a bad intention. When we say that the bibanja owners’ interest is going to have security of tenure, when you mortgage mailo land with people occupying it, any prudent bank which is going to visit that land and check on it will know that the people are there and their interests will be protected. The bank therefore will give you their loan knowing that people are on that land. When you fail to pay, the bank will sell and the person will buy knowing that lawful and bona fide occupants are on that land. Those are the due processes any prudent bank will undertake.

Secondly, concerning the rights of landlords not being protected, this is not true. First of all, the landlord is the overall owner of the land with the title; he is the big man there. The occupant is not even issued with a certificate of occupancy, and so legally he has what you may call a superior interest or a superior right over this property. However, to prove that even in this Bill we have taken care of the landlord, we have amended this clause in such a way that instead of two years which had been provided for a default to take effect, the default will take effect within one year. So, it is in favour of the landlord.

Furthermore, we have also protected the landlord in clause 3 where it says, “Subject to subsection 7, a tenant by occupancy who purports to assign ….” In other words, if Omara Atubo is the kibanja owner on mailo land and he calls Okello without the knowledge of Odongo -(Interjections)- or Mukasa, then that transaction is illegal. In fact, the man will even be fined and he is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding 96 currency points or to imprisonment not exceeding four years. This is in favour of the landlord.

Another provision, which is in favour of the landlord, is clause 4 on penalties. A person who unlawfully enters into land occupied by a registered owner is going to be imprisoned for four years and is also going to be fined 96 currency points. So, we have tried to bring a balanced law.

Another point you made is that, how do you criminalise -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Minister, I have casually looked at this document, which has been issued to us and there are problems. On section 3, amendment of section 35, you say in 1(a), “subject to sub-section 7, a tenant by occupancy who purports to assign the tenancy by occupancy without giving the first option of taking the assignment of the tenancy to the owner of the land, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 96 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding four years.” That is what happens to a person who assigns the occupancy without consulting the landlord. He is only fined that amount. 

However, when you come to 8 you say, “Subject to sub-section 7, a transaction for sale of interest in land by an owner made without giving the first option of buying the interest to the tenant by occupancy is invalid.” Why don’t you make the other one also invalid? I do not participate but I casually looked at it and I thought it was strange.

Also in this one subject to sub-section 7 - transaction for sale of interest in land by owner - you are saying before the owner sales to me, he should consult the lawful occupant. Is that what you mean? Otherwise, the commissioner is prevented from registering it. What would happen if Ssekandi, the landlord, donates to you? Donating is not a sale. What would happen if Ssekandi dies and is succeeded by his son? That is succession and not a sale. What happens? Don’t you think that the intention here is to protect the existing interest of occupants? 

What you can say here is that if you transfer the ownership, this should not affect the interest of the occupant, and you end there. However, if you have to make this invalid, I think you should also make the other one who has sold the kibanja invalid so that the owner takes his thing. Don’t you think so? 

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, we have received very good presentations. There are already people who have made presentations on this provision but they came a little bit late after we started listening to this reading. At the appropriate stage, those people who have made those provisions -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR OMARA ATUBO: I can say they are very positive and I am inclined, even at this stage, to say that we shall favourably consider those views. (Laughter)

Finally, there is this question of civil and criminal matters where you say that we are criminalising matters which are civil. Lawyers who are here know that there are many things which are civil and criminal but most of them end up with somebody claiming damages and compensation. In land disputes, people are killed, people are assaulted and you can be convicted. Even in instances where there is death, where people get killed, the survivors go and claim awards. So, I do not agree with hon. Otada that this land matter is purely civil and therefore we should not criminalise it.

The issue of a defined court is handled. If you see in the amendment, “court” has been defined. We are making it criminal also, to make it deterrent. That is part of criminal law. Somebody should not feel that he is so rich, that he has Shs 1 billion in his bedroom and that if he commits an offence, he can just compensate with Shs 100 million in court and get away with it. Such a person would feel the pinch if he is given a few days in prison. His money will not let him out. We think this deterrent is really what we need. Court has been defined by the committee and it is there in the report.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Alaso was suggesting that we sleep over these reports and I agree with her, but you seem not to want to come back on Friday. We shall consider them on Tuesday.

Hon. Members, I appeal to you not to fear to bring in amendments that would help us make a good law and a fair law to all parties concerned. The House is adjourned until Tuesday at 2.00p.m.

(The House rose at 5.14 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 17 November at 2.00 p.m.)

