Tuesday, 17 November 2009

Parliament met at 2.57 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. We have some visitors, but when I get the details, I will formally introduce them to you. 

This morning, I received a call from Arusha that our team has been doing well; actually they have reached the final. Let us pray for them that they will eventually win.  

3.00
MS SYLVIA SINABULYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to make a statement to Parliament on the upcoming Parliamentarians’ Conference on Maternal and New Born Health, which is scheduled to take place between 23rd and 25th November 2009 at Hotel Africana, Kampala. 

On 23rd–25th November, this year, Parliament of Uganda will host the Third Parliamentarians’ Conference on Maternal and New Born Health. This conference is being organised together with the Inter-Parliamentary Union and World Health Organisation. 

This is the third conference in a series on the occasion of the first meeting of parliamentarians hosted by the UK Parliament in London in March 2007. Members of Parliament from developed and developing countries agreed on the need to place maternal and new born health as a key national and international priority. 

This meeting was followed by the second meeting hosted by the Dutch Parliament in November 2008, in The Hague. The second meeting resulted in the adoption of a roadmap for members of parliament to take action on maternal and child health. 

Efforts targeting parliaments also fall within the general objectives set by the IPU, and the count down to 2015 partners to support parliaments in making the difference for mothers and children’s health. 

The third conference, which we are due to host, arose out of the express need of parliamentarians to enhance their capacity to take action for mothers and children’s health. The theme of this conference is: “Ensuring Access to Health for All Women and New Born: The Role of Parliament”.

The meeting will provide a forum for members of parliament from developed and developing countries to exchange experiences, map up next steps and strengthen parliamentary cooperation in this field. It should also allow for the issue of maternal health to remain on the international agenda. 

The Parliament of Uganda was chosen to host this conference in recognition of efforts of its Members in advancing the agenda for maternal and new born health. Participants in this conference expect to benefit from the opportunity to learn from the work carried out in Uganda. 

The principal result of the conference should be deeper understanding and knowledge by parliamentarians and the relevant personnel in Parliament of maternal and child health issues. Participants will also gain a better understanding of parliamentary initiatives and mechanisms to achieve progress in this field, and strengthen their commitment to pursue action at the national level. 

Over 40 parliaments are expected to attend the conference and His Excellency, the President of Uganda, has accepted to open this conference on Monday, 23 November 2009. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. That is for your information. 

3.03
MR CHARLES OLENY (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on two issues. One is information to the House and the second is a matter of national importance. 

On the first one, Mr Speaker, you may recall that mid-last month, the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development did present here a petition by the Buganda Road Flat tenants. We were directed to consult the Attorney-General on certain issues that the House raised on that day. 

I now wish to inform the House that the Attorney-General has written back in reply saying that he would require some two weeks in order to interact with the committee. I, therefore, wish to inform the House, knowing very well that we had been directed to come back to this House on this issue within a period of two weeks. 

On the second one, I have just returned from my constituency and the matters that I found regarding the non-payment of Anti-Theft Stock Unit (ATSU) salaries is of very grave concern. I wish to inform the House that ATSU staff are part of the Police that are deployed to counter the raids between Karamoja and the neighbouring districts. 

ATSU personnel are now running to 20 months without payment of their salary. This is happening against the background that there has been verification by the ministry on issues regarding still-salary. 

Mr Speaker, the ATSU have a structure. They have the commandant who is based in Katakwi, and then they have zonal offices which are the equivalent of district police commanders, in all the eleven districts where ATSU are deployed. Then we have the OCs at the detachment level. 

But it is surprising that to date, not much has been done to marinate the situation of the ATSU. It is not just the salary; they do not even have uniforms. When I interacted with one superintendent of police, who is the fourth intelligence officer, he revealed to me that they have never received additional uniform since 2007. The same applies to gumboots and shoes. 

Therefore, I would like this House to exercise its oversight role and call the minister to account, and let a special investigation be carried out and a report be submitted to this House. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Are they volunteers or public servants?

MR OLENY: Mr Speaker, it looks like they are volunteers, but they are not. They are staff within the government structure. This House can recall what we went through with the volunteers who came to be known as Arrow Boys and the Amuka; it was the same trend. But these are not a volunteer force. 

3.08
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, this is a very sad matter, and I wish it had been drawn to the attention of the Minister of Internal Affairs and to me earlier –(Interruption) 

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I wish to thank the re-known scholar, for giving way and accepting me to seek this clarification. It is a known fact that ATSU personnel are from the mainstream of the Uganda Police. They were only assigned that as special responsibility and duty. They are, therefore, on Government payroll through Ministry of Internal Affairs. 

The clarification that I seek from the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business is whether all civil servants are paid their salaries after notification by members of parliament. If they are on the payroll, what has happened in the past 20 months that they have not been paid? Did that require Parliament to draw the attention of Government and the line ministry to their responsibility as accounting officers, and as persons responsible for human resource management in those respective ministries?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, hon. Wadri, my former student. I can see I did a good job. (Laughter) My answer is simple, namely, when the Minister of Internal Affairs brings a statement - as I direct him now to do so - on Thursday, we shall know the truth. As I speak now, I do not know. 

Secondly, obviously mistakes occur in systems and when these mistakes occur, we appreciate when you draw our attention to these mistakes as soon as possible and then they are corrected. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us wait for the statement on Thursday. Let us go to the next item. 

BILLS
 SECOND READING

THE LAND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you remember there was a motion to have the Bill read the second time. We received the report of the committee. Now the debate is open to you. I suspect that there are many of you who would like to make contributions on this important Bill. Because of that, I suggest that we give time in which a person should make their contributions, and I suggest seven minutes. After seven minutes, the technology will work and we will get another person.

I also suspect that a number of you may be interested in improving the Bill by making amendments. If this is the case, I suggest that whoever has an amendment should commit it in writing and issue copies to us, especially the chairperson of the committee and the minister, so that when we are having a general debate, we can internalise these amendments and at the committee stage, I will have been given sufficient notice to handle the amendments. You can now start contributing.  

Before we do so, in the VIP Gallery, we have Mr Timothy Manarin, representing the United States Embassy. You are welcome! (Applause)

We also have Mr Callum Burns, Harriet Labouchere, Caitlin Murray and Rosie Rowe. They are from United Kingdom Young Parliamentarians Association. They are here at the invitation of Hon. Matia Nsubuga. You are welcome to Parliament of Uganda! (Applause)

Then, we have students and teachers from Green Hill Academy Makindye East, Kampala District, a constituency represented by hon. Mabikke. You are welcome! (Applause) 

3.15
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (NRM, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I find it a bit unfortunate that we are here largely dealing with a problem that all of us who are here did not originate. My only concern is that instead of addressing the real problem through implementing the provisions of the Land Fund, we are trying to handle the problem through piecemeal registration. 

I have already, with my colleagues, raised concerns on the constitutionality of particularly clauses 1 and 2 of the Bill relating to the powers of the land board to determine rent in privately held property, and also the powers of the minister to act where the land board has failed to act. I did this with my colleagues and we have already laid on Table our concerns. 

We are referring particularly to articles 26, 27(2), 241(1) and 237(1) and (3). 

That notwithstanding, Mr Speaker, perusal of the Bill itself, which you need to appreciate by looking at the Land Act itself, seems to suggest a protection being given to tenants by occupancy created under Section 31 alone of the principal Act. However, there is also another category of people that would need protection under the provisions of Section 29(3) paragraph (c) of the same Act. I am saying so because when you look at the Definition Section of the Land Act, you realise that it refers to the lawful and bona fide occupants as defined under Section 29. 

Also, there is the definition of a tenant by occupancy and it says, “… as defined under Section 31.” This tries to suggest that these two are entirely different. At an appropriate stage, I would like to move an amendment to also have sections 29(2)- subject of course to my area of concerns – and (3)(c) be reflected so that these ones are also protected because their protection expires after the expiration of the five years from the coming into force of the principal Act.

Secondly, I would like to say that the Bill itself, particularly clause 2 - which is good enough the committee is suggesting to have amended to include other provisions of the law - that the restrictions mentioned therein be limited to only those proceeding to evict under this Act, on non-payment of ground rent alone. Those restrictions should not cover other provisions of the law, since they are entirely different.

And when you get to clause 3, which amends Section 35, particularly clause (b)8, which is inserting sub-section 7 – I find it, one, discriminatory in the sense that whereas a bona fide occupant is only found guilty of an offence, on this other one, the transaction is nullified. Secondly, in my view, it tends to exert a lot of unnecessary duties on the commissioner because, how will the commissioner know that actually the transfers being presented before him/her are in respect of land that is occupied by a bona fide or lawful occupant or someone who has not even instituted a caveat? I would be comfortable if this clause is deleted, because the provisions of the Registration of Titles Act are adequate enough to protect both those who are buying and in occupation of such land. This will also make it cover both parties adequately without undue discrimination.

Subject to my earlier concerns, Mr Speaker, I wish to rest my case.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, but perhaps you need background information in that the issue of district land boards assessing ground rent has not been brought by this amendment; we decided this long time ago after we realised that Shs 1,000 was unreasonable. So, we said that this be determined according to the local environment and we noticed that the body capable to do that is the district land board. 

I am surprised you are saying constitutionally the land board cannot do that. I do not see the basis of saying so, because according to Article 241 of the Constitution, which spells out the functions of the district land board, reads as follows: 

“The functions of district land board are: 
(a) to hold and allocate land in the district which is not owned by any person or authority; 
(b) to facilitate the registration and transfer of interests in land; and
(c) to deal with all other matters connected with land in the district in accordance with the laws made by Parliament.”

In the last function, you can see the power of Parliament to create other functions in respect of land and give them to the district land boards, being emphasized. Anyway, you have a case; you can bring your amendments.

MR KIYINGI: Mr Speaker, I would like to give further information with respect to what you have been saying, that under Section 31(3) of the Land Act this issue is catered for and it reads thus: “The tenant by occupancy shall pay the registered owner an annual nominal ground rent as shall be determined by the board.” And the board in the Definition Section is defined as the district land board. That is why I am saying the matter was settled long ago; the Act is with us. The land board can determine the ground rent.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you will have time at committee stage. Otherwise, what I have read is what is in the Constitution; it is very clear –

MR NIWAGABA: I wish, Mr Speaker, you could also refer to Section 59 of the principal Act, which stipulates the functions of the board. In my view, the functions of the board do not include – 

THE SPEAKER: The problem, hon. Member, is that whereas you are reading an Act, I am reading the Constitution; the Constitution is the supreme law.

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate your interpretation of the Constitution as far as Article 241 is concerned. I also would like to thank hon. Kiyingi for pointing out the provisions of Section 31 of the Land Act.

I appreciate the concerns of hon. Niwagaba, but the problem we normally have is that we read one section of an Act, but we do not refer to other relevant sections or articles of the Constitution or an Act of Parliament relating to the same subject matter. 

I agree with his interpretation of Section 59 of the Land Act, but you cannot read it in isolation. It gives powers to the board, but so does Section 31 of the same Act. So, they need to be read together.

I have had the benefit of looking at other issues that were laid on Table by hon. Otada and I wish to comment as follows:

One of the issues put forward by hon. Otada was whether determination of rent by the district land boards amounts to deprivation of the right to property. On that, I would like to say that the 1998 Land Act empowers the district land boards to determine ground rent, as you have correctly pointed out. The spirit behind the amendment of Section 31 is to protect tenants from undue and unfair evictions. An analogy can be drawn from the historical point of view on the Busuulu and Envujjo of 1928, which were fixed by the governor because the private parties could not negotiate on equal footing. To leave these matters to the tenant and landlords, giving them the freedom to negotiate, will be creating a very big mistake.

It should be noted that articles 32 and 43 of the Constitution do limit the enjoyment of rights as opposed to the rights enshrined in Article 26 of the Constitution, which is not absolute.

The other issue that was raised in the same reservations that were laid on Table, concerned what tenure the land boards would be deemed to have in respect of private owners’ lands. I find this issue erroneous because district land boards will not have power to take over ownership of property. Therefore, the question of tenure does not arise.

Another was: Are land boards under the control of the minister? I would like to say that the minister does not influence the decisions of the land boards, and nor is this Bill intended to do so. But rather comes in to check omissions or failure by the boards to act. 

We should be reminded that independence, either of the board or even of the judiciary, entails freedom to make a decision, but does not entail freedom against accountability. Even if you are a judge, you cannot hear a case today and deliver the judgment two years from now; you cannot say you are enjoying independence of the judiciary nor should land boards do so.

Hon. Otada also raised the issue on whether the loan ground for non-payment of rent makes the enforcement of other laws irrelevant as far as registered lands with occupants is concerned. Here of course the minister has already indicated his willingness to look at some other proposals – I will not labour on that point so much.

But suffice to say that what was envisaged in the Bill was a tenant-landlord relationship and it should have been put better by saying that for avoidance of doubt, that section be applicable only in a tenant-landlord relationship so that it leaves lee way for other laws like the Contracts Act, Mortgage Act and so on, to be applied. But we shall look at that when we get to committee stage.

The other issue was how constitutional it is to limit courts’ jurisdiction and exercise of its discretion to this loan ground.

Courts’ jurisdiction, Mr Speaker, is not limited by the Bill, rather it specifically confers jurisdiction on the court in this matter. If the tenant by occupancy fails to adhere to any other conditions other than payment of ground rent, the law governing the other matters shall be applicable.

On whether the amendment to Section 59 is superfluous, I would like to say that the amendment of this section is for emphasis and avoidance of doubt; courts need to be guided. Mr Speaker, it is always good to be precise. Law should be certain rather than leaving it in the hands of courts to make decisions either way.

Hon. Niwagaba ended on a note in respect of Section 29 (3)(c) of the Land Act. But in my opinion this section caters for different circumstances relating to compensations to land owners, where Government settled people. 

On the other hand, the Bill seeks to protect people who individually settle themselves on other people’s land, and their settlement was legalised by the Land Act of 1998. 

I wish to end like this. In 2007, when this Bill came to this House for the first reading, the same year, the Chief Justice of Uganda issued Practice Direction No.1 of 2007 on the issue of court orders relating to registered land that affected tenants by occupancy. This was recognised even by the head of the judiciary, that evictions on land were becoming rampant and so that there was need to curb such evictions. For instance, in this particular instruction, the Chief Justice directed or guided magistrates and judges that in handling any matter involving tenants on other people’s land, they should move to what we call locus-in-quo – settle the matter by looking at the actual evidence on the ground. But the Chief Justice of Uganda does not have powers of Parliament. He, for instance, cannot legislate for sanctions and penalties because that is the prerogative of Parliament. 

Therefore, I wish to pray that we all take this matter very seriously, and the earlier we have this Bill passed, the better for our people. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, in the public gallery we have pupils and teachers from St Peter’s Primary School, Nsambya in Makindye West being represented by hon. Hussein Kyanjo. Please join me to welcome them. You are welcome! (Applause)

3.34
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my brother Hon. Daniel Omara Atubo who is the Minister for Lands, for having tabled this Bill.

However, from the onset, I would like to put it on record that I oppose this Bill in its entirety because land as we all know is a source of livelihood. (Applause) You can be pecuniary poor, but if you have land, you are a rich person. At the end of your life, you will need the land for at least that measurement of six feet to accommodate your remains. So, the issue of land is very central in as far as mankind is concerned. 

When I look at the object of this Bill, especially object No.2 and No.3, it clearly gives me the direction and indication that this Land (Amendment) Bill is sectarian. It is giving more protection to tenants and bona fide sitting occupants rather than the registered owner of the land. 

Unlike all legislation and policy making processes, this is one of the laws that I have seen come to Parliament for first reading and thereafter a lot of changes have had to take place. Under normal circumstances, one would have first addressed his or her mind to problem identification. In this Bill, the problem identification that Government has come up with is that there are rampant evictions. Government did not go ahead to assess the magnitude of this problem that they had identified. They did not give it critical analysis to address questions like why we have rampant evictions on land and who the people behind it are. They should have asked themselves those questions. Then they would have come up with an action which would have been geared towards addressing those pertinent issues in their analysis, which unfortunately I do not see anywhere in this Land (Amendment) Bill.  

Today, we see people being evicted left and right and yet we have got laws in place. The reason why there are evictions and why these evictions are of concern to us is not that there is a vacuum in the law. There are very many provisions in our law volumes that address issues of eviction. There are those which specifically address the law under the Land Act, and there are those which are of criminal nature. But how have we as Government implemented these laws in as far as resourcing the institutions that are in place to administer and implement these laws is concerned? The whole blame comes back to us. If somebody comes to my land or I buy land and there are squatters on it, the law provides very clearly that there should be compensation. Have these people been adequately compensated? If they have been, will there be any reason for us to come up with such a law? But if they are gun-wielding persons, Generals, senior police officers, ministers, what happens? 

The issue is not about this amendment Bill; the issue is about commitment of Government and everyone of us to operationalising and living in a world where there is rule of law.

Land is of essence and it must not just be looked at as a factor of production. Land has got economic value. It is a resource, and that is the reason why lawyers and bankers appeared before the committee and said that if this law is enacted the way it is, land would lose value. I can no longer come and tender my certificate of registration for a mortgage. While some of you MPs and those of you who are well placed may be having bungalows in Muyenga, Kololo, Nakasero and have titles that you might give financial institutions as security, my people in Terego cannot and the people in Bugerere cannot. (Interjection) Do not derail me Prof. Kabwegyere; wait for your appropriate time to make your submission. You want to cause disaster here? (Laughter) 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, is the honourable member in order to plead that the people he represents do not have land titles when he may be one of those who discourage land titles. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: In those circumstances, if you think there is information to the contrary, you give him information so that he gets to know. (Laughter)

MR WADRI: Thank you. I did advice my senior brother that he was going to cause disaster and indeed he caused it, but that is not the essence of our debate. 

Mr Speaker, you realise that when this Bill came out, many of us were sent, as it were, voluntarily to our constituencies to consult. We consulted very widely and I can with certainty talk for West Nile. My colleagues from Arua are here. The people from Arua - I have the minutes and if time permits, I can print them out because they were sent to me electronically - came out strongly to say, “If anybody in this Parliament from Arua supports this Bill, he/she should not cross Pakwach bridge,” and that is in black and white. (Laughter and Applause)  (Mr Baba rose_) You are from Koboko, Mr Minister; you are not from Arua District.

MR BABA: I would like to thank my brother, hon. Kassiano Wadri, for giving way. I recall very well that consultations on the Land Bill took place in Arua at Hill View. There was no other consultation on the Land Bill other than that and all of us from West Nile Region, at least from Koboko, Maracha, Terego and Vuura, were all there in that meeting. 

There was no decision or recommendation saying that we must not support this Land Bill. What was of concern to the people of the region was on their customary land and the issue of reconstituting the land tribunals so that land cases do not go through the courts. That was the major issue of concern. We fully supported the Land Bill. Thank you.

MS BAKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Wadri, for giving way. I wish to inform this House that on that particular day, I had the collection of all the elders and people who matter to us in the region. I called them to the Catholic centre and we had a very intensive debate on the issues in this Land Bill. It was during that meeting, and for the first time they called me by all my names, and they told me, “Bako Christine Abia, go and tell all your friends, particularly those who come from the West Nile region, that the only single irreplaceable asset that we have is the land that we own. And hence, any of you who dare say anything affirmative on this Bill, should never cross the bridge.” It was during that time. Possibly the honourable minister was not in that meeting and should not misguide this House. Thank you.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I can understand the predicament in which my senior brother, hon. James Baba, is in -(Interruption)

MR OLEGA: Thank you. I thank my colleague for giving way. In West Nile, this land issue is well understood because the minister went there and had interaction with our people. This Bill is for the people who have been oppressed and are suffering. Therefore, it is not true that the people of West Nile said that whoever passes the Bill should not cross the Nile. What transpired was that there was agreement that this Bill is a good one –(Laughter)- and it is going to assist people who had been oppressed. I thank you.

MR WADRI: Not long ago, in 2005, we were here in this House on yet another contentious Bill that was being debated during the Constitution amendment exercise and some Members stood up in support of the Bill because they wanted to be heard and wanted to please the powers that be, and they were adequately rewarded and yet they had consulted the people who sent them here. (Applause) The point I am making is that when we went upcountry, the people of greater North, in general, were concerned with 32(b) -(Interjections)- Allow me build my point. And you know for a fact that in the entire greater North, the land tenure system is of customary nature, which you own and pass on to generation after generation. I therefore cannot expect a person like my friend, hon. Wakikona, with his colour and complexion, to go there because customarily, they will know and he will not fit -(Laughter)

MR WAKIKONA: Mr Speaker, Wakikona is a true colour of a Ugandan. (Laughter) And it is a very common colour in the Mount Elgon area. If this matter was raised by Nandala-Mafabi, perhaps I would think he made an error. Is it in order for hon. Wadri to imagine that I am an Indian or Australian or Arab who cannot talk about land matters in West Nile, which is in Uganda where I belong? Is he in order, Mr Speaker? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: You are free to talk about it. He is out of order to think that you are not competent to talk about the Land Bill.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, the point I was trying to emphasise is the customary nature of the land tenure system where members of the same clan are known. 

So, if that is the case where people of a locality know themselves by the different parameters, and they all said in unison that they do not want their land tenure system to be tampered with by 32(b) and you are now trying to bring 59 in order to –(Interjection)- I do not know at what stage, but in the document I have, it is still there. Unless you are going to remove it, but if you can expunge it, the better. 

In a similar vein, there were also extensive consultations in Buganda. I remember that the Katikiro established a committee headed by Betty Nambooze and the government also established a committee headed by Maj. Kinobe and they went around the country. The findings of these consultations were in unison and were to the effect that they did not need the amendment Bill, but rather build on and strengthen institutions which were created under the 1998 –(Interruption)

MR MADADA: Mr Speaker, I was the vice-chairperson of the committee that went around Buganda. I moved in more than eight districts. The consensus was that people supported the Bill. Is he in order to impute that the people in Buganda, in the areas we consulted, never supported the Bill and yet he was not part of the team? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, from the account which has been given on that issue, what hon. Wadri requires is the right information because whatever he might have heard was hearsay, but since you were there, you should give him the right information.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I come from Bugisu and I am more competent to talk about Bugisu because I come from there. Mr Madada comes from Busoga. How competent is he to talk about Buganda? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would advise that you study this Bill. Make an attack where you think the provisions are bad. There are certain provisions, which are good; for instance, if they say that a “kibanja” holder cannot sell that “kibanja” unless the landlord has consented, can you reject that? 

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, as I wind up, when you are talking about those good provisions in this amendment Bill, they should not be looked at in isolation. I consider those seemingly good provisions as a sugar coating, to make Ugandans swallow a bitter pill, and I can foretell that if this amendment Bill is passed the way it is, we will run into more administrative issues in land administration in this country. 

I appeal for sanity and to each one of us to appeal to our conscience and remember what the people, who we are representing in this House, have sent us to say. I rest my case by saying, I, Wadri Kassiano Ezati, MP Terego, reject this Bill in its totality. Thank you.

3.55
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleague Hon. Kassiano Wadri to make my position very clear. I am totally opposed to this Bill, reasons being that we should remind ourselves and be cognisant of one thing. In making legislations, the letter of the law is as important as the spirit. 

In this particular case and before we come to the specifics in this Bill, we need to critically examine the spirit behind this law and this is very important. The reason –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I beg for your protection.

THE SPEAKER: You are fully protected.

MR LUKWAGO: Most obliged. Mr Speaker, you will agree with me that the reason this Bill was shelved for some time was because there was a lot of contention, anxiety and tension in this country. The argument was that there was no consultation before the Bill was approved by Cabinet, and this is also captured in the report.

There was an attempt to bring all the stakeholders on board and there were negotiations going on between the central government and particularly the Buganda government - [Hon. Member: “Buganda Kingdom.”] - I maintain Buganda government. I trust my diction and I chose that word consciously; Buganda government. 

The report we received is that the Bill was shelved and even the President is on record as having directed that the Bill be stayed. When it was stayed, we expected the committee, which had already made the report, to review its own report and come up with an addendum after consulting with the government of Mengo.

In the report we see here, there is no addendum. What I have before me is a ten point document, which was raised by the Attorney-General of Buganda, Apolo Makubuya, and was adopted by the “Lukiiko” as totally opposed to the Bill. It is here and I beg to lay it on Table.

To date, the views of Buganda as a key stakeholder are not incorporated here. The honourable Prime Minister is here. One time we had a meeting with the “Bataka” council at Ivy’s Hotel and we received reports from our clan leaders. The Vice President was there and all MPs from Buganda were present. The instructions we got from our leaders were that this Bill should not be accepted. I am sure, Mr Speaker, that you were also there. Has the position changed? 

Now we understand that the President, after making calls to the Kabaka in futility, eventually accessed the Kabaka and we are meant to understand that they are debating and trying to negotiate a way out. We believe that this Bill is one of the issues that are a subject of negotiations between the President and the Kabaka. Why are we not sensitive to the process that is going on? What is going to happen afterwards? I rest that issue at that point.

Finally, because I am racing against time, when you look at the statement here, the minister, hon. Atubo –(Interjections)- my time is being eaten up. The minister here has never stepped in any part of Buganda to consult the people. I stand to be corrected. I have never seen the minister in any part of Buganda soliciting for people’s views. Now, he is claiming here that the issue is all about protecting the people and he is saying he is giving -(Interruption)- please, I have very limited time. 

I challenge the honourable minister here. He is saying in his statement that there is one landlord who has caused the eviction of 300 to 500 households here in Buganda. I want the minister to substantiate this statement. We need to know this landlord. We need the particulars here.

The minister is trying to bring an amendment purportedly to exclude customary land, but he is making it clear here that this Bill is not all about the 9,000 square miles. 

I need to inform the minister that the 9,000 square miles you are talking about is our customary land here in Buganda. That customary land was vested in the crown during the colonial days, after the promulgation of the 1900 Agreement. At Independence, it was vested in Buganda Land Board, which was a statutory body. That land was kept for the generation today and for the posterity of the generations to come. Who are these people who are grabbing this customary land for our children, for the posterity here in Buganda and you do not want it to be protected under the Act?

Mr Speaker, you are a Muganda –(Interruption)- it is a fact. Isn’t it a fact? 

THE SPEAKER: Make your statement. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I look at this Bill as having eyes and it is looking at Buganda specifically -(Member timed out.)

4.02
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I just want to ask one question. Who are the landless people in this country? Has the minister taken stock of who the landless Ugandans are? 

Back to this Bill; we have an issue. I do not think this Bill has been brought in good spirit. The architects of this Bill certainly have a hidden agenda and motive that they just want to blind Ugandans and imagine that everyone in this country is going to be so distracted so as not to read the vice behind this Bill.

In 32(b), it is stated that adequate compensation has to be paid to a person claiming interest in the land, except where the person has abandoned the occupancy. First of all, when you start claming interest in what is not yours, aren’t you a thief? It would be so disastrous for me to walk down to hon. Atubo’s farm and start claiming interest and if I do not abandon that interest, I must be compensated. Isn’t this theft? I am only evicted when court has gone there to investigate whether I rightly deserve my interest. This is broad day thuggery and theft of land, which belongs to us all.

We, in the North, treasure our customs and beliefs and we are not about to say “yes” to this. It is good enough that the minister comes from the North where these things are clear cut.

Secondly, they are telling us that the court should have visited the locus and conducted a hearing. We know the court processes in this country. I have just been in court recently and it took me one whole year as a Member of Parliament to secure a judgement. What about a peasant down there? 

We have been reading in the papers that magistrates in this country and Government are taking bribes worth Shs 200,000. What do you expect of my grandmother who has had a “Maseruka” from Parliament claim interest in her land? Where is she going to get Shs 200,000? By the time my grandmother is trying to secure a hearing, this person has structured this land so that the value for compensation is too much for her to afford. Isn’t this robbery? It is so sad that in the 21st century, ministers who particularly come from the Northern region of this country and know the interests of our people would craft such a Bill and bring it to Parliament.

We are told in this Bill that we are trying to protect people from evictions. Just look at the headlines in this country. Who are the people evicting others? They are the mighty and powerful who are linked to state power and politics. How can we, therefore, claim that this is in the interest of the lowest of the low in this country? This cannot go on. It would certainly border on insanity to bring such a hopeless Bill here.

Before I take my seat, there is a statement here that court has received a report from the land committee of the area on the status of the occupants of that land. If land belongs to me, I have the title; but the mighty have settled on my land, and because of my insignificance in society, they have taken advantage of my land. Honestly, when will I receive the report from the courts? It may take me ten years and by the time I am trying to even get near that report, I am thrown out -(Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you, honourable, for giving me way. I would like to inform my sister that when you are weak in terms of finances, and maybe also in many other ways, the weak can be very dangerous. We are going to make this law, which will promote a lot of killing. If I know that the land is mine, but I have to go to court, yet the court will not listen to me, but to the mighty, my next step will be to pick up arms like spears and kill. Thank you.

MS BAKO: Thank you, my sister. The information that my sister is giving me is just confirmation on one thing –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I seek for your protection.

THE SPEAKER: You are protected.

MS BAKO: This is to tell Ugandans that this Bill is wicked, unfortunate, uncalled for and we must resist it with utmost trust.

4.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Time has come for men and women to stand out to be counted on this very important legislation. 

I am a former Member of the Constituent Assembly, an assembly, which discussed, debated and finally promulgated the 1995 Constitution. I am also a former Member of the Sixth Parliament and –(Laughter)- it is the Sixth Parliament, which enacted the Land Act. I was also a Member of the Seventh Parliament, which amended the Land Act. 

In the Sixth Parliament, that used to be my place, where Hon. Ishaa Otto is sitting –(Interjections)- I used to sit there and my contribution was captured. It is on record for everybody to read. I am happy that I have been contributing that way. Right from the CA, I have been consistent. 

On the issue of the Land Amendment Act, I was directed by Cabinet to traverse the country and consult the people. I went to Masaka, I went to Mukono and I went to Kayunga. Of course I consulted my district Kiboga, which is hit most by land wrangles. Therefore, when I hear somebody saying that we have not carried out enough consultations, I wonder - unless the word consultation has a hidden meaning. But if you are talking about consultations, I think enough consultations were done.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you very much, Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa Akot –(Laughter)- the one I know best is Akot. Thank you very much, Akot, for giving way, and particularly for helping us to reflect on what happened in the past.

I remember in the Sixth Parliament, you were sitting not very far from me. There was a very hot debate. You and me used to consult closely about the issue of land. You made a strong statement, which has remained in our Hansard if we all wish to refer to it. You said: “Honourable Speaker, I want to warn you. There are many people here whose citizenship is questionable and they are buying huge chunks of land –(Applause)- from Buganda.” By that time, she was representing Kayunga and we were all concerned. The topic at that time – rather Kiboga – was that if Baganda were not careful, the non-Baganda who are not necessarily Ugandans were taking over land in Buganda. When you talk about land in Buganda, I am one of the many who own land in Buganda. I have never been harassed, so I want this clarification. Has this changed? I remember my dear sister with whom we come from the same clan – she is an Ogora like myself - after making that statement, it did not take long before she was made a minister. It upset me because she went in front and left me behind, but at least I was happy –(Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members –(Laughter)- these interruptions should be minimal. The minutes you have used are against her time, so let us avoid unnecessary interruptions. 

But hon. Nankabirwa has never represented Kayunga. It is a fact.

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much my sister. The Hansard is there for you to read. There is a lot of misrepresentation by my sister. For example, I never talked about questioning citizenship of the people. I was opposing the provision to automatically transfer public land to free hold. I enumerated the landlords who acquired public land in Kiboga, left it and then want to automatically transfer it to freehold. 

Going back to my presentation; I went to Mukono; I went to Kayunga; and I went to Masaka; and the major question was: “Are you going to come to the sub-county and parish levels to sensitise people about the provisions of this very good document?” (Interjections) Yes, this is on record. 

Let me concentrate on my constituency, Kiboga. This amendment is overdue and that is why I want to be on record. My people are complaining that we are delaying because they are being evicted day-by-day. How can you oppose a provision like 32(a) (i) (ii) and (iii), which is protecting the people? Even if I am to be evicted, let that be through a court order and let me be given six months so that I can plan where to go. How can I oppose this? How?

Over the weekend, I was in Kiboga –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: This is the danger of interruption. Most of her time was taken by hon. -

4.18
MS FLORENCE SSEKABIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here in my full capacity as woman Member of Parliament for Kayunga District. I widely consulted my voters in Kayunga District and 80 percent of them support this amendment Bill. (Applause) In Kayunga, it is so serious that both the tenants and the landlords are suffering and it is still very clear in the minds of Ugandans that it is in Kayunga where a young landlord of 26 years was murdered in cold blood by the tenants. 

The issue is that people are not secure at all as far as land is concerned; they cannot have agricultural produce because they can be evicted anytime. The landlord cannot survey their land because they can easily be murdered; the people have nowhere to run to -[Mr Lukwago: “Clarification.”]- no, I am sorry; I have my time and you had yours. I am not the one who gives you time. (Applause) I am not talking about any district other than Kayunga District, so I should be given my time. 

The people of Kayunga District have been displaced; some of them are on the lake shores where they are now not even secure. Others have run to forest reserves where the National Forest Authority is threatening to evict them. Our major concern is that we need this law as soon as possible. (Applause) 

Secondly, the people of Kayunga are also requesting Government to provide the Land Fund so that those who are on “Bibanja” can afford to own land and be secure. Indeed, for us in Kayunga, the Land Fund forms priority number one on our list of priorities.

I want to quote areas like Mugongo in Bbale sub-county where people have died. You know how Africans treasure their elders. Even if they are dead, they accord them the respect they deserve. Someone buys land, fences off where their grandparents and even grandchildren are to be buried. Because of the shock, some of the old people were buried there since they had nowhere to go. They had to move with their iron sheets since that is all they could carry, leaving the mud and wattle. For the moment, it is important we pass the law. The people in Kirubo, Kiyola, Mugongo and many other places have nowhere to stay and are to be evicted anytime. The law has not helped, and we need a stronger law, and the Land Fund is anxiously awaited.
 
Those who suffered the evictions, need the government to come in to re-gazette the land, because they cannot go back to the people who bought the land, unless Government comes in as recommended by the committee. Those who are now in the forest reserves, need them to be re-gazetted so that they settle, or else they have nowhere to bring up their children from. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I call upon everybody to support this amendment Bill. (Applause) 

4.28
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When this Bill was read last year, Acholi Parliamentary Group was the first to come out in the same group with a statement rejecting this Bill in its totality; our view has not changed since then. (Applause) 

Let matters not be taken as joking matters. This Bill is very small, but if we make a wrong decision today, very many Ugandans will die in future because of that decision. We have to be very serious and nationalistic in discussing this Bill. 

I had a lunchtime appointment with the Minster of Lands, my brother hon. Omara Atubo, and we had agreed that 32(b) would be deleted.  (Laughter)  I am surprised that 32(b) is part of the Bill. 

We who still live in customary land areas have no problems; we do not want anybody to come with their laws to us; we have our own –(Interjections)-  please, leave me alone –(Laughter)- I know you are under instructions that is why there are no more sits on the frontbench. I know what you are here for. (Laughter) My request is that we agree to delete 32(b). The amendments made by the minister will not help us; we do not need them. We have lived for centuries without these laws and we do not need them.  

I am a practicing valuer here in Buganda. Since this Bill was read for the first time, the value of rural land in Buganda has almost gone to zero. There are almost no financial institutions that can lend you money using your title in rural areas as security. Even if you write clearly in your report that there are no squatters, they are not sure that there will not be squatters tomorrow. So, if our people are not sure that they will not use their land to develop themselves, how are we going to develop this country? This Bill is not introduced in good health; there is a hidden agenda in this Bill. 

In 1975, Idi Amin first brought the Land Reform of 1995, abolishing all interest in land greater than 99 years. Amin has condemned, the degree was not implemented and 34 years later, Amin is dead but Aminism is back here. (Laughter) Why do we want to nationalise people’s property without compensation? We are nationalising the interests of land owners without compensation against our own Constitution? What are we doing?

MR WAMBUZI: I tried to restrain myself, but is the honourable member in order to stand in this House and say that he does not want any title deed in Acholi, but he wants 
titles in Buganda –(Interjections)- Is he really in order? -(Interjections)- That is what he is saying in his argument.

THE SPEAKER: I think what the honourable member was saying is that he is here to participate in affairs of national issues and, therefore, if you handle national issues, you can talk about local issues and talk about other issues within the same nation. So, I think he had two limbs - his and Buganda’s.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank you very much. Our country is not moving forward because of the kind of leadership we have, and you can see them. (Laughter) When we are discussing a very serious matter, the minister who is not paying attention gets up and starts talking about something else. (Laughter) I am saying that we may pass this law but the implementation will be a very big problem –(Member timed out.) 

4.31
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): We are finally debating the Land Bill and indeed, the Bill has been delayed for various reasons. As it is or how it was with the regional tier, one of the reasons as to why the Land Bill delayed was because –(Interruption)  

THE SPEAKER: For purposes of correction, we have never debated the regional tier. What we discussed and passed was the regional government. We call it regional government because we established bigger areas than districts and we gave them the name, “region”. If Uganda had kingdoms all over, we would have said, “kingdom governments”. I see people misinterpreting what we did. We could have called it, “provincial”. Sometimes I hear people saying they will compare federal with a regional government. No, a regional government is the cup while the federal will be the tea. There is no competition between the regional government and federal. You could have a federal system within a regional government. 

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much for that useful information. I would like to put into consideration the reasons as to why we have been getting or receiving various pieces of information and views in as far as this Bill is concerned, and most of them negative. We have heard from Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa that she traversed the whole of Buganda and that most districts in Buganda support –(Interjection)– Yes, I remember you mentioned the districts you went to. 

We have His Majesty the King of Buganda and the reason as to why the king is referred to as Ssabataka is because of land. When we are debating the Land Bill here in Buganda, we are almost debating the Ssabataka. I must repeat this - when we are debating the Land Bill here in Buganda, we are almost debating His Majesty the Kabaka of Buganda because he is the Ssabataka. (Applause) Mr Speaker, allow me to continue –(Interruption) 

MS NANKABIRWA: I am called Ruth Nankabirwa, MP of Kiboga in Buganda. I am rising on a point of order against my colleague, hon. Sebaggala, who is trying to mislead the country without quoting the authority he is using. He is saying that when we are discussing the Land Bill, we are discussing the king –(Interjection)- we are discussing Kabaka. Unless he substantiates, is he in order to mislead the honourable members and the entire country without quoting the authority?

THE SPEAKER: Candidly, what we are discussing is the administration of property called “land” and how it should be controlled. The issue of traditional leaders is different and has a chapter of its own, just like land has a chapter of its own. 

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you for that guidance. Historically and traditionally, those who come from Buganda know the reason as to why he is referred to as Ssabataka; period.

Secondly, in our various consultations and in the meetings we held with our electorate, they were very clear that they reject the Land Bill in its totality. I would like to now pose a question because we have heard that His Majesty the Kabaka on several occasions has said a very big “no” to this Land Bill. Who, here, is a rightful Muganda, to now come and oppose the Ssabataka of Buganda who has said “no” to the Land Bill? – (Interjections)- Yes, if you are a Muganda and you are supporting this Bill when the Kabaka of Buganda has said “no”, then I really doubt whether you trust your kingdom –Interjections)- I should not, as a man from Buganda and one who treasures the Kabaka of Buganda very much –(Interruption)-  

MS NAKADAMA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I do not know whether Hon. Lartif Sebaggala is in order to intimidate the members of parliament who are from Buganda that when they debate and do not say “no” to the Land Bill, then they are opposing the Kabaka.

THE SPEAKER: When we started this business, I told you that it is quite sensitive legislation. What I detect is that people are using all kinds of strategies to prevent people from talking candidly about this law. Please, let us not mix issues. Let us be candid, let us be honest; do not use strategies that tend to bring fear in people who should be contributing. 

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: Your time is up. Honourable members, let us be honest to each other. Let us be frank and helpful so that we have a good law, such that we get out the bad areas by amendment. 

4.40
MAJ. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Mr Speaker, I want to request the indulgence of the House; Members should really graduate and place ourselves where we belong, and that is the national assembly of a country. We   are here to discuss a national law that looks at a scarce resource called land, and we should be nationalistic in our perspective. While Hon. Kassiano Wadri represents the people of Terego and I represent the people of Ibanda North, what we do discuss here and what finally ends up as an Act will be a national law. It will not be an LC III or a lower local government law. So, I request for the indulgence of Members. Members should really control their tempers and remain with the necessary sobriety so that we can have a good law for the country. 

Secondly, when you read through this Bill that has no more than five pages, it is characteristic of protecting the people we represent here. It is to protect them from evictions - whether eviction is being exercised by a General who is part of the Executive arm of Government; whether the eviction is by a minister or a Member of Parliament from a ruling party. People are making all sorts of insinuations on the people carrying out evictions, so even if it is the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister here who may buy a piece of land and may want to evict people, the law must catch up with him, being part of the Executive notwithstanding. That is all that we are saying. 

I, therefore, request our colleagues here that at an appropriate time when we go to committee stage, people should really maintain sobriety and stop being extremely partisan. This business of saying, “Guma, you are a Mukiga, you are a Munywarwanda or you are an Anyanya should stop.” Cameras are focusing on us and we are degrading ourselves. So, it is extremely important that we remain at the level of a national parliament. 

This law, including section 32(b), talks about people on customary land. Everybody has read it and it talks about protecting the peasants and the less advantaged Ugandans so that MPs who have money, executives or people who are in business should not necessarily evict these disadvantaged and less privileged sections of our society. So, whether you are on the Opposition or Government side, I would really expect that a serious legislator here should be able not to be carried away by emotions. 

Some people are talking about the spirit of the law but nobody has come out to tell us about this sprit. Mr Speaker, if there is a Bill that has had extensive consultation in this country, it is this Bill. It is now two years since 2007 when we were here, and we are about to end the whole session and we are debating it. It has even undergone a lot of surgery but people continue to say that there is this sprit; is it a sprit of a dead person? What sprit is there? The law is absolutely clear but people simply oppose it even when the provisions are in the interest of the people they represent. I request for the indulgence of Members - whether it is the minority or the majority part of the House - to really be objective and accept and pass this law. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.46
MR KASAIJA STEPHEN (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in calling for Parliament to be sober because this is a very serious matter. The question of land is so important that we really need to be sober because it affects us and it will affect the future generations. 

We need to be realistic. We need to know our history and we need to balance the people we represent. We have a law in place; there is the 1998 Land Act and there is the Land (Amendment) Act 2001, but all this has failed to bring harmony, which means that there is a problem. The major problem is the issue of evictions. Colleagues, I call on you to stand firm and say, “No more evictions in this country” -(Interjections)– Don’t worry; I am going to explain it. 

I come from an area where these evictions are rampant. Time and again, people have called me to the constituency and I go to the ministries, so I know what it means. At the same time, we need to be fair to the landlords. I think that is what we should go with. We should be fair to the disadvantaged and to the landlords. Whereas we are saying that the poor should not be evicted, we should look at the interests of the landlords. 

I am calling upon this Parliament to support the issue of the land fund such that the land owner who has bona fide occupancy or lawful occupancy, whatever you call them, should have two options. One option should be to accept the busuulu; if he or she fails to accept that, then let Government compensate this person through the land fund and then the question will be settled.

I was reading through the report; there are those families that are headed by children. If we now say that these landlords should be free to do whatever they want – colleagues, look at these people, the wretched of the earth. Colleagues who come from Buganda, colleagues who come from Toro, colleagues who come from Ankole will know what I mean. There was a historical imbalance; some people found themselves with a lot of land and on this land there were people living there. However, because of our historical misfortunes, as I may call it, some people were partitioned alongside their land. They said, “You and you, you are under so and so”. So, we are trying to address this historical imbalance. 

What are we saying? We are saying that if you got land in that way, the law protects you because you have a land title; but at the same time we are saying, you should not evict these poor people who may have come there not out of their wish but because of the historical imbalance. Have the busuulu; if you cannot accept this, let Government compensate you, but let nobody evict these people.

If they do not want to sell their land - that is what you are saying - then why is Government in place? We really need to be revolutionary. This is why you are here. If there is an imbalance, you must address it. You do not want to sell your land but you are saying the citizens of Uganda should go; where? Where should they go? -(Interjection)- Where they came from? Then you are very unfair. They were found on that land by the time our colonialists gave them to the landlords. Be realistic!

Colleagues, I call upon you to understand what we are doing. We must address these issues soberly. I come from an area where this imbalance was. Go to an area like Kasenda, Hakibale and Nyabuswa in my constituency, hundreds of families are being evicted yet they were there by the time people were given land. In the first instance, who owned that land before it was given to these landlords? 

My colleagues, some people said that land -(Interjections)- Protect me, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You are very much protected.

MR KAGWERA: Some people are saying that land will lose value because those people who have titles will not be able to present them to the bank and get loans. You are forgetting that there are those Ugandans on these pieces of land that also need to get loans, and this is why we are saying that they must have certificates, and legally they must be recognised and also get money. You are looking at one side. You are looking at the side of the landlords but you forget that the tenants are also Ugandans who need to get money from the same banks you are talking about. 

Colleagues, I call upon you to be sober like we have always been. Let us debate this motion and we pass this Bill without harming anybody. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

4.52
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to add my voice to my colleagues who have pointed out that it is true our people are being evicted. In my district, Wakiso, I have been meeting my people a number of times who have actually had a problem of being evicted. However, I must say very clearly that the people of Wakiso District are looking forward to amicable agreements between the central government and the Kabaka who is a key or major landlord.

I just want to seek clarification, and my clarification is very simple, on behalf of my people. When I look at the amendment to section 31(a), it is talking about the minister determining the ground rent payable if the district land board fails to do so. We would not have a problem with this, but my people asked, “Will the minister be able to at least consult the landlords within a given area to be able to come up with reasonable ground rent?” They asked these kinds of questions. So, I raise -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, when we say that the district land board will assess rent payable or busuulu payable, it does not mean that they will go to a village and see 100 tenants and than make 100 assessments. No; that is not what is expected of them. I think what they are going to do is to get areas in the district that deal with coffee, for example, and which get above a certain amount and say they will pay this amount. Not every tenant expects the district land board to go there. They will zone the district and even the activities and then make an assessment. If you do not want the minister to do so, you suggest who should make the assessment and then you make an amendment.

MRS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that clarification. Of course, as representative of the people, I could not hesitate to express their concern in as far as this is concerned. 

Going to the issue of the Act that we are trying to amend, I would like to also ask another question that my people have been asking themselves and which I also ask myself. Who is to blame for all the evictions that are taking place in the country, especially in the central region? The answer may be difficult to get. 

My other concern is, if this amendment is passed, probably the honourable minister should tell us how implementation will be effected. I do think that, even before the amendment, if the prevailing law had been well implemented, our people would not be hurt to the level they are hurt. All the same, I must be clear. I do appreciate the spirit in which this amendment is being brought because it is brought to help the people that are being evicted; the people we represent.

In a very good spirit, I would like to tell you that when I have been meeting my people to discuss the land issues, I have been at times asking them, “Can I see the hands of those who have titles?” Assuming I had 100 people in my meeting, I would get about five with land titles. This is an indication that the majority of Ugandans are liable to eviction as squatters. Now, honourable members, I am a Muganda, a staunch Muganda, I want to be clearly understood for the -(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the term “squatters” is different from a lawful kibanja holder.  A kibanja holder is not a squatter.  

MRS SSENINDE: Mr Speaker, I do not think I specifically said they are squatters. What I wanted to indicate is that you find that a big percentage of Ugandans do not have titles; this means they fall in the other categories either as tenants or squatters. 

However, we should also not forget, and I say this from the bottom of my heart, that all Ugandans in this country on whichever land, in whichever district they are, belong to Uganda and they are supposed to benefit from whatever is provided on this land. So, because of this, I just want us to consider this Bill; whether it is passed or not, there are Ugandans that need our support.

Finally, I want to say we should not, if we are passing this Bill -(Interjections)- We must put in consideration -(Interjections)- I beg your protection, Mr Speaker. 

I am making my points very clear and I am telling you what my people are saying. When it comes to the landlords, we should also not forget that there are landlords in our areas who must not be oppressed. Therefore, when we are deciding how to proceed, we should put into consideration the landlords and at the same time try to protect the tenants. I would, therefore, like to conclude by saying that we need to come up with a land fund. (Applause) This is the only way that I think we shall protect both the tenants and also the landlords -(Member timed out.) 

4.59
MR SULEIMAN MADADA (NRM, Bbale County, Kayunga): Mr Speaker, I am a Member of Parliament for Bbale Constituency in Kayunga District where a number of issues of eviction and problems of land have existed. I also happened to have consulted in eight districts of Buganda. I was in Mubende, Mpigi, Kiboga, Kawolo for Buvuma, and I was also in Kampala – Kawempe; Nakasongola and Luweero. I would like to assure you that when I went, the situation on the ground was hostile, but when we handled what was in the Bill, we noted that this situation had been made hostile because of media propaganda. At the end of the day when we went clause by clause through this Bill, people found no problem in supporting this Bill. (Applause)

One point I want to bring out clearly is that when discussing this Bill and legislating, we need to look at the socio-economic context of the country. Of course, we are working in a capitalistic world where capitalism drives profit maximisation and where if institutions of state are not carefully managed, some people can take interest in owning public property. The weaker ones in a capitalistic tendency seem to suffer unless there are proper legislations. This is because what comes to the minds of people is to maximise profit and gain from the ignorance of the people.

This Parliament must stand beyond this and see that the voiceless, the poor people in the villages, are suffering. I have been analysing who the people opposing the Bill are, and people need to also take that study. When you talk about bank, banks are commercially oriented businesses and they would like to maximise profit; they would not like to be inconvenienced. I wonder why a person representing a very poor group would defend a bank and hurt the interest of the poor. (Applause)

I have also analysed what has been happening in the media. I have a media background and I know what the media say and who owns media in this country. When you look at what is going on there, of course they are talking, but behind it there are interests that we need to discover.

Going back to what is happening; you are caught in a dilemma with two big groups saying, “No, this is this.” Your last resort, as a Member of Parliament, is the constituency. (Applause) I went back to my constituency and every time I was faced with challenges of people saying the Bill must be brought to Parliament and be discussed, and this is a reality. 

I remember I was in the Seventh Parliament and there was an amendment brought by our colleague, Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, removing the fee of Shs 1,000 and leaving the fixing of the rate to the districts. What has been happening is that there has been a vacuum; the districts have not been fixing the ground rate or the busuulu. That, therefore, brings in an amendment, which says that if the districts take six months without fixing busuulu, the government responsible - and we are not talking about an individual - will have to fix busuulu. I find no problem with this. 

In fact, when I asked for alternatives from the people, I said, “In case the district has not fixed busuulu and busuulu is the ground on which one can be evicted, what do we do?” We gave people options and they ended up saying we must find somebody to fix busuulu. So, the debate here would be, if the busuulu is not fixed by the district, who should be responsible for fixing busuulu? Those are the arguments that we should be able to look at.

When you talk about the law and say that the laws in existence are sufficient, I want to say that I have had problems in my constituency. I know of a man called Saddam. One of the laws they used to evict him was the law on trespass. He was a kibanja holder but when a landlord came in and bought the land and fenced it off, he was charged for trespass when he went there and he was put in prison. So, the existence of these laws does not benefit the ordinary person but the landlord. 

When you look at introducing criminality in this matter, my understanding of the law that has been in existence is that it has been civil and so the two parties involved are the ones that go to courts of law. Now, you are talking about very many big people chasing people from the land but the law has been a civil law. So, where do you bring in the state? The best way to get there is to introduce the issue of criminality such that the state can put its hand on it.

I believe that if we are to look at issues objectively, the issue of this amendment is long overdue. All we need to do is not to begin measuring the spirit of the Bill. I want to caution my brothers and sisters; unless this Parliament has set parameters of measuring the spirit, it cannot be a basis of discussion, because the word “spirit” is subjective and not objective at all. It depends on what spectacles you are putting on. I want, therefore, to say that we cannot debate a law basing on the issue of spirit. It would be very unfair. Until you have a standard of measuring it, we cannot use it.

5.07
MS BETTY KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga North, Kampala): I rise with a heavy heart to present the views of the people of Lubaga North on this Bill. My heart is heavy because I see history repeating itself. It was in 1967 that one Godfrey Binaisa wrote a constitution abolishing the Kingdom of Buganda. It was in 1980 that Paul Muwanga presided over an election that brought back Obote who had abolished kingdoms. It was in 1995 that Besweri Mulondo hit the final nail in Buganda’s quest for federalism, and it is in 2009 that one Byandala presents a Bill in this Parliament seconded by hon. Nankabirwa –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, let us not personalise this debate. Hon. Byandala is a chairman of a committee.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take your guidance in good faith. When we talk about Godfrey Binaisa, he was the Attorney-General. These are important historical landmarks and that is why we keep repeating them today and they do not go away.

Hon. Nankabirwa and hon. Madada have told us that they went around Buganda seeking the views of the people on this Bill. What they did not tell us, and what I want to tell this House, is that while they were going around loaded with facilitation, at the same time there was another committee, Nambooze’s committee, going around with no facilitation. What they should tell us is: Which committee attracted most people?

THE SPEAKER: How was Nambooze’s committee moving? Didn’t they have transport? 

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, they did not have a formal budget. I attended both of these consultation committees. This is because I was a member of the Civic Education Committee of Buganda and I attended many of them. I know the number of people that were attracted to these ones. I also attended some that were called by officials like Maj. Kinobe in Makindye. The point I am trying to make is that the voice of the people was clear even at that time those committees were moving around. 

The reason why I really stood up was to express my fears about the spirit of this Bill. The spirit of this Bill, in my opinion, is expressed in statements made by key Government officials during times before land evictions became an issue. I want to read an article that was published by the Associated Press, and this is from a leading daily in Harare. It was published on 6 June 2002. That is the time when President Museveni from Uganda visited President Mugabe in Harare. It says, “Speaking during his state visit in Zimbabwe, Museveni whose controversial no-party democracy has scored some success, said he supported the seizure of white-owned farms in that country”. It goes on further down and quotes President Museveni as saying, “When I heard about the problems created in Zimbabwe, I do not agree with those who condemn President Mugabe. In Uganda we have the same problem created by the British but we shall sort it out.” This was long before the so-called land evictions became a big issue. 

I am also going to read quotations from a statement made in this House by Gen. David Tinyefuza on the question of Buganda’s 9,000 square miles. In his statement, Gen. Tinyefuza gave a detailed history of the impact of colonialism on the formation or demarcation of internal boundaries of Uganda. He says, “Today, before the Movement Government intervention to reverse these historical wrongs, a few Basongora are scattered in Kasese District”. Then he goes on to say that matters of land cannot remain unattended to, and the intervention by Government, like it seeks through the Land (Amendment) Bill 2007, is to carry out land reform in an orderly manner. 

The main point I would like to make is that statements from key senior people before this Bill was presented, talk about land reforms created by history not by unlawful or lawful occupation of land.

5.16
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman representative, Dokolo): I would like to thank the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development for bringing this Land (Amendment) Bill. I also want to caution some of our colleagues who have confronted some of us saying that our son and our very own is being used to give our away land.

I am not making this statement in defense of hon. Omara Atubo but I want to put it on record that consultations were done in the Lango sub-region and in some of the consultations I was there personally. The cultural leader was there in person, the Bishops representing various religious organisations were there and the Lango sub-region unanimously agreed that Section 32(b) be deleted. That was the position of Lango Parliamentary Group and Langi leaders. I want to state here that hon. Omara Atubo agreed with the position of the Lango Parliamentary Group and the Langi leaders and, therefore, let us delete the name of Lango when it comes to this Bill. However, I want to say that when the Jews decided that they wanted to treat Jesus their way, Pontius Pilate just washed his hands and therefore I do not want Lango to be stained because of this. 

I want to seek clarification on three issues. The Constitution of Uganda under Article 237 at whose making you, Mr Speaker and I were there to represent the people of Uganda, we agreed that there are four ways of owning land in Uganda. If you are first and foremost a citizen, through customary tenure, freehold, Mailo or leasehold; the clarification I am seeking here is that by this amendment we are attempting to introduce the fifth tenure and that is the bona fide occupant.

I am just seeking a legal clarification; I am not opposing whatever has been brought. I just want to understand whether by giving powers to the bona fide occupants, whether we are not introducing the element of dual ownership on a registered piece of land.

THE SPEAKER: I was in the Constituency Assembly and I know it was an afternoon when the issue of bona fide occupants came in and I sat on a committee which sat in that round thing in the International Conference Centre. This issue of bona fide occupancy came in especially because of what was happening in Kibaale and other places.

It was in the original text of the Constitution - the term bona fide is used and it was defined and it meant a person who had occupied land without any kind of harassment for 12 years to that date when we promulgated the Constitution. Bona fide, therefore, does not continue. The definition was restricted to those people who had occupied land 12 years up to 1995. So, the other one must be lawful or he must be claiming from people who were bona fide occupants by 1995. It is not that every trespasser is a bona fide occupant, it has a restricted definition.

MRS OGWAL: Thank for that clarification. I think we need sensitisation on this matter because there are very many occupants on registered land who are now claiming ownership and they are not willing to move out if the landlord wants it that way.

I want to say that land is one of the main assets that we have for the purpose of development and it is very important if we are moving from peasantry kind of agriculture to commercial agriculture. It is important that we remove any impediments on land ownership and I would have wished that this law facilitates negotiation between the landlord and the occupants so that if the landlord wishes that you move off the land, so that he can may expand his agricultural zone, it should not be resisted because that is his land, that is the land he has registered his interests in and that is the land he must develop. Whatever law, it must facilitate an understanding between the two parties. I am uncomfortable with power being given to an occupant who does not hold the title. I get uncomfortable and I get worried and that is where my concern ends. 

I would not wish for a situation like in the Constituent Assembly when we brought a genuine motion and hon. Mulondo and Bidandi Ssali shot it down. Now it has come to haunt us, some of us are lucky to be alive to witness all these things unfold. So, let us make a law when we know that events will not unfold while we are still alive to watch and then we regret; we will wish we had not acted that way. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.24
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to oppose this Bill and I will give my reasons quite simply. I have two sides to this reason but let me start with the land of my forefathers. The purpose of this Bill is to prevent rampant evictions. We do not have rampant evictions so you are curing a disease that does not exist in the land of my forefathers. I am going to come to the land of my mother also but in the land of my father, we do not have evictions. 

The truth of the matter, in the land of my father and forefathers, is that what we have is a problem of people claiming interest in customary land. We have had problems, which have come on the Floor of this Parliament and it concerns the cattle keepers who move with thousands of animals. There are times when tensions had developed and the matter was brought to this Parliament. A select committee has been set up to look into that matter.

In 32(b), this Bill provides for somebody who has interest in customary land and this creates a lot of fear. The tensions, which happened in Apac ended up with people losing their lives and that remains. On the land where my father and great grandfather are buried, I spent more than two years trying to remove a cattle keeper. He was not there before 1983 but insisted that he has interests. He had not paid anyone for any piece of land but he insisted and I could not remove him. 

Ultimately, I had to plant crops all around the kraal and every time his animals ate the crops, I handed them over to the sub-county. That is the problem that we have. If it is a question of evictions, we do not have that problem and I am sure the minister will agree that tensions are with the cattle keepers. We believed that 32(b) was going to be removed and we were comfortable with that but when we see it coming back in a different form, we become alarmed. What is the purpose?

I know that there is a historical problem but the purpose of the Bill is not to address the historical problem but to address the rampant evictions. If we are to address the historical problems, we should come out clearly and say so. Let us not assume that a Bill designed to end rampant evictions is going to address the historical problem. We are beating around the bush and we are not treating the actual disease. We are going around treating symptoms. 

The root cause, as far as I see, is actually poverty. Poverty has changed the whole dynamics and I find it difficult to accept that the NRM Government really has the people at heart. We have heard that people are suffering and are being exploited in their places of work. We have raised the issue of minimum wage where a law exists and empowers the minister, in dealing with the employer and employee, to fix a minimum standard but the government has refused. Now all of a sudden, we are concerned about people living on the land. I fail to understand!

In the area of agriculture, our farmers are not protected. If the government brought a Bill or motion that our farmers should receive 70 percent of the world market price of whatever they produce, you will have my full support but still the same farmers are being exploited. Land becomes the only avenue to raise money. Many people are going to acquire that land, buy a boda boda and when it breaks down, they will be destitute and that is the reality. If we think this Bill is really correcting the problems, it is not.

On the issue of the cattle keepers in Akokoro, they were being supplied by helicopter and I raised it to our minister. The minister is in the House and if you want to be quoted, I will raise it. I gave the date and the time when the helicopter was supplying - if the government does not know when its helicopters are being deployed, if the government does not know when an armed soldier is participating in evictions and you think this Bill is going to correct that problem, we are deceiving ourselves! 

If the people in authority and in command do not know where their soldiers are at any given time then we are in a serious problem because there is no way that evictions can be carried out with the involvement of security forces without those in charge knowing. By implication, it is with consent. On that basis I oppose the whole of this Land (Amendment) Bill. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.31
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I urge Members of Parliament to debate this Bill with soberness. The issues raised in this Bill look to be okay but when you come to implementation, it becomes a problem. We have lawyers in this House. The issue we have at hand is to totally criminalise evictions. At the same time, we have the procedures to follow while evicting people on a particular piece of land. 

I want to give a scenario. If, for example, I have two square miles in Luweero and there are people who are staying there without land titles and I have a block with land titles, I go to court, get a court order to have them evicted. Also, I am aware of the cost implication of paying for the rights of those people – buying them off - because I know the value of the land is over Shs 10 billion and compensating these people can take Shs 2 billion. Definitely, I will go for compensating the people and have them evicted. These are sugar-coated ways because we are getting close to 2011. You are creating the impression that you are going to protect people against rampant evictions. 

I remember when there was a debate about taking a mattress to Luzira when you are detained there, most MPs opposed it, saying Luzira is a place where you can be trained and, therefore, you should sleep on the floor. But when a minister was arrested and taken there, he requested for a mattress. However, he was reminded that he was the one who had enacted that law. So, I am urging Members of Parliament not to incite our voters because we are institutionalising evictions. If I want to evict people and I am ready to compensate them, there is no way they can remain there. 

Hon. Omara Atubo, are the people in Temangalo going to survive eviction because they were there at the time of sale? I want you to assure us and let Ugandans know that eviction is a procedural matter in court and if I have the papers and the capacity to compensate, they must be evicted.

So, I am warning Ugandans who are jubilating over this Bill that it will reduce rampant evictions - that is a lie! Come 2011, elections will be over and you will see rampant evictions because they have been institutionalised. We have to be careful!

I was consulting stakeholders about this Bill and most of them, including the Law Society, rejected it. I also consulted the people of Pallisa – some Members of Parliament are seated here quietly and they did not consult their people because they feared this hot issue. In Pallisa, no Member of Parliament consulted the people. I went sub-county by sub-county and covered the entire district. The people rejected this Bill in totality, clause by clause. 

When the government picked LCs to take consultations to Mbale, the LCs said, “Home is hot, we cannot go and talk about this Bill.” They ended up transferring the LCs to Tororo. When they were in Tororo, the people said, “The Bill is bad, we cannot go and talk about it.” So, some people refused to sign for the Shs 40,000 they were supposed to get. 

But let us be sincere and really pass a law - 

MR WERIKHE: When we were consulting, we had a meeting for the Eastern region in Tororo and all the leaders from Pallisa were there. I saw no leader opposing this Bill. I was the overall coordinator. So, is hon. Opange in order to mislead the House that this Bill was rejected by leaders from Pallisa when he was not there?

THE SPEAKER: Since he was not there, he does not know what happened during your meeting.

MR OPANGE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I did consultations and even when the leaders were in Mbale, we put an announcement on Radio Uganda saying the problems of Pallisa have been transferred to Mbale for discussion. Then they went to Tororo. Even in Tororo - we were following but the matter is here - the people of Pallisa rejected this Bill in totality.

This Bill focuses on bona fide occupants and landlords. You want us to introduce the elements of the purchaser, the one who buys the land. Let us make this Bill extremely tight for anybody to buy land because that is what you are driving at. Because if you allow somebody to lose billions of money by preventing them from evicting people, then what are you up to? If you want, let us make a law so that the Baganda do not sell their land, which has squatters. We should make it so that the issue of a third party – the purchaser - must be considered in this Bill. That way we will know that when somebody pays for the land - the buyer should beware - so that we know that in Uganda, there is no sale of land.

The other issue - I am aware there are Baganda here. The 1900 Agreement acknowledged the existence of 9,000 square miles, which are supposed to be returned to Buganda. But this Bill is silent on that matter. 

Also, we are aware of discussions between the Kabaka of Buganda and the President and the major item being discussed is this Land Bill –(Member timed out_)

5.38
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The debate on land and making land laws has been a sensitive matter. From 1900 after the agreement, there was a revolt by the Bataka. The Busuulu and Envujjo laws came in to mitigate that. In 1975, they could not do much because of the political situation. In 1998, it was still very hot. In 2004, it was very hot and I do not expect this Land (Amendment) Bill of 2007 to be an exception. It has always been sensitive, but we have always come out to provide what is best for this country.

I have had the opportunity of perusing through the Hansard when they were enacting the 1998 land law. Many MPs opposed that law. But today they are saying it is sufficient and we do not need another law. I have said it elsewhere because the Bill has been in the public domain for some time. I want to put it on record that to me, this Bill is necessary if we make the required improvements. That is the position I got even when I traversed my district in Nakaseke. From Kasangombe to Ngoma, from Kinyogoga to Semuto, they brought out issues, which I want to bring to the attention of this august House. 

One of the issues is that it is not practical for the minister to determine ground rent. I want to support the position of the committee that we get a neutral body to determine ground rent other than the minister.

Also, the issue of the minister coming in to determine the ground rent if the district land board does not do it in 30 days is okay. That is why I am saying if such improvements are made, I will not hesitate to support this law.

Mr Speaker, the issue that was brought out about land evictions would be equivalent to intellectual dishonesty for us to sit in this House and say that there are no evictions when they are actually rampant.  I will give an example of one man is Semuto, Mr Ssenabulya who was a Kibanja holder of 10 acres and all of a sudden the owners sold the land although the man insisted on cultivating on the land. He was given summons from Luweero Chief Magistrate’s Court because these people who were evicting him are actually rich and they belong to the elite and some are soldiers. This is a  very vulnerable old man who when he got the summons, went and straight reported the matter to the office of the Luweero LC V chairman who told him not to mind that he would talk to his colleague and things would be okay. 

So, the man went back to Semuto and the chairman wrote to Mr Ssenabulya thinking that everything would be okay. All of a sudden judgement was entered and the man had to pay all the costs. So, we are legislating for people who are very vulnerable; who do not know anything about the law. 

What the people of Nakaseke also raised was in regard to 32(a)(i) that somebody will be evicted in regard to non-payment of rent. Even this law; the Land Act, section 43 if you say somebody will be evicted for only non-payment – I support the position of the committee when they subject this provision to other existing laws. 

THE SPEAKER: What would have happened if somebody prevented rain from falling in an area; that is if he charms the rain so that it does not rain in a particular area, what would you do? 

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, I do not know what would happen but still subjecting this provision to other laws, to me, would be appropriate. And again on Section 31(a)(i) when a court order is granted and the person to be evicted is given six or three months, the tenant must maintain the status quo. Otherwise, within that period that person may cut all the trees and any kind of destruction on that land. So, I believe that should be made. 

They wanted this law because for the first time an amendment on Section 92(1)(c) is being made. The problem of illegal settlers coming from wherever they are migrating from and settling amidst them; this law is actually moving from six months to four years. To me, if it provides for penalising heavily the illegal settlers, I will not hesitate to support it and if it is also punishing the errant soldiers or security personnel that are using the guns to intimidate people and then grab the land, I will support this law.

Finally, I also agree that this is law is not the ultimate solution; the ultimate solution is the Land Fund. (Applause) The Land Fund was passed and money has been going on to Kibaale District -(Member timed out_)

4.16
MS GRACE TUBWITA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you much, Mr Speaker. I support the motion. I would to thank the committee for the report. 

When you look at the motive of this Bill, I feel that it will help some of our people who are facing rampant evictions most especially in districts where we are having absentee landlords. When the Bill proposes that when a landlord is to sell he should notify the other, I want to assure you that this is a serious issue, which could help some of our Bibanja holders not be evicted unknowingly. We have had circumstances whereby a landlord sells land without informing the tenants on his land and then a person who is buying buys without seeing the people occupying land and others as well take it that it is vacant. They only realise that there people occupying it later. Some of them are very merciless that they just evict these people without even coming to any agreement with them. 

So if this Bill brings in such a provision, I feel that it will protect our people and it will bring to order some of the landlords who will sell their land without notifying the tenants on the land. 

On the issue of ground rent, I find no problem. After the district land board has failed to fix the ground rent and then the minister takes over - because this will help us. At the moment the district land boards have derailed these issues of land. You find most of our people are crying over even getting a provisional land title from the land board offices. So, I have a feeling that this will also help the land board to become more active and do their duties.

My request is one, just as the committee proposed that if the landlord refuses to receive the ground rent from the tenant, let there be a provision whereby a tenant can be in position pay that ground rent even when a landlord refuses to receive it and his name is cleared in order to avoid eviction. 

In circumstances where there are absentee landlords, that means that a tenant will fail to get where to pay this money because some of the tenants who are sitting on land do not even know the owners of the land. I have this problem in my district. So, if there is that provision of an office where a tenant can pay even without a landlord receiving the money directly, it will help us so that when it comes to the time of evictions, these people will not be affected. I want to support the provision that proposes to operationalise the Land Fund throughout the country because this will help us especially in the areas where we have absentee landlords in mostly the lost counties. After the British colonialists gave land to the kingdom, some people who were given this land disappeared and the people are sitting on land without knowing the rightful owners of the land. So, if the government can get these titles, pay them off and the people can have the opportunity to occupy this land, I feel that this will help us a lot. I thank you.

5.51
MR WILLIAM OKECHO: (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. Where I come from, land matters are sorted out customarily and people sit down around a table and sort out land issues. West Budama County North is an area which is fairly rural and during my consultations, much as they said that there is no problem with the amendments to the Land Bill and especially after the Bill had been given quite a thorough surgery in using the most critical areas, they were concerned about section 32(b). They continued saying that in the Land Act, there is a provision for the Land Fund. They wanted - if possible –(Interjections)- could these ministers in front of me keep quiet because I am talking? (Laughter) I want you to listen to this because it is a fundamental amendment, which I feel is very important. 

There is a provision in the Land Act which provides for the Land Fund and during my consultations, my people who own customary land, which is protected by their customary practices, wanted to be assisted to get titles to their land because they cannot afford to process them at this point because it is extremely expensive. They wanted to see if it could be possible for government to help them to use the Land Fund to get titles so that they are able to commercialise their land should there be need. Some of them are holding huge chunks of land, which they cannot use very effectively because they cannot even take this land to banks to acquire loans. Because they needed some money to be assisted, I would like to request government through the minister to expand the use of the Land Fund to be able to allow people to access this fund to get land titles.

We need an expansion of the use of the Land Fund to be able to help people who own land to make their land commercially viable so that they can even use it to acquire facilities like loans, in my place which has no disputes like evictions and all these kind of problems. If it ever happens, it is customarily sorted out because all land belongs to the people. Thank you very much.

5.55
MS HUDA OLERU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I start by thanking the minister and the committee for sincerely accepting to listen to the cries of the people of West Nile. They have accepted it in their report where it is written, “Section 32 (b) has been deleted,” - this is what is in the report and that is why I am thanking them. If it is changed in any other way, then it is not my problem –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Huda, it is at the Committee Stage that we shall delete such a section and not now. You can only propose an amendment, just as the committee has done. 

MS OLERU: But it is already in the report –(Interjections)– yes it is a proposal in the report, which we shall support and I am thanking them in advance because I have appreciated that. For any development, there must be land reform. If this amendment is going to bring development and help the people, then I support it. 

In terms of making a law, when it is a capitalist state, almost all the laws made favour the rich people but if it is a mixed state, which I believe Uganda is, the laws made will also help the poor people. If this amendment is to stop evictions, the interests of the poor people are being catered for. But if you take development with the interest of poor people and you do not want to evict the poor, sometimes you will fail in infrastructure development. For example, our urban cities where there are suburbs where the government is not taking interest to replace these people and to put up better housing so that we put our town in a better way. 

Kampala is in a mess and government should have a comprehensive plan whereby it has demarcated good places or else it should buy this land from the land owners, establish good houses or moderate ones for poor people, and our city would look better. But because we are not taking these things into account and because we are saying that these poor people must not be evicted, I do not see a bright future for our urban cities like Kampala. 

Mr Speaker, I see a programme being run on UBC TV these days about some men and women talking about land; that if you want to evict me, you must give me time. My question is: how will the people of West Nile know that there is sensitisation going on on radio and TV, which does not even cross the Nile? Is this not only for the people within the areas where the communication network of UBC reaches or is it for all the people? 

I want to emphasise the comprehensive plan of government for the people. In 2007, I went to Khartoum in Sudan and there is a place where those people are putting hydro electric power but what the Government of Sudan did was to buy land from the land owners where they are now resettling the people. What they do is, for every person, they give about three acres of land and even build a house for them so that the people are decently resettled. So, can our government also have such a plan like probably the Land Fund that we are talking of? Can we now see the landlords who want to sell their land and we buy off this land so that we settle the tenants? Some of them are stubborn especially when you talk in terms of paying house rent where I am almost a victim. For instance, there is somebody in my house and this is now the tenth month but he has refused to pay my rent –(Laughter)- and whenever I talk to him, it is very complicated but because I am human, I am all the time telling him to do something but he has become resistant. What should we do? I think this law must be a coin with both sides. Thank you very much. 

6.02
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Mr Speaker, I rise to support this motion in as far as it supports people who really need it. I have sat here for sometime and I have listened to the contributions of my colleagues, who represent different people of Uganda and I realise that different Ugandans will be affected by this Bill in different magnitudes because our land issues are different. 

In my constituency for example, evictions of tenants are not rampant but there are evictions of people who are living in areas that were at one time gazetted by government to create wildlife centres and government farms. These people are being evicted and I do not think that this law is going to protect those people in the same manner. But I will support this Bill because I am a Ugandan and because I realise that it will protect the interests of Ugandans in areas where truly there are evictions. And it does not matter when evictions started; and I think evictions did not start in the 90s or in 2002; I think there have been evictions for quite some time according to a study done on land. So, you cannot say that prior to this time, there were no land evictions unless you are talking about that time when land was historically organised by the colonialists in a way that you had landlords and tenants on the land that belonged to landlords. But I believe it has been there for quite some time.

We need to speak like Ugandans. We know very well that there are areas where people are being evicted and I think that the purpose of this Bill is to protect those people who are being evicted from land that belongs to landlords and people who have been living there for generations. But at the same time, I would also like to see a win-win situation. Therefore, I would like to support and add my voice to those who are calling for a Land Fund because we do not want to see a situation of Zimbabwe where government gets up and decides that because there were historical imbalances, land is going to be taken from those who had it wrongly through colonialism and given to those who do not have it. As government promised us, I think this promise should be taken seriously so that no landlord loses his land using this law without being compensated. There must be compensation. 

Mr Speaker, I think this law indeed is addressing historical issues. One of the contributors said that it is addressing evictions rather than historical issues or imbalances but I think it is the historical imbalances that lead to evictions. So, I think it is targeting that. I would like to rest my case by calling strongly for a Land Fund to compensate those whose land will be affected by this law and also in future for laws that will address other issues of land that are facing our people. I thank you. 

6.07
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also rise to thank the committee for bringing the report and I also thank all those who have participated in the consultations. I think as we debate this issue, the object of the Bill is very clear and we should not confuse what the Bill is about. It is not addressing all the problems affecting land issues in this country. The Bill is particularly looking at evictions; and I think the question which we must ask ourselves is whether there are evictions in Uganda.

Hon. Akena was saying, “There are no evictions, there is no disease”, therefore, we are prescribing medicine when there is no disease but I want to say that even when there is no disease, you can give a vaccine to prevent that kind of disease. I think in this case, evictions are real; all of us who live in this country know that there are evictions, particularly in areas where mailo land is the main land tenure system, particularly in central Uganda here and other parts of the country.

Therefore, I think all of us know that evictions are there, and as Parliament, we have a duty to legislate and cure some of these problems. We all appreciate that the law will affect different parts of the country differently, but we have that responsibility to put legislation in place and some of these issues have been created by history and we cannot wish them away.

Secondly, this law is just temporary. It is just trying to cure an issue of eviction, but like most of my colleagues have said, I think we need comprehensive land reforms in this country if we are going to solve most of the issues which are being raised. The problem we have is that some of the land tenure systems which obtain here are a little bit difficult and sometimes primitive. 

I have had the opportunity of flying around most parts of this country and look at what is happening. When you look at central Uganda, I think because of the mailo land nature, it has even become difficult to develop some of this land because of the dual ownership. We know there have been attempts to make a law to streamline the relationship between the landlord and the tenants, and all those who live on the land, but it has remained a problem.

Therefore, like many colleagues have argued, the issue of the Land Fund, the need to streamline the ownership in this mailo land system, I think must be addressed once and for all, otherwise we shall pass this law, but problems will still remain with regard to the relationship between the landlord and the tenants. I, therefore, want to urge the ministry responsible for land that they should prepare reforms; we should mobilise resources so that we can compensate landlords and be able to strengthen the land rights of the tenants and to solve that.

In relation to that, in my view, the customary land tenure system is also primitive in a number of ways. For instance, it is very difficult to attach economic value to land of a customary nature and we have examples and experiences from areas like South East Asia where the World Bank has supported government to do systematic titling so that they can improve the economic value of the land.

Individuals can own land and land becomes an economic asset, but in our current situation, much as most of you are arguing to protect the current nature of customary land, I think it will not take us far the way the tenure system is working with customary land. I want to urge the Ministry responsible for Lands to prepare comprehensive reforms; we debate them and be able to solve most of the problems affecting land in this country. I thank you very much.

6.11
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to submit in two bits. One of my submissions is on the proposals to do with the amendments regarding to mailo land. I would like to express my opposition to the amendments for the reason that I feel this is piecemeal prescription to a bigger problem. I call it piecemeal because the issues we are trying to address have a historical perspective to it, and until we get down to our history and try to find remedies that address the historical imbalances, it is not enough to come into this House and say you are addressing evictions.

I am prompted to ask; have all previous evictions been outside court? No! People actually get evicted on court orders. What is the new thing that we are prescribing? I think by coming with these amendments, the minister and indeed Government is being apologetic for its failure to institute land reform in this country. We also know that it is a failure to implement existing provisions to do with evictions, to bring to book undisciplined soldiers and the undisciplined rich who go on rampage evicting people. What we needed is that the minister should have come here, asks for more money and provides for the Land Fund so that he can help people to acquire land.

When we talk about production, production has to do with control; and it has to do with ownership of factors of production; and you are now saying that you are going to empower people simply by telling them you will be evicted. Forget about it; they will not be productive that way. What we need is a functional Land Fund that will help the people to acquire the factors of production. Buy off the right of ownership from the landlords and empower those peasants that we keep boasting about.

It is also important to remind the minister that we need a national land policy to inform the law. The undoing of this government most of the time has been that they come with the law and they think that it is going to form policy. It just does not work like that. It is distorted that is why the committee rightly says this is a stop gap measure. What if the gap becomes larger tomorrow morning? Do you make another law? I think it is unfortunate.

Two, my impressions on customary land. I am aware that there was - the minister, Hon. Daniel Omara Atubo went to Soroti and consulted the Teso region at Soroti Flying School and I would like to restate for the record the type of information he got there. The people of Teso told hon. Omara Atubo that they have been poorer from 1986 to-date, they are worse off. They told Hon. Daniel Omara Atubo that they lost all their cows, an exercise which was watched over by a helicopter gunship; and so they do not totally blame their brothers and sisters from Karamoja. They know that the Karimojong cannot afford guns. 

They told hon. Omara Atubo that the education in Teso is no longer capable of harnessing the full potential of their children, and since 1986 to-date, we have more monuments in memory of our deaths than any other period. We also told Hon. Daniel Omara Atubo that we are too poor to access and afford justice. The proposals that people go to court so that court comes to evict the balaalo - for us the problem is the balaalo. (Laughter) These herdsmen of yours that move from one place to another; they have been to Soroti, they are in Kadungulu, Bugondo sub county, they have been in Alwa in Kaberamaido, they have been in Gweri, they have been in Kateta and they have been in Agu wetland.

Those are the real problems we are worried about when it comes to our customary land, and the most interesting bit of it is that they are guarded by the Army. The day you say anything on radio against the balaalo in the wetlands, the Army goes there and you ask yourself, “Who is this one who watches over the interests of balaalo and does not watch over the interests of the customary land owners?” 

I want to say that we opposed this proposal and the people of Teso actually prayed and fasted. Hon. Daniel Omara Atubo knows that when he went to the radio station together with Hon. Musa Ecweru, they were almost hit by lightning. (Laughter) Thank God we had also -(Interjections)– Yes, he is here. They almost died. Thank God we had also prayed and said, “Lord forgive them for their iniquities; they do not know what they are doing.” (Laughter) They do not know how emotional or how bad we feel about the poverty and the economic hardships of Teso. The only thing that remains to us is a piece of land; at least you can cultivate some cassava and eat; save the balance and take your child to school. We are not as rich as other parts of this country, where all projects go. 

In concluding, I want to say that as people from Teso, we do not trust the NRM Government on matters of land. We have no trust at all and if any issues have to be raised on customary land, I think the NRM first has to deal with the credibility issue from the people of Teso, then we can think about it. As of now, please forget because you will just anger the population. I thank you. (Applause)

6.18
MS REBECCA AMUGE (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am in pain because I am not going to support my mentor. Hon. Daniel Omara Atubo, the minister, is not somebody I only respect, but I honour, for many reasons, some of which he does not even know. (Interjections) 

When it comes to the issue of land in Lango, it belongs to three categories of people, namely, the living, the dead and the unborn. Mr Speaker, you are well aware that the people of Lango have been in the camps. When I was growing up, from the time the NRM came to government, we were told to take care of our land. It is going to be very difficult for us to unlearn what we learnt. The people of Lango believe that the only asset they are remaining with is land, and they were temporarily comforted when they were told that Section 32(b) was deleted. However, when we saw it in the Bill, the whole of Lango started panicking, but we believe that when it comes to the committee stage, they will probably look at us with sympathy and delete it. If they do not, then -(Interruption)

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I want to assure members of parliament that 32(b) will be deleted. 

MS AMUGE: Mr Speaker, allow me to thank the Prime Minister and also request that the one you are putting there to substitute 59, should also be deleted. 

I would like to ask the Government to explain to us again because when the Bill was withdrawn, we were told that there were consultations between the Central Government and the Buganda Government, but we did not want to know the details. However, we thought it would have been important for us to know how far you have gone with the dialogue between Buganda and the Central Government. I seem to see nothing in that line.

The people of Lango, in all the districts, resolved in a very big meeting that 32(b) be deleted and nothing be used to substitute it. I believe that Hon. Daniel Omara Atubo has been with the cultural leaders. He has supported them to look at this, and they believe that he personally believes that our people do not have any problems of eviction. Actually, when it comes to the issue of –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think the name of hon. Omara Atubo has been mentioned 100 times, but this Bill does not belong to hon. Omara Atubo. He happens to be the minister; do not personalise.

MS AMUGE: Most obliged. Mr Speaker, I am mentioning it to exonerate him because -(Interruption)

COL BUTIME: I am seeking clarification. Now that 32(b) has been declared as going to be deleted, and Lango region is where the minister comes from, should he not lose interest now in pushing this law which does not concern him? I am seeking clarification on that.

THE SPEAKER: Can you continue please.

MS AMUGE: Mr Speaker, I have no comment, but I am just bringing out the feelings of the people of Lango. The people of Lango, under the Lango Cultural Foundation, have been undergoing a lot of training. They have spent a lot of money to train the cultural leaders on how to handle land disputes, especially after the LRA war. If this new thing comes in, it may be very difficult. 

I want to conclude by saying that we want to build trust in the Government as the people of Lango. We want to believe what they tell us and when we tell our people, they believe in us. So, if they say that the customary land issue is going to be left to the cultural leaders, let it be so. However, if we discover that they have coated it in another way and fixed it in another section, we will be very disappointed. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.27
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Somebody behind me is complaining that why have you picked me? I have just told her that you and I are among the few surviving politicians from 1996. (Laughter) So, we have been around. 

I just want to speak very briefly because I want to speak with knowledge. I know that there are many people who get excited and they speak about certain things that they do not understand. For example, I have heard some people talking about customary land when they do not actually understand, what it is. I gave a lecture to one of the honourable members this afternoon. She believed that customary land is not against women and then she said, “I will not support that position.” Many people do not understand but they just come here and say, “You know this one must also be there,” because somebody is saying it must be there. 

There are five problems we have in this country. The first one is that we have a historical land problem and if Government wants to address this historical problem, it must address the entire colonial historical problem in this country. You cannot be selective and say, “Now we are going to address this, then we will address the other one bit by bit.” It must be holistic. Let us come, take a bold stand as politicians and address and correct the historical problems created by colonial people. 

Secondly, there is a problem that is being caused by the cattle keepers who are aided by military personnel. They are armed and they are roaming the country and Government is quiet on this matter. I have seen them in West Nile in Obongi, in Teso and Bulisa, and they have also crossed into Lango. These are people causing worry, but Government is quiet. They are roaming on people’s land. I would love that in debating this matter, the Leader of Government Business for the first time comes on the Floor of Parliament at least to give a position and clarify. Migration ended many years ago; where are these people coming from who move in big numbers; the entire village and they are being aided and supported? This is a problem that we should address.

The third problem is the greedy, rich people in this country who want to acquire large chunks of land and buy off even poor people. They are all over the country and they want to cross into any place and buy land. Government must protect the poor and I want to speak specifically for our area. There are people who think that there is free land in the Acholi sub-region and they must go and buy off land because the land is not being utilised and that they want to develop it on behalf of the people. This is going to cause a terrible problem, I want to warn you. It will cause a big problem because many people will not support the peasants to be treated by capitalists whose interest is to dominate people economically. That will not happen. 

So, this is a big problem, but Government must come up with a policy to guide people when they want to buy land. For example, how much land must you buy? Must you go and buy an entire village? Must you buy five or 15 square miles as an individual? Must you buy a whole parish? Must you buy a whole sub-county? This is the real problem.

The fourth problem is that there is a tendency today for people to turn land into a political weapon to dominate people. In other countries, it is because if you have land and people are landless, then you will use land as a political weapon to do anything you want. Whether you want votes, people will vote for you because now you have access to land. “You know I can give you land if you vote for me.” I think we must be careful while addressing this, because this is going to be very temporary. And I want to warn those who are pushing this that it will be very temporary and it will not survive many decades.

The fifth problem is basically Government reserves. Government is the chief evictor. Some of these colonial boundaries for national parks and forest reserves were put in place when the population of Uganda was extremely small. Today, in some of these places, we are facing this problem. I was in Kibale just a few months ago and I saw what is happening. When you talk about encroachment, people have nowhere to go and so they have to encroach on the forests. In areas surrounding national parks and in game reserves, people have to move. We must, as a Parliament, address some of these problems. If it means de-gazetting some of these places, let us allow our people to go and settle. 

I want to conclude. As I said, I have very little knowledge of land elsewhere and the reason why when we come here as colleagues and debate takes place, is for me to listen to be convinced. Let me raise the issue of customary land. I want us to be extremely careful. I believe that the Prime Minister will stand for his integrity and he will stand by the statement he has just made because this will cause a devastating war if you push for this. I really want to warn in advance. In the Acholi sub-region, people have been impoverished for all the last 20 years of war -

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, hon. Okumu. For the statement which the Prime Minister has made, the whole person of Government assurances here, we shall see that it is not flouted. (Laughter)

MR OKUMU: I thank you, Mr Speaker, but I think I will take his personal integrity as something of a bigger concern. 

Our people have suffered for the last 20 years or so. They have been impoverished because of war. I think it would be an abuse for even some people in Uganda today to stand up and say, “There is abundant land in Acholi; the land is not developed and, therefore, why don’t we give it to investors or developers?” You are insulting our people. People have been in camps. They have been in very difficult conditions and they could not develop that land for all these years. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I really thank you. Twenty six contributions have been made so far and we shall continue with the debate. But as I mentioned, I have listed names and the priority will be given to you whose names have been captured here. I would urge the Prime Minister that we should start by 2.15 p.m. and therefore if there is a Cabinet meeting, you may have to end it by latest 2.00 p.m. so that we are able to proceed at 2.15 p.m. 

I thank you very much for the contribution. Continue to be honest and helpful so that this Bill is salvaged. Let us cut out what we think should not be there. In case you think the minister should not be the person to assess, you can make an amendment for a board of valuers or something like that. But let us help to have a good law.

With this, we come to the end. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.34 p.m. and was adjourned until Wednesday, 18 November 2009 at 2.00 p.m.) 

