Thursday, 10 November 2011 

Parliament met at 2.34 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good afternoon, honourable members. Today, we have a fairly long list of business to finish. I think I have seven motions, three statements, communication from the chair and I am sure there might be matters that will come before that. So, the management of time is going to be of essence because the matters we are going to handle are all very important. I am going to be, as usual, very strict with my time so that we can finish this business in time to allow us proceed. 

The scale of business that we have might make us consider adjourning for two weeks after finishing today’s business to allow the committees, which have been tasked to do certain jobs, finish their work and then we shall be able to process those matters that they are handling when they are ready. 

We have tasked the rules committee to deal with amendment of the rules, and just yesterday, we gave them an additional assignment and also gave them a timeframe within which to handle that. They are going to need time to be able to do that. We have loan requests that are pending. 

The Committee on National Economy has not had time to sit and handle this matter, so they may also need special time to be able to strictly deal with this so that they can also have it ready for the work of Parliament. 

We have the ad hoc committee on energy, particularly to do with issues of electricity and related matters. They have started sitting and they also need time to be able to finish what they are doing. 

We also have delegations of this Parliament that have travelled and up to now we have not been able to receive any report from them. We may also need to give them some time to handle this. 

Finally, honourable members, the budget process has started and very soon you are going to start having budgetary orientation workshops to which you will be invited, and so we need time to allow you participate. We do not want a repeat of what happened in the last budget where we were handling the tail end of the project and that was not very comfortable for many of us. We had to work extra hours in order to do a simple job. This time we would like to start it right and do it right so that it is easy at the end. 

With these matters, and for the committees to be able to focus on doing their work, we are going to have to adjourn Parliament for a period of about two weeks to allow them process this work for Parliament. I will be announcing the proper date. This time it will not be sine die; it will be to a definite date so that we can resume and process business. So, for the committees, when that time comes we urge you to process this work quickly so that we can finish it. Thank you.

2.39
MS RITAH NINSIIMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on two matters of national importance. The first one is the case of the Siamese twins that were born on 10 June 2011 in Kabale District, and referred to Mulago for further advice regarding their separation. Mulago Hospital has done all it can. It has offered all the necessary tests and it has offered all the necessary treatment and it is now referring these twins to Cairo, Egypt. 

I would like to thank Members of this House from all political shades. When this problem came up, the Independent Members of Parliament, led by hon. Otada; NRM led by hon. Ruhindi; the Opposition led by hon. Sabiiti; and the East African Members of Parliament led by hon. Dorah Byamukama took up the mantle and helped us in fundraising for these children regarding their upkeep in Mulago. I would like to also thank Parliament because for all the months they have spent there, their upkeep has been totally in the eyes of Parliament. 

Along the way, when we were trying to look for where they could get treatment best, hon. Sanjay Tanna connected me to the women of the Indian Association of Uganda and there was a company called Bio Waste and they were all suggesting that if we took these children to India, they would sponsor them full board. I talked to the hospital director of Mulago and he was also trying to consult other experts from the USA and other places. So, in their wisdom, they feel this operation will be very successful in Cairo and they are planning to fly them out on either Saturday evening or on Sunday at 10.00 a.m.

The challenge, however, from the twins’ parents is that from the money we have been contributing for them, they are now remaining with Shs 2 million and yet they have assured them that they will do everything for them save for their upkeep, which has to be solely on them. It is on the basis of this that I moved up and down and finally decided to table this matter here in this House. If it is your wish, Members, you can help me request Government that since it has helped us this far, it can also take up the upkeep because I am not sure how long this process will take. It will be unfortunate to find out that they cannot go just because of upkeep. Let us emulate Rwanda where when Siamese twins are born, Government immediately takes them up and the parents are there only to nurse the kids. 

The reason I am saying that if it is the wish of this House, and that Government takes up such rare cases, is because I have been very much stressed as the area Woman MP. Actually, the parents did not even care to approach other constituency MPs. Just last week, we got another case from Kitgum and I would not wish the Kitgum MPs to also go through what I have gone through. So, I pray that if it is the wish of this House, Government clearly takes up the issue of Siamese twins. I know Government has a number of challenges, but since these are rare cases, it is my wish that they take it up. 

On the issue of upkeep, I am praying for an immediate solution because as I speak, I am at the stage of the last kicks of a dying horse. They are going on Saturday and there is no time.

Second is the issue of the work on Kabale-Kisoro Road. I am thankful –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, don’t you think we should finalise with the first issue and then we go to the second. The rules time them. So, that is one issue, which we need to finish, and then you raise the second one. Can I have somebody from the government because this to me sounds like a very clear issue. 

2.44
MS CHRISTINE ABIA (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have patiently listened to my sister, and this spells something that we as a nation need to work on. Assuming there were ten twins of such a nature, how much money and begging would go on? It is now a call on Government that in the 21st Century, we as a nation do not have the capacity or technology to separate these twins domestically.

I remember the case of the Rwandan twins who were separated when they were adults and they died. Today, it is from Kabale and it is already in Kitgum. What if a scenario strikes in Kisoro and again in Arua? It is incumbent upon Government, in my view, that if we cannot have that capacity, it is high time we started investing in technology and expertise because there is no way we are going to continue referring our children and patients to India and Cairo. It gets exorbitant and takes a toll on the image of the country that we cannot do such separations in the country. 

My appeal is to Government; if we do not have the technical expertise, it is high time you begin training the experts that we need. If we do not have the necessary technology, what are you doing as the whole sector and as Government to ensure that we have the appropriate technology that will save the lives of Ugandans? Children used not to be born with this kind of malady. Now that the recurrences are on and off, I think it is imperative that Government invests in the necessary things that we need. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

2.47
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my sister and honourable colleague, hon. Ninsiima, for bringing up this issue. It happened some time back and I think we just read about it in the papers and that was all. So, I want to take this opportunity to thank her so much for what she has done for that family. She is my neighbour from the district, so I have been hearing that she has really done a lot for those people.

This is something that normally comes once in maybe five or ten years or more. I would, therefore, suggest that as Parliament we should make a resolution and put it in place that when such cases occur, Government takes them up and they either do the operation or the needful. This is something that does not happen occasionally; it happens once in many years. I last heard one from Arua and now this one from Kabale is after so many years. If it is not so much strain on our resources, I would suggest that we pass a resolution that whenever it happens, Government takes it up and the parents are also assisted. 

Now, for this urgent one, I urge our government to help hon. Ninsiima because there is nothing and she needs to help the family and give something for upkeep. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. It is only the ladies who have spoken; so, if you are saying gender, then hon. Dr Sam Lyomoki could give us some technical guidance on this matter.

2.50
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to welcome you because we have not seen you in a long time. I would like to add my voice to that of hon. Kabasharira to thank our sister, hon. Ninsiima, for the interest that she took in this matter.

In her submission, hon. Ninsiima said if it is the wish of this Parliament, we would then give her permission to approach Government to request for assistance that Government takes up this matter. I am wondering whether a Member of Parliament needs the permission of this House to approach, for example, the honourable Minister of Health and request for assistance for such an issue. Also -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kamateeka, the honourable member was just being polite in requesting this House to request the government to do that.

MS KAMATEEKA: Yes, Mr Speaker, but I would have loved it if she told us what measures she has taken to approach Government for this assistance and whether this assistance was denied.

I do not think that as Parliament we need to pass a resolution to ask Government to do its duty of looking after its citizens. So, my submission is that Government should be diligent in handling these matters. As my sister says, these matters come up once in a while and Government should realise that the parents cannot plan for these kinds of issues, so Government should take them up without a resolution of Parliament. I beg to submit. Thank you.

2.52
DR SAMUEL LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I want to thank hon. Ninsiima and colleagues who have supported this situation in terms of upkeep. 

This matter of support for people to go out of the country for treatment came to our committee and we did handle it. First of all, the committee observed that there was no provision for citizens who do not fall under any ministry. The current method of support to people going outside falls under whichever ministry you fall under; say if you are a public servant, you are either under Ministry of Health, Ministry of Education or wherever. So, the accounting officer supports you in terms of giving the money after approval by the Medical Board.

We noted that the citizens who do not fall under any ministry do not have any vote and we did agree with the Ministry of Health and the Medical Board that they should, as much as possible, try to find extra ways of how the Ministry of Health should take up those matters. This is because the method of disbursement of money for foreign travel for treatment does not cater for peasants who do not fall under any ministry. So, Mr Speaker, I would suggest that this House should just direct that Government takes up this issue without any further debate on this matter.

We did recognise that there are certain people in this country who travel abroad at the expense of Government. The committee directed the Medical Board to give us the list of the people who have travelled for the last 10 years. We were given the list except that it did not have names because the Medical Board said it was for confidentiality and whatever. However, we agreed that the medical doctors and the committee chairperson could go and see that list to find out if there are some citizens who are taking advantage of this. We wanted to find out in terms of demography and other aspects who these people are who access this support. As a committee, we are still following up to find out whether there is equity in the distribution of that money.

Mr Speaker, apart from supporting the current situation, we need to come up with proposals on how best Uganda can be able to support her citizens. I know that just like the colleagues have said, we do not need much expertise; it depends on the case because some of the cases are simple and even Uganda can handle. However, cases where you need to separate organs or something of that nature, you need to go abroad. It might not even be possible for the country to have all the expertise. Even in developed countries, they also sometimes refer this type of situation to other countries for medical attention. 

I think it is acceptable only that we need to have good, high level medical treatment in this country and also options for referral in cases which are a bit complicated where you need other experts. Sometimes, even in the US, they are not capable of doing this and they have to bring in other experts to handle those situations. 

Mr Speaker, when you look at the current situation, we have circumstances whereby even the support that was being given by the well-wishers was not good enough. Ideally, we are supposed to get support from the government and so there was no need for MPs to go and start borrowing money. Suppose the MP was not there or is a type that switches off their phone, there would be a big problem. I think we need to agree here that Government must come up very strongly to mainstream such situations when they happen, so that it does not come to this level of borrowing money here and there. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the rules give us only 15 minutes to discuss this matter. Since you have exhausted the 15 minutes, I am reverting to the Frontbench of Government. I ask Dr Mallinga, not as Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, but as a professional in this area, to say something.

2.58
THE MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As it has been pointed out, Siamese twins are extremely rare. In every country, surgery for Siamese twins is usually a speciality in certain centres and in the whole country. When it comes to separating those children, if it is possible they are referred to that centre because not every hospital carries out the operation. This is because of the equipment and because of the expertise people have gained in carrying out this operation. 

Whether the operation can be carried out depends on what organs are shared by the twins. Sometimes if it is the heart which is shared, one of them might have to be sacrificed to save the other. What I would like to point out is that we do not have that expertise here yet and we have to invest if we are to develop it, not only in separating Siamese twins but also in other specialities. 

I was sent by Cabinet one time with the former Prime Minister to go to Mulago and see what it needs in order to reduce on referral of patients abroad. We came back with a list of what Mulago needs - there is a lot of expertise, but not for separation of Siamese twins; but up to now, Mulago is still waiting. They need an MRI machine, cardiac operation machines and specialised orthopaedic machines, among others. So, next time Parliament debates on the budget, those are the things to look into. 

As far as the details of referral are concerned, we have been told that there is a country which was going to pay for all the expenses. That is the route which we should have been followed. I just wanted to provide the technical aspect of the situation, but the administrative area will be handled by the Prime Minister. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought it had qualified to be a disaster.

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY EDUCATION (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I happened to have delivered Siamese twins in 1994 when I was a medical superintendent in Mityana Hospital. It is a delicate issue and I understand what my colleague is going through. In fact, by then hon. Ssempijja was the RDC there. These Siamese twins, like my colleague has already said, sometimes share the heart, liver and intestines, making it a complex situation altogether. 

When I delivered those twins, I had to refer them to Mulago and they stayed there until they made a combined weight of 10 kilogrammes. Thereafter, they were referred to South Africa where an operation to separate them was done. Unfortunately, one died in the circumstances mentioned by Dr Mallinga. 

I think there is a provision where the government helps because the ones I delivered were helped by Government to travel to South Africa. I think it is just a question of taking up this matter with Mulago and the health ministry to ensure that these children are taken to wherever they need to be taken for separation. Thank you.

3.03
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER IN CHARGE OF EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Mr Eriya Kategaya): Mr Speaker, I thank those who have helped so far on this issue. In the Ministry of Health, there is a medical board which examines some cases which ought to be referred outside the country because we do not have the necessary skills here. I would like to ask hon. Ninsiima to bring this matter to us and then we shall take it up with the Medical Board. 

MS NINSIIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and Members for your kindness regarding this matter. I also –(Interruption)

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Speaker, I know what really happens. The Rt hon. First Deputy Prime Minister has said that the Member should bring this matter to the Medical Board. Today is Thursday and she has told us that they are supposed to fly out on Saturday. I know that there are alot of intricacies. You say the Member should bring it, but it is a long procedure. I thought that the government should say that they are going to take up this matter. I know what it means for her to end up with that board because they must sit and take a decision and it is not a simple matter. I know what happens. 

So, I think the government should just say that they are going to take up this matter so that it is upon them to summon that board and the other issues related. Otherwise, leaving it to the Member is not going to be possible. I know what happens.

MR KATEGAYA: Mr Speaker, we are aware of the urgency of the matter and we are aware that the Medical Board can be urged or prompted to act as quickly as possible according to the urgency of the matter. This has been done before, so when I said that she should bring all the information, the ministry will definitely be instructed to take up this matter as urgently as is needed. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, honourable member, please contribute quickly and the 15 minute rule will apply strictly.

MS NINSIIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The second issue is regarding the work on Kabale-Kisoro Road. Just last weekend, we buried 10 people who were killed in a road accident on the Kabale-Kisoro Road. They were somewhere in their gardens when a truck lost control - I hear it had little pressure in the tyres - and 10 people died on the spot. 

When this incident happened, there arose another problem. We are happy about Kabale-Kisoro Road, but the problem it has come with is that there was no expansion work done on that road, so it remained as narrow as it was before. Several corners have been created and when trucks and other vehicles are moving on the road, they keep zigzagging because of the many corners on the road in addition to the narrowness. 

I know it may be a little late now for more work to be done, but I thought I should raise this because I am anticipating more accidents on that road. When the road was constructed, it became smooth and vehicles are now driven at a high speed. Because the Kisoro Road is a busy one with heavy trucks that usually go to Congo and even Rwanda, it is now putting the lives of the people in that area at stake. If people are digging and a trailer fails to negotiate a corner, it finds people in their gardens. 

I thought I should also bring it up so that we see what can be done if expansion cannot be done. What other interventions can be made because as I speak, it is now difficult for a trailer and a bus to pass each other together? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Byandala, this is your matter, please deal with it quickly.

3.08
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank my sister for bringing this up. Yes, she says the road is narrow. To the best of my knowledge, the minimum width is six metres and the width of the roads is scientifically arrived at. We do not guess; we take traffic counts and we project the design life of the road and then we determine the width. 

You should remember that these funds were borrowed from the African Development Bank and whatever we design is checked with our partners. So, we cannot come and say, it is going to be 10 feet because there are engineers competent enough like ourselves. We must argue from the engineering point of view. Yes, the road is zigzagging as you said, but that is the terrain. If we did not want that, we would have to tunnel and that would mean the cost would be very high and we do not have that sort of money. 

With the speed on those roads, we put road signs, we put road markings and all those are instructions we give to drivers. If you do not observe the road markings stopping you from overtaking and you try to overtake where you are not supposed to, if you also steal the road signs, which give instructions then you are likely to get problems. So, I appeal to the people; please do not damage the road, leave the road signs there because they are put there for a purpose, and observe the speed limits. 

The road was very bad and narrower than what it is now. Government has done its best and the people should be very appreciative. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, could humps help because the issue now is the speed? The road is good so people are speeding and they fail to negotiate corners.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, I will instruct my engineers to see some areas where we can put some humps at maybe black spots, but the best thing is to observe the speed limits we put there. These limits are put after careful calculations and observations.

MR TINAKSIIMIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable minister is saying if you steal signposts, if you steal the road rails - he is just guessing according to me. He does not know which ones have been stolen. 

I equally want him to tell this House the efforts that have been put in place other than coming here and starting to lament and accuse the honourable member who has brought up the issue. What effort is he making to either stop the stealing or to replace those ones which have been stolen? How many of those has he taken a headcount on to know that these ones are missing since he put them there?

MR BYANDALA: I thank hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire and I want to assure him that I never guess. I did not guess. I know it is a fact. This is not only on that road; yesterday, we were commissioning a new road and having one handed over, but it is the same problem. Our people steal road signs. We have tried to even ensure that the poles are perforated and put in concrete, but they still steal them. We have tried plastic plates, and they are still stolen. So, I am just appealing to people, please allow us install road signs and do not steal them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: At least they will not steal the humps. The humps will be difficult to steal. (Laughter) Honourable members, we have exhausted the 15 minutes on this particular debate.

MS NYIRABASHITSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is very true that these signposts were stolen. They are not there along that road. To add to that, when they talk about the narrowness of the road, if you compare the road from Kabale up to Mukko and the distance from Mukko to Karingeri, the size is very different. The honourable minister should explain whether from Mukko to Karingeri and from Mukko to Kabale you put different measurements and yet the terrain is the same. This place is very narrow and when you go past Karingeri towards the bamboo forest, they expanded the road. So, we are wondering why that was done and yet that is the dangerous spot where we are getting problems. I thank you very much.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, I thank my colleague, but unfortunately, I do not know at what kilometre she is talking about. However, where you see where we have expanded, we expand for a reason and not just expand. We are sometimes providing for cases where people may have to overtake. This is because in some of those areas you cannot overtake and in our wisdom we provide a spot where people can overtake. 

There are also places where many people wait for vehicles to stop, and so, we expand those places. Unless I know the exact kilometre spot that she is talking about, I cannot give an exact answer, but a general one that wherever we provide more than the rest, then there are reasons for it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you very much. Hon. Ogwang on another matter now. We have closed this one.

3.15
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I rise on a matter of national importance with specific reference to the Youth Fund. The subject that I am going to address is on the Shs 25 billion which was appropriated in this House. As a representative of the young people, I have been to my constituency and the young people are asking, “Where is the money?” 

I would like to request the Minister for Finance to come out clearly here as all of us are Members of Parliament in this House. Whenever these young people have gone to the various banks Government mentioned, there is nothing in these respective banks. So, the question that I want to ask Government and specifically the Minister for Finance here is: “When is this money going to be ready?” When are they going to come before us here and tell us that this money is ready and accessible for all these young people? (Ms Nambooze rose_) –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, he is still raising the matter; he has not even raised it yet. You cannot give information because the information is with him. He has to inform the House first; raise the matter and then you can inform. You cannot allow her and I overrule him allowing that. He rose on a matter of urgent public importance and he has not yet made it; how do you start receiving information? Let him finish.

MR OGWANG: All of us here are aware that we are in the second quarter of the financial year, and as far as we are concerned, the budget we appropriated is meant to work for 12 months. We have already finished three months and we are now left with nine months. My request to Government, and specifically the ministry, is that they should come out clearly and tell us when these funds will be ready. 

I remember that the ministry came here and tried to give some of the criteria for accessing this fund. The Speaker then ruled that the ministry should come with a comprehensive plan on how the young people should access this money. To our surprise and dismay, we have not seen anything up to now. So, it is my humble plea, honourable colleagues, that we request the ministry to come up urgently with appropriate measures on how the money should be accessed by our young people.

Last but not least, there is the issue of the money that we appropriated that went to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. It was specifically the Shs 2.23 billion for skills development. How far has the ministry organised itself for these young people to begin accessing the skills required to access the money because we are now in limbo? I am in touch with the National Youth Council, but there is nothing taking place at the ministry. So, I am raising this here; can the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development come out clearly on this subject?

MRS BAKIREKE: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I quite sympathise with our colleagues who represent the youth. Yesterday I met a group of eight young men from Eastern Uganda, who were particularly looking for hon. Ogwang. They were saying that they have been in Kampala for two days and were hunting for this man, hon. Ogwang. They said that they wanted him to give them their money that was given to them in the budget; the Shs 25 billion. 

The information I wanted to give is that our honourable colleagues who are representing the youth are having a very hard time. The youth are hunting for them for their money. Those in Mukono have also been to my home and they are saying that they want these people to give them their money. It is as if the money was released and it is being held by the honourable Members of Parliament. That is the information I wanted to give and I thank you.

3.20
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am sorry that I do not have an immediate answer for this and the Minister for Finance is not here. I actually met him going out. I just stood to pledge that I am going to ask her to come with a comprehensive statement on this matter so that Members, on the basis of the information, about the plans for this money, can have a full debate. We will do that as soon as we can. I thank you very much.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I thank you. I thought the Prime Minister should have waited until all the issues are put before Government and then he responds. I have an additional issue, which goes to the Prime Minister. 

During his campaigns for re-election, everywhere the President of the country went, he went promising young people support and in his own words he said, “The moment I am elected, you will get this money; do not worry.” Each time I go to Kumi, I am bombarded by these young people. How I wish my friend, hon. Ogwang, was there to face the music with me. 

There is this group called Ongino Boda-Boda Association that went with their memorandum to meet the President. It was presented to His Excellency the President who was a candidate then and the President said, “Well, under the youth scheme, you are going to be catered for.” So, every 20th of every month, these young people have a meeting and they keep inviting us as political leaders. Is this the kind of money we are talking about that will go to these young people – not only those in Kumi, but also those in Kotido, Kasese and Kisoro? 

Throughout the country, these promises were made by the President. Fortunately, he is now the incumbent President and I think you, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, should help the President to fulfil his pledges to the youth. These are commitments by Government and as far as I know, the President’s word is law and so I do not expect you to turn around and ignore these young people.

MRS WINFRED KIIZA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. The additional information that I would like to pass across is the information that was given to this House which is in our budget. It is about the Shs 40 billion that is supposed to go to the youth. The information was that for every youth to access this money, they should have got training from Enterprise Uganda. I can imagine Enterprise Uganda is overwhelmed by requests of youth wanting to access this training. The assumption is that when they get this training, everyone with a certificate from Enterprise Uganda is going to receive this money from Government. 

I want to assure my friends who represent the youth and all of us, Members of Parliament, that this is another challenge we should be ready for. Enterprise Uganda is doing a very good job of training our people, but the youth are expecting money after this training and I do not know how ready we are to meet the concerns of the youth who will demand for this money. So, as we talk about the Shs 25 billion, we should be ready to encounter the challenges from the young people. 

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have heard from the outgoing Leader of Government Business that this matter is going to be presented –(Interruptions)

MR BITEKEREZO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have a well-known, duly appointed Leader of Government Business and he is the Prime Minister of this country, which is the Pearl of Africa. He is a lawyer and a well accomplished one. So, is it in order for somebody to call him outgoing? Where does he want to take him?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssebagala, those remarks are uncalled for. Please withdraw those remarks and apologise to the House. 

MR SSEBAGALA: Mr Speaker, it was a slip of the tongue; and since it was slip of the tongue, I have withdrawn. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Apologise.

MR SSEBAGALA: Mr Speaker, I apologise for the slip of the tongue because the honourable Prime Minister is still under investigations. (Laughter)

On that issue that has been raised by the youth representative, as indeed hon. Mbabazi has informed us, a fully-fledged report is going to be presented here next week. However, when it comes to youth matters, we cannot refer them to the youth representatives of our constituencies. We are squarely responsible for them as representatives of the people in those constituencies. This money has had a lot of impact; it was publicised that the youth were going to get this money –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you raise the procedural point. 

MR SSEBAGALA: The point is, since we are going to get a fully-fledged report on the Shs 40 billion, why don’t we wait for that report to come next week before we debate?

MS AMODING: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank my colleague, hon. Peter Ogwang, for raising this very important issue. 

Mr Speaker, we can no longer sleep because of this matter. As I speak, I receive over ten phone calls daily from the youth inquiring about this money and I have so many project proposals in my office. I keep telling them to hold on a little more until the Minister of Finance prepares the guidelines, which will enable us access those funds from the bank. The guidance I would like to seek is: Is it not appropriate for the minister to give us information on that matter? Informally, we talk to her and we ask her how far she has gone with that issue because it is quite difficult for us to explain it to the youth. 

Also, is it not proper for the Minister of Gender and the one for youth to give us an explanation? I feel that next week is a little far; we want to know what the ministers are doing in the immediate future on that matter. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, there is no one holding the Floor, so you cannot give information. On what point do you rise?

MR BIRAARO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Related to this issue, when the elections were over and we passed the budget, there was the issue of the elderly who were promised some money that would be paid regularly. Today, I have received about six calls in addition to several others before on that matter. So, when the minister is bringing the statement, let Parliament also know about the fate of the payment promised to the elderly who are 60 years and above. 

We have a problem with the youth. People in Buhweju will not look at hon. Ogwang, hon. Karuhanga or the MPs from Kampala. Let the minister bring a comprehensive report about all the interest groups who have got outstanding pledges. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there was a procedural point raised and a point of guidance also raised on this matter, which have not been ruled on. I thought you were going to raise another matter which would require my ruling. 

Let me guide the House as follows: The matter raised by hon. Ogwang is important, as you can see from the response of the Members and the concerns of the youth of this country. The Prime Minister has made an undertaking that a comprehensive statement will be brought before this House, which will receive full debate. However, I earlier stated here that by close of business today, we will be adjourning the House for two weeks. So, coming with the statement next week will not be possible because the House will stand adjourned. However, I am extending this debate for an additional ten minutes to allow Members inform what should go in the content of the minister’s statement when they finally bring the statement to Parliament. So, I will allow an additional ten minutes. 

MS MWEBAZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a member of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and I want to give information to my colleague, hon. Ogwang, and to the House. 

He talked about the National Youth Council and the money that is supposed to go to the National Youth Council apart from the Shs 40 billion, which the youth are demanding because that money has some controversies surrounding it. He also said that there is nothing going on in the youth council. I want to inform this House that the National Youth Council trained youth groups in several districts and it has given some money to the districts. Each district has been given Shs 5 million to empower the youth groups. I even have a list. If you could give me 20 minutes, I would present to you a list of 20 districts and the youth groups which have got the money from the youth council. 

They are even still giving out money to the districts. They are training under the youth council. They are training the youth groups and they are giving them money to empower their youth groups. So, the money goes to the districts and Members are supposed to consult the community development officers to access that money.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the issue that has been raised by hon. Ogwang is the Shs 25 billion that has been sent to the banks and not money that has been sent to the National Youth Council or whatever council. We are talking about this money and how the youth are supposed to receive it. There were guidelines that were supposed to be prepared, and I am sure those are coming in the statement that will be subsequent to what we agreed to. Hon. Members, we have seven minutes remaining. 

3.35
MRS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Issues of the youth do not only concern youth MPs; they concern every Member who is in this House because they all voted. If the country is not realising any production because we have a large population, which is mainly of youth who are redundant, and they are promised many things with no fulfilment of the promises, this is dangerous.

One of the conditions for accessing these funds is that the youth should have received training from Enterprise Uganda. We have got information that the youth in some districts have already been trained and others have not yet been trained. The clarification I would like to see in the document is the districts whose youth have already been trained and the schedules for the subsequent trainings for the other districts so that we are able to mobilise and inform our youth accordingly. Thank you.

3.36
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to also contribute to the issue of the youth because in Kampala, the youth who are looking for jobs and something to do are so many. They are eager and the plight of where their final income is going to come from lies squarely with them. Many of them have been eking out a living on the streets. They are out now. They have not been trained. 

The system the ministry will use should be consultative with Members of Parliament, who can provide input for some of the guidelines. As you know, we have district quotas for the girl-child to university. As Members of Parliament for the districts, we are normally informed, “These are the names”. It is not for your input, but for your information. I have been following the Kampala District quota recipients and they normally come from about three schools. I wonder how those three schools are always the beneficiaries. 

We are afraid some of these programmes meant to help our people – the manner in which some of them are selected brings to question whether it is not only hand-picking by a few individuals in the ministry. So, I want the ministry to have an all-inclusive process that will have input from Members of Parliament and other leaders, not just the youth leaders. 

The other issue is about NAADS. I am citing examples of programmes that have come to benefit our youth and people, but have been selectively given to individual groups. I appeal for the process to be all-inclusive and include party affiliation because that is very important. We know the youth are marginalised, especially those who are dear to the Opposition leaning parties. We have realised that even on this side, we are just privileged to have one youth Member of Parliament who is an Independent. So, our views should be very clear because we have a high population of youth in this country. They may not necessarily belong to the NRM, but they are citizens of this country. I want to appeal that this is taken into consideration. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.39
MRS  ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I have two issues. 

One, I wonder how services reach the district before the representatives of the people are notified. I think it would be a good procedure that if a service is going to be delivered - especially some of these touchy ones which involve satisfaction or fulfilment of pledges made during campaigns - it is important that the people who are sent here by the people and are supposed to monitor these activities be notified. 

There is no way you are going to hold MPs accountable when they do not even know what is happening in their districts. How does a service leave Kampala and reach Soroti without Angelline Osegge knowing? I reach Soroti and I am asked, “How did this happen? Why hasn’t it happened to so and so?” I cannot answer. 

It looks like we as a Government are dis-coordinated. People expect us to move a situation like a bicycle chain - when information comes from one angle, it goes through a certain process before it reaches the recipient. However, I see a tendency, like my colleague has said, were some of these services are delivered basing on political affiliation and we are running into a danger of politicising developmental projects. This is causing bitterness among certain circles. It is causing dissatisfaction. At the height of it, people look at MPs as the nearest, highest political leaders whom they expect to satisfy all their needs. At the end of the day, when a presidential pledge is not satisfied, it is Angelline Osegge who is going to do it. It is really giving us a hard time and we do not want to speak negatively all the time. 

We are pleading with Government; please fulfil the Presidential pledges. These things brought votes. We must not abuse this. The financial year is almost in the middle; when are we going to implement these activities? Are we going to return this money or divert it? Now, Ugandans do not trust us because once we delay to implement something and we use money that is allocated for something else, they know we are going to use it for a different thing. I earnestly request Government, in a patriotic manner, to please make sure that these pledges are fulfilled and as they are being fulfilled, Members of Parliament need to be notified.

I have a situation in my district. Hon. Peter Ogwang comes from my district; I am his MP. There are youth groups in my district and you know the nature of youths; they are very versatile sometimes. I have an office in Soroti District and hon. Ogwang does not have an office. So, when the fire cannot go to him, it is me who takes it up. It is a difficult situation and we do not want to make our youth desperate. So, please, Government, fulfil these promises. 

This comes with all the rest of the Presidential promises; promises for cars for people who have been paying allegiance to Government. I have a musician in my district, Mr Ojebe, who was promised a double cabin pick-up; up to today -(Laughter)- everyday he calls me at least five times. Now, it has degenerated to him asking me to at least buy him a motorcycle. I think you are being unfair to us as Members of Parliament. Please, walk the talk. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. The 15 minutes are way beyond what I had allotted. If there is no response from the government, we close this debate and build on the undertaking from the Prime Minister that a due statement will be made, which will explain this thing properly before it will be subjected to a proper debate for Parliament to take an appropriate decision on it.

Hon. Members, join me in welcoming a group of people from Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) whose activities are focused on improving maternal health in Uganda. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House. You are welcome.

Still in the public gallery, we have pupils and teachers of Santa Lucia Basic School represented by hon. Ibrahim Semujju, Member of Parliament for Kyadondo East. They are also here to witness our proceedings. You are welcome. 

In the same vein, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of St Kizito Ngombere represented by hon. Bakaluba Mukasa, Member of Parliament for Mukono South. (Applause) I have just received another communication on the presence of pupils and teachers of Jessy John Day and Boarding Primary School, Mukono, which is represented by hon. Betty Nambooze, Member of Parliament for Mukono Municipality. Please join me in welcoming all these groups to the Parliament of Uganda.

PETITION

3.45
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to first of all clear the worries of hon. Musa Ecweru, who asked why I had been seated behind yet I am a shadow minister who should be sitting on the Opposition Frontbench. The reason is because I am too tall. If I sit here, the legs may cross over and I can be blamed for crossing the Floor. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, under Rule 22 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, I would like to present before this House, a humble petition from the cotton farmers of Agago District in Northern Uganda. The farmers said –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, with a petition, you just do the prayer. Just say the prayer in regard to what you want this Parliament to do for the petitioners.

MS AKELLO: But the Members are saying the prayer is too short –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the request to Parliament, however short it is.

MS AKELLO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. 

The petitioners, who are cotton growers in Northern Uganda, urge Government, through the Cotton Development Organisation, to increase the price of cotton to at least not less than Shs 3000, considering the current inflation rate which has affected the cost of farm inputs. This is because the current price set by the Cotton Development Organisation is only Shs 1600; this is too low. The humble petitioners who appended signatures are 1800. I beg to lay the petition on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The petition is hereby forwarded to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling. The committee should do it in a timeframe of two weeks for us to have it properly discussed when we come back.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.49
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Jessica Alupo): Mr Speaker, allow me to welcome you back to this House. The paper I am going to present is in line with the establishment of Kigumba Petroleum Institute. As you know, the intention of the NRM Government is to train –(Interruptions)

MS ABIA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order. I have received a copy of this paper dated 1 July 2011. Behind it indicates the Minister of Education as Ms Geraldine Namirembe Bitamazire. I am wondering whether she is in order to lay this schedule on the Table when –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Member, we have not yet seen the document she is laying. You are just anticipating. Please proceed, hon. Minister.

MS ALUPO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. The Statutory Instrument I am going to present is in line with the view of having a fully-fledged petroleum institute in Uganda called Kigumba. In that regard, may I, with your permission, read the title of the instrument: “The Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions: The Establishment of the Uganda Petroleum Institute, Kigumba, Instrument 2011.”

Mr Speaker, allow me lay on the Table this instrument under Section 75(2) of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001, CAP No.7 of 2001.

As I said before, the NRM Government – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, just lay the document on the Table because that is what is required of you now.

MS ALUPO: Mr Speaker, I lay it on the Table.

MRS WINFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the honourable minister for bringing this instrument to the Floor of the House. 

I would like to be guided by the minister on something about this Statutory Instrument, Supplement No.19 dated 1 July 2011. The instrument as laid on the Table today is supposed to have been signed by Ms Geraldine Namirembe Bitamazire, Minister of Education and Sports. However, to the best of my knowledge, in the Ninth Parliament we do not have any Member of Parliament with the name, Namirembe Bitamazire. Therefore, we don’t have a minister of education with the name, Namirembe Bitamazire. The document is dated July, meaning that it is a document of the Ninth Parliament. Therefore, Government has a substantive minister of education, with called the hon. Alupo Jessica. 

I would like to be guided whether the appointing authority has changed his mind and brought on board the honourable minister, Geraldine Namirembe Bitamazire, the one we used to call, “Mama”, while others referred to her as, “Jajja” and I loved calling her, “Mzee wa kazi”. I wish to be guided through you, Mr Speaker, whether Namirembe Bitamazire is now the current Minister of Education and whether this statutory instrument is not defective. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you hon. Member for raising that point. If you look at the opening paragraph of that statutory instrument, it is in the exercise of the powers conferred upon the minister responsible for education. 

Hon. Members, there are three types of statutory instruments that can be brought to the House. The first type is for information, in which this category falls. The second type is what we call instrument requiring affirmative resolution of Parliament. Those kinds of instruments are where, when they are issued, they do not become operational until Parliament approves them. This does not fall within that category. The other category of statutory instrument is the one that requires a negative resolution of Parliament. That one starts operating immediately until Parliament says no to it. This also does not fall within that category. So, the statutory instrument before the House this afternoon is for information and it is properly laid before this House and properly received. Next item. (Applause)

STATEMENT OF BUSINESS

3.57
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise in compliance with Rule 25 of our Rules of Procedure, to give the business of Government at the next meeting, which is going to be in two weeks time. 

First, I would like to say that when Parliament resumes, I will present to the House the list of Bills for first reading. Secondly, there are Bills that this House recently resolved to save. These Bills are already with the Ninth Parliament and on the 25th of last month, as I said, we passed a motion to save them and that means that they need no reintroduction. These Bills include for example, the Geographical Indications Bill, 2008; the Chattels Securities Bill, 2009; the Companies Bill, 2009; Industrial Property Bill, 2009; the Anti-Counterfeiting Goods Bill, 2009. The list was passed here in Parliament. 

These are before committees of this House and as I have had occasion to say before, when we meet as a Business Committee, we will be informed about the progress the committees are making in preparing the reports for presentation to Parliament, and of course, Government has vested interest in this and we look forward to that. That is the report I have for today. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Hon. Members, in the Speakers Gallery this afternoon, we have a parliamentary delegation from Ghana comprising of members of the Committee on Gender and Children. They arrived this morning for an intensive programme, to share experiences and learn from their Ugandan counterparts on gender responsive budgeting. The delegation comprises of: 

1.	Hon. Halutie Rafatu Alhassan Dubie, MP
2.	Hon. Kobena Mensah Woyome, MP
3.	Hon. Gifty Ohene-Konadu, MP
4.	Mr Ernest Darfur, Assistant Clerk.

Please join me in welcoming them. Thank you. (Applause)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO ESTABLISH UGANDA PETROLEUM INSTITUTE KIGUMBA (UPIK) UNDER THE UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS ACT, 2001 AS AMENDED

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a motion for a resolution of Parliament – yesterday it was not ready. Is it ready today, honourable minister?
 
4.01
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Jessica Alupo): Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, this motion is moved under Section 75(2) of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 and Rule 43 of our Rules of Procedure. 

“WHEREAS Section 75(2) of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 empowers the minister responsible for education on the advice of the National Council for Higher Education, by statutory instrument, to establish a public tertiary institution in any place in Uganda;

AND WHEREAS Section 75(3) requires the minister to lay before Parliament an instrument made under Section 2, which includes the object and functions of the public tertiary institution and the location of the public tertiary institute; 

AND WHEREAS the National Council for Higher Education has advised the minister responsible for education to establish the Uganda Petroleum Institute Kigumba;

AND WHEREAS Objective 18(2) of the Constitution of Uganda, 1995, on the National Objectives and Directives of State Policy, provides that the state shall take appropriate measures to afford every citizen equal opportunity to attain the highest educational standard; 

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by Parliament as follows: 

1.	That the Uganda Petroleum Institute Kigumba, be established with the following object, functions and location; and as set out in the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions (Establishment of Uganda Petroleum Institute Kigumba) Instrument 2011 No.31.

2.	Object of the institute
	The object of the institute is to provide education and training in the fields relating to petroleum and energy sector.

The functions of the institute will be:

a)	To train and conduct courses, seminars and workshops and to create public awareness of the petroleum sector.

b)	To provide diploma and pre-diploma courses of study and training in the field of applied science and research including petroleum engineering, chemical engineering, international petroleum business management, pipeline engineering, petroleum geophysics, petroleum geosciences, environmental engineering and environmental law among others.

c)	To arrange and organise conferences, seminars, workshops and study group in its field of operations. 

d)	To conduct educational programmes in matters relating to petroleum, and to design, construct and develop educational and other materials and equipment relating to the petroleum sector. 

e)	To conduct examinations and award certificates and diplomas to candidates who complete the prescribed course of study and where necessary to revoke such awards.

f)	To do all things incidental and conducive to attainment of the objects of the institute as may appear to the institute to be capable of being conveniently carried on for the benefit of the institute and Uganda at large.

g)	To perform such other functions as may be directed by the minister on the advice of the national council in the promotion of higher education. 

3.	The vision of the institute is to be a regional centre of excellence of training professionals, technicians and craftsmen in the petroleum and energy sector.

4.	And the mission of the institute is to provide a world class education in geosciences and petroleum engineering in order to support and advance the petroleum and energy sector.

	The institute will be committed to academic excellence and fostering of an intellectual environment that leads to developed graduates who can be future leaders in their respective fields of expertise in Uganda, the East African region and the world at large.

	The institute shall have its main campus at Kiggumba in Kiryandongo District in Western Uganda.” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it seconded?

4.07
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers Representative): I was just rising on a point of procedure. When we were handling the policy statement of the Ministry of Education and Sports, this issue of the petroleum institute raised a lot of concerns. The minister at that time said that there is going to be a motion coming and we shall handle this matter as Parliament. 

When you look at the motion and the statutory instrument, the motion is just to raise the issues that are raised in the statutory instrument and trying to put them in the motion, maybe for purposes of emphasis. But we had hoped that at the time of raising the motion, the motion would be referred to the committee, where we can have the stakeholders come in. This is because there are lots of issues in terms of the people who are being trained and a lot of concerns that came from various circles, and now we are moving a motion here, where we are not even giving chance for other stakeholders to be listened to. 

Committees are there to allow people who cannot come to Parliament to be listened to because there is a lot of contention given that this is petroleum and you know the type of situation that we are dealing with. What was the rationale for enjoining Parliament to come out with this motion if we are not going to allow stakeholders to be listened to so that we can be able to guide; such that by the time the motion is debated and passed, at least we can be able to guide on additional issues that must be part and parcel of the formulation of this institute?

We thought we would have enough time to interact with the various stakeholders so that we can be able to raise issues that we think must be considered as we start this institute.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, does the creation of institutions, private universities, public universities and all related matters require public hearing in the committees of Parliament? Does it? Is there such a requirement? 

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Speaker, it does not require that, but the reason why Parliament passed the resolution - this is a people’s House. On other matters it might be self-explanatory and you do not need to, but given the nature of this institution and given the fact that it raised a lot of concern and the ministry told us that a resolution was coming and that we shall have time to look at it –(Interruption)

MR TAANA: I would like to thank the colleague for giving way. The matter of setting up this institute is a matter of national importance. Its importance cannot be weighed. We needed it yesterday, but there are certain aspects that are pertinent.

I want to give information that there were certain aspects of the existing institute in Kigumba that were supposed to have been reallocated to an institute in Tororo. Last year, the minister wrote correspondences, the district chairman accepted and thereafter there was reversal of the same by the same minister. We held consultative meetings in Tororo that were organized by the then minister, Gabriel Opio, and I was present. Like the honourable colleague is saying, we want this institute to go on, but there are certain issues that need to be clarified. 

I remember in that meeting, for example, the purpose of removing certain aspects was that one, they would not correlate with a university of geosciences - say the existing courses; and secondly, the amount of space, manpower and building area to occupy the new courses. There were several factors. So, I think what my honourable colleague is trying to say, really holds a lot of substance. I thank you.

MS ONDORU: I think the Member is right to raise that query because there are schools which have been opened in this country when some stakeholders had not bought the idea, and up to now they are not recognised. They are not even on the Government list of qualification issuing institutes in this country; for example comprehensive nursing. There should be adequate preparation before these people are taken on. This is a nice course, but they will be frustrated if they come out and they are not recognised –(Ms Alupo rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, first wait. Let them raise the issues and then you will come in. 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, and honourable colleagues. The information I want to give is to the effect that the matter of the land that hon. Sanjay Tanna has talked about was long concluded because Kigumba Cooperative Institute has almost 500 acres of land and they have already agreed that the petroleum institute will have a separate land title from this one. So, I think nobody should mix this up at this point in time. 

Also, it was very unfortunate - even at the time of Minister Gabriel Opio - to try and transfer the Cooperative College from Kigumba. Everybody here knows how central Kigumba is. It may be in Bunyoro, but it is on the way to Arua bordering Acholi, Lango, and Buganda. So, it is the United Nations, if you want. 

Actually we, in Bunyoro, as we thank the minister for bringing this Diploma and pre-diploma statutory instrument, we have been waiting for a decade to get a fully-fledged university of Bunyoro like Busitema, Gulu and Mbarara universities and hon. Minister, as I support this motion, I am waiting for the other instrument which gives Bunyoro for the first time a public university. 

DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Mr Speaker, I find it a little bit funny. It is like there is no petroleum institute in Kigumba yet the information that we already have is to the contrary. So, to bring a motion at this moment, like we are going to establish a new institute of petroleum is strange. I think this Parliament needs a comprehensive brief of what exactly is being run as an institute at Kigumba so that we can know. If there is no institute, then we can talk about establishment of an institute; but we already have something running as an institute. This can be enriched by the chairman of the social services committee on whose committee I sit.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That is exactly why the committee got interested in this matter because there were a lot of complaints. For instance, an issue was raised and we could not verify the national character of the people who are being trained there; there were a lot of issues, some of them baseless, but we wanted to look more at this and we thought that the purpose of this resolution was to allow the Parliament to listen to other stakeholders so that we can be able to understand some of these issues and by the time we come here, we know what we are talking about. But just to pass a resolution on an issue that has been running, we might be authenticating certain things that we think must be reviewed. That is why I think it is wise to allow Parliament an in-depth analysis and we come back as soon as possible when we know exactly what we are talking about.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Speaker is speaking and he does not do that very often. An instrument was issued establishing the institute. By virtue of Section 75(2) of the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001, it is a requirement that the issue be brought to Parliament by a motion of this nature. In other words, the instrument already establishes the institute. The parliamentary resolution now is to confirm that this is so - in my understanding - from the way I read the two documents. I have no previous information to this; I was not part of the committee that had the discussions. So, the issue is about the establishment of the university and not about how it will operate. Issues of its operations, contents of its courses and the way they will do the admissions cannot be contained in this motion. Can it? Could it be contained in a statutory instrument? I thought issues of regional balance would be a matter of review on the operations of the institute by the committee responsible for that sector because there is an instrument that created it. The instrument is being laid today as per requirement of the law because it has to be there to be laid. If it is not there, what do you lay? The instrument has to be there for you to be able to lay it before Parliament and as I said earlier, this is an instrument which is for information and it is not the other type of instrument where you must approve or something like that. I thought I made the decisions clear. So, I am just seeking this; and these operational matters can be examined by the committee, and a separate procedure of the committee, and then move this House to examine the operations of the institute. Wouldn’t that be a proper way of handling this matter? 

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Speaker, normally, we have statutory instruments which are laid without a resolution. That has been a procedure, but immediately you bring the issue of a resolution, it means that the resolution must be examined by Parliament, because most of the time, we have been having instruments laid and we don’t even have a resolution, and the committee or Parliament is not repositioning the instrument, which is for information. But what we are questioning is the resolution that has been brought, and since there is information that we have additional issues to discuss, I think it would only be wise for us to look at this matter. That was the way I looked at it and given the fact that we had an earlier discussion, where this matter came up and we said okay, since we are waiting for the resolutions to come, we shall examine it. Now the time has come. Why should we just pass it off because we are aware that there is a situation that needs to be reviewed or discussed? If it were a simple matter that the instrument has come and it has no resolution, and that the matter has never come out of the committee, we would just pass it. But I think we need to discuss this matter and you guide us. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me give proper guidance. Is this an instrument that requires parliamentary approval before it becomes operational? It is not. In other words, it is not a motion that you refer to a committee. If this instrument was such an instrument that requires parliamentary approval, I listed three categories of statutory instruments -[MS BAKO: “But the instrument is being laid today.”]- That is why I am asking the question. I thought I was explaining a procedural point. Can I raise it and then seek information from you, because if it is an instrument, is the section so required? I have not looked at the section, maybe somebody could bring me that particular section and I look at it. I will need to look at it myself. If the section, for example, said something - I will give you an example of the Privatisation Law, the PERD Act, the one that was used for privatisation. The section specifically stated that an instrument made to alter the listing on the schedules of that Act must be laid before Parliament within a number of days for its approval before it becomes operational. Is that the same kind of provision in this Act? I need somebody to give me the provisions of the Act and I look at them so that I can give proper guidance on this issue. Please, somebody get me the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act so that we can have a more comprehensive ruling on this subject.

In the meantime, I am going to use Rule 22 of our Rules of Procedure to alter the business to defer further discussion on this particular matter, and bring in another matter while I look at the law and make a proper ruling on this issue. 

MOTION TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE PROF. DANI WADADA NABUDERE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister, before you raise the motion, we have a delegation from the late Prof. Dani Wadada Nabudere’s family with us in the House. We have Mr Andrew Muduli Nabudere, his son; Mr Silver Mafabi, his nephew; Mr Francis Mashate, his nephew; and Mr Mike Muduli. 

4.26
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER FOR EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Mr Eriya Kategeya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Prof. Dani Wadada Nabudere. 

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda notes with deep sorrow the untimely death of the late Prof. Dani Wadada Nabudere;

AWARE that the late Prof. Dani Wadada Nabudere was born on 15 December 1932 and grew up in Bumayamba village, Buyobo sub-county in Budadiri West Constituency;

RECOGNISING that he exhibited a high level of academic excellence, graduating with a prestigious Bachelor of Laws Degree (London) in 1963 and was admitted as a Barrister at Law, Lincoln’s Inn, London in the same year;

CONSCIOUS that the late Prof. Nabudere was the Vice Chancellor, Marcus Garvey University, and that he previously worked as an Associate Professor at the University of Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania and a visiting Professor at the University of Zimbabwe as well as Professor at the Islamic University in Uganda where he made a great contribution to the field of education;

APPRECIATING that he published papers and books and made profound research, especially in the areas of politics, law and finance and documented numerous publications thereby sharing his wealth of knowledge and experience with the public;

FURTHER APPRECIATING that he played a very critical role in the political history of Uganda as Minister of Justice in 1979, and Minister of Culture and Community Development and Rehabilitation in 1979/1980 in the Uganda National Liberation Front interim Government of Uganda;

NOTING THAT he was the Chairman, Board of Directors of the East African Railway Corporation from 1971 to 1973 where he played a big role in the formulation of policy and the making of decisions to ensure prudent management of the railway sector for the mutual benefit of the people of Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania;

ADMIRING THAT the late Prof. Nabudere was an elder in the Elgon region and the President of the African Association of Political Science from 1983 to 1985 and the Vice-President of the International Science Association where he worked tirelessly to advance Political science;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that this Parliament:
1.	Collectively conveys deep condolences to the family, relatives, friends and the entire country upon the loss of this gallant and industrious Ugandan; and

2.	Takes cognisance of the distinguished services and contributions rendered by the late Prof. Dani Wadada Nabudere.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is seconded. Please speak to the motion.

MR KATEGEYA: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the late Dani Wadada Nabudere was one of the few remaining among the group of politicians who fought for the Independence of this country. As a young man, he joined Uganda Peoples’ Congress and he was in the wing which was called the progressive wing. His colleagues were mainly the late John Kakonge, Mr Bidandi Ssali who is still alive, Mr Kirunda Kivejinja and the late Raiti Omongin. 

After some time in the UPC, this group was expelled, except for the late John Kakonge. The late Dani Nabudere formed a committee called the Vietnam Solidarity Committee and this is the time some of us met him as students from the University of Dar-es-Salaam and Makerere University. He was advocating for the fight and supporting the people of Vietnam in their struggle against imperialism and colonialism. Through this committee, he introduced us to the politics of liberation. That is how we came to know them in our young days.

During his struggle, he was detained without trial at Luzira and he remained there until 1971. In 1971, when the military coup by Amin took place, we had a debate with Dani Nabudere on what to do. There were two schools of thought. One was that we could support Amin too and have an opportunity to realise our revolutionary dreams. Another was that we cannot join Amin. It was not possible to work with Amin to carry out a liberation struggle and Dani Nabudere was on the side saying we should support the coup of Amin. Some of us disagreed with him, but we kept in touch. Then eventually, he joined what I mentioned in the last paragraph, when he became the Chairman of the Railways Corporation of East Africa. 

Some of us opposed Amin, but we kept in touch, as I said. Eventually, he left the Railways Corporation of East Africa and went to Tanzania to the University of Dar-es-Salaam.
 
As we all know, he did a lot of teaching at the University of Dar-es-Salaam, organised some of the young people together like Prof. Mamdani, Mr Ruzindana, hon. Wafula Oguttu, who is here on the opposite side, and we kept working together to see what we could do to remove Amin. 

Eventually in 1979, there was the Moshi Conference, where we were organising to see what should be done after the removal of Amin. Dani played a very crucial role in the organisation of the Moshi Conference. Those who were around then - we came here with what we used to call “The Moshi spirit” - that is when we formed the Uganda National Liberation Front (UNLF), which was an attempt to forge the unity of the people of Uganda against dictatorship. 

When we arrived in Kampala in April 1979 - I am sure some of you were not yet politically active - Wadada Nabudere was the Secretary for Political and Diplomatic Affairs in the UNLF. He was also a member of the National Consultative Council (NCC), which was the interim Parliament of the country. He was also cabinet minister both in the Lule and Binaisa administration. Of course, all of us know that eventually, the UNLF umbrella was torn and we went our different ways. 

Dani was known to be with the group of what we used to call the “gang of four,” which was made up of hon. Rugumayo, who was Chairman of the NCC; hon. Yash Tando, hon. late Omwony Ojok, and himself. Again, we had a lot of debate on what to do in the transition period. 

Later on, Dani became a Delegate of the Constituent Assembly and was very active in the formulation and eventually enactment of the 1995 Constitution of this country. 

When the late President Milton Obote returned on his second coming, Dani formed what we called the “UNLF Anti-Dictatorship,” a group which had the idea that we could mobilise people without engaging them in what we called a “militaristic manner.” But for us we were on the other side, where we said that we could do both; we said we could organise politics and then military at the same time. Again we were on different paths, but strategically along the same path.

Mr Speaker, the man we are paying tribute to was nationalistic; he was patriotic and he was a pan-Africanist in the full respect. That is why we should pay tribute to him. He loved Uganda; he worked for Uganda; and he loved Africa as a whole. He was a scholar, a prolific writer and reader, and had a very good grasp of international affairs and the role of Africa in this situation.  He strongly believed that intellectuals in the Third World should really wedge war against ignorance because he believed ignorance was one of the causes of under development.

Lastly, he was very consistent in his ideological approach and orientation up to the end. He was what we call Marxist, and he never changed even up to his death. He has believed that Marxism will come back, but that is a different matter. But he was consistent in his thoughts and his deeds. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, he is a Ugandan who did his part during his time and in our view, our political differences do not diminish his achievements because you can disagree with someone, but recognise that he is doing a good job. With these few words, I beg to move. 

4.40
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Today is a very black day for some of us who hail from the “Mountains of the Sun.” Around 1993, when we were looking for delegates to the CA, I recall at home, we the younger ones were going for the young man who had stood against Prof. Wadada Nabudere, the older one. And we were arguing that it was time for us to choose the young ones. Our parents were for Prof. Nabudere, while we were for a man called Michael Niduyi. 

I remember in the politics of the day; none of us pierced the other and I think that is the only election I have seen in Uganda, that could have seen very minimal or no rigging at all, because the government of the day may not have liked Prof. Nabudere to come to the CA. But at the end of the day, I discovered that the elders had done a right thing to have brought him to make laws for us; and indeed, he never disappointed us; he came and made the laws. 

But having said that, we would like to thank the NRM Government –(Applause)- for the first time to have come out and recognise such a person although you are recognising him when he is dead. Now, that is the music they play; that, “They thank you when you are gone.” This person should have been recognised when he was still alive. You are saying, “He is a nationalist; he has good ideas; he is a builder;” but you have not been talking about it. 

I would like to agree that Prof. Nabudere, who has died; who comes from my constituency; who mentored me into politics; who has been looking after me; who has been guiding me all along - in fact we had a meeting slated for Saturday, unfortunately we can’t meet; he is gone and he has been a consistent person; he was a trustworthy and dependable person. 

You have said that when you came back from Tanzania in 1979, one of his roles was - he was the minister in charge of rehabilitation. You recall at that time, that was the ministry with maximum resources, but he never picked even a shilling. If it had been these current ones, I do not know what they would have done with such a ministry. 

That demonstrates that people from Eastern Uganda, especially from the mountains of the Sun, when given an opportunity, will perform to the expectation of all with trust and dependendability. Unfortunately, if they are there, they could be these small ones and not these ground ones, who can take even a full cow when they are going to eat a small piece of meat.

Prof. Nabudere was also the Chancellor of Marcus Garvey University - I do not know if Prof. Rugunda knows about it, but he has been writing and teaching and he does it for free. This is for the branch in Mbale. If you went to him for anything, he will write, teach and explain for hours without even asking for a cent.

That is why when he saw Bugisu Cooperative Union - which is for the farmers - being taken or being eaten by a few individuals, he was among the elders who got up and said we need a union. Again it is unfortunate he has died; when we got it, it was taken again by Government and he has been fighting for it to come back, but he has died before we get it from the hands of Government again. But I want to assure him that with his spirit, we are determined to fight up to the end.

He has been working on the national convention, in fact, tomorrow, there was going to be a regional meeting organised in Mbale and calling for everybody in the whole country to go to Bugisu and we discuss the issue of taking Uganda back to its owners. Uganda belongs to some people, but a few people have taken Uganda for themselves. Unfortunately, this conference cannot take place. The one for Central took place as well as the one for Northern. The next one was for Eastern; so that from there, we go for the national convention.

For us in the Elgon zone, Prof. Nabudere was an elder, adviser, and an asset to us. It is unfortunate that he died when he was not even sick. I have never seen him asleep or someone saying he is sick. It is unfortunate - maybe if he had fallen sick, we would have gone to him and asked him to give us some more wisdom. Unfortunately, he has gone.

His brain was very important; if there was a way we could have it pulled out and given to somebody, I think we would have grabbed it and maybe given it to - but I would have received it very fast if you do not want; it is because his brain was very important and we have lost it. If we had given you a small portion, I think this country would be in a better state.

He used to say he wanted a free Uganda for all; that has been his argument, and that we need to take Uganda to its owners, but he has died before this can be finished. I hope there will be some individuals who will wake up and take Uganda to the owners. Maybe after his death, this will be an opportunity for those who have taken Uganda from the owners to return it to the owners. This has been one of the things, which he has been fighting for; that we need a free Uganda for everybody. I hope if we are all listening and if we have heard him talk, that this will be an opportunity for you to allow that to take place.

It is unfortunate that he was not given maximum chance in Uganda to exercise his full potential. It has only been the academic world, which knows him. The only place where he was in the public arena or in Government was when he was a minister for justice and rehabilitation and then a CA delegate.

It is at this time that I want to plead with the leadership of the current government, that we have some elders who exist and whose knowledge we should tap. Even if you do not agree with him or her politically, he could have some ideas to give. If there was an elders’ forum in Uganda, I am sure Prof. Nabudere would have been there, and would have availed some good information to you. 

Yesterday, there was a professor who appeared before a committee. The man is about 78 years and studied mathematics. He was asked ten questions and he never wrote any of the questions anywhere, but he answered them from the first one to the last. He had just recorded them in his head.

For your information, he is a man called Kirya. I have told you that Easterners are very good. He is from Eastern Uganda and he did so well. I said with this knowledge and if such people were put in an elders’ forum, I think they would be the best to provide us with information.

I want to conclude that trust is a very important thing. Prof. Nabudere was trustworthy. Help is an important thing. Prof. Nabudere would help without reservation. Incorruptible individual - Prof. Nabudere was of that calibre. A researcher who has written and published books and papers - Prof. Nabudere was of that nature. 

I am sure all of you are aware that he read up to late - I should not have told you, but professor read up to 2.00 a.m., slept for two hours and by 4.00 a.m. he was up. On the day of his death, he had just been reading, and he was reading his newspaper, when he said he was not feeling well. When he took some water, Prof. Nabudere collapsed. He was a reader who did a lot of work. I plead with all of you to take his works, read them, note them, and possibly they could be of great help to you. 

For us in the Elgon zone, we have lost. We want to plead with all of you to pray for us so that we can overcome our grief. This person is irreplaceable. If the First Deputy Prime Minister can say that this was a good and knowledgeable man, you can know that he was indeed. Just imagine what we, as a region, have lost. So, we ask for your prayers so that we can go through this difficult moment. 

To me, he was my mentor in politics. In a lot of ways, I have lost and I am requesting for special prayers from you. To the family, we know you have lost a father, a brother, a grandfather and the best we can do is to pray for you.

Hon. Members, as I conclude, I want to say that trust is the most important thing. If we can get Ugandans who can be like Prof. Nabudere, incorrupt and trustworthy, then this country would move on to the next level. Thank you.

4.56
THE MINISTER OF COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to thank you for enabling this august House to spend some time reflecting and paying tribute to the enormous contribution made by Comrade Dani Nabudere to Uganda, to Africa and to the world. Let me also take this opportunity to extend our sympathies and condolences to the family – and I am glad that members of the family, including his son, Andrew Muduli, are here to witness this tribute to their departed family member and a great statesman. 

Dani Nabudere has, without any doubt, been an outstanding individual and he literally was an institution in himself. Apart from being a very ardent family man, Dani was a big mobiliser and he focused his mobilisation, especially during those early days, among young people, in schools, in workers’ movements and other related institutions. In fact, because of his work, Natolo Masaba, Chango Macho, Magode Ikuya, the late Musamali and Saul Makanya, who was a deputy mayor of Mbale – they made Mbale the headquarters of the progressive, patriotic and pan-African politicians in this country. (Applause) And they believed in knowledge – they believed in reading and in discussions – and to that end, they established the Lumumba Progressive Bookshop in Mbale, whose main task was to sell, as cheaply as possible, books that focused on the Socialist ideology and also on understanding the aspects of Imperialism and Capitalism and other associated ideological connotations. The leader of the team that made Mbale what it became was Dani Nabudere. 

I first interacted with Dani Nabudere in the mid-sixties when I was a student at Busoga College Mwiri. He mobilised us, young people, and organised a seminar in Mbale. We went, spent some time with Natolo Masaba and others, and since then, the comradeship increased. In spite of the occasional differences here and there due to belonging to different parties, the ideological line, commitment and comradeship was maintained. 

As my colleagues, Ndugu Kategaya and Ndugu Nandala, have already said, it is true that Dani was dependable; he was open and principled. You could not be unsure as to what his position was – he would articulate it straight and in simple and clear language. No wonder, his clarity and principles quite often made him clash with the status quo. As you have already heard from Ndugu Kategaya, as a young man in Uganda Peoples’ Congress in 1964 – he was a member of the UPC Youth League - and a number of others were expelled because they refused to accept some of the goings on within the UPC. 

It is also true that although he initially worked with Idi Amin and became the Chairperson of East African Railways Corporation, he did this job for a very limited time. Actually, within two years or so after the Amin takeover, Dani had already resigned his job and had gone to the University of Dar-es-Salaam to teach. So, whenever he had difference of opinion, he would straight away articulate it. Now, it is true that after a stint of teaching in Dar-es-Salaam – he was also involved in organising the Moshi Conference as you have heard – but while at Dar-es-Salaam, he became a prolific articulator and writer. He used to exchange a lot of sharp views and articles with people like Prof. Mamdani and others - with my friend, hon. Wafula Oguttu. I am sure Ndugu Wafula will be telling us more about this because he was on the spot at that time. 

His academic achievements have been talked about; actually Dani amazes me up to now. This is a man who went and did a degree in law at London School of Economics. He got his degree in 1963 and that was the only formal degree he got. But you hear that Dani was a very prominent Associate Professor at the University of Dar-es-Salaam. He was a visiting professor in Zimbabwe and was based in Mbale until his death. As Ndugu Mafabi said, Dani was an amazing scholar; he read a lot and his house and study room was always full of new books. Sometimes, books are there for decoration, but for Dani, they were there for reading and for writing. Actually, Prof Dani Nabudere has given us an important lesson that you may not go along the traditional line of getting your degree, your masters, PhD, but that does not mean the end of learning. You can actually use other routes like Prof. Dani Nabudere used - he studied and became a distinguished professor. Of course, these days there is e-learning as well, but Prof. Dani Nabudere used even more difficult routes because at that time, studying by computers was still undeveloped. 

So, the point I am making is that, Prof. Dani Nabudere was a prominent professor with no PhD. I am told that in some universities these days in Uganda or abroad, you cannot be considered for a teaching job unless you have got a PhD. If I am correct, Mr Speaker, that position needs to be reviewed. You can make enormous contributions without getting these academic papers in the traditional sense. I do not know how many academic papers Sir Isaac Newton had or the other eminent scholars and inventors. Let us encourage our educational system to be able to develop our children and youngsters broadly, horizontally and vertically so that they are more equipped to deal with life. Sometimes we take narrow routes of studying just for exams. You go into past papers to make sure you pass the exams, but when you are faced with real life, that education, I am afraid, becomes very wanting. Prof. Dani Nabudere has taught us, has told us and has shown us that there are many routes to educate ourselves and we should take advantage of those. 

My brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi wondered whether I knew anything remotely connected with the Marcus Garvey Institute. I humbly say yes, I do because Prof. Dani Nabudere took me to the site where he was going to build his house just outside of the fence of Mbale Municipality and said “Ndugu, this is where I want to build a personal house”. He eventually did it, but after completing the beautiful house, he decided to turn that very house into the Marcus Garvey Institute. In fact, he had to vacate it and build another smaller house in the lower part of his piece of land in order to create more room for the Marcus Garvey Institute. 

I am happy that Prof. Dani Nabudere decided to invite Government when the Marcus Garvey Institute was being officially launched several years ago. Government was fully cooperating with him in that respect of ensuring that the Marcus Garvey Institute became fully operational because of what it stood for and what it stands for, is consistent with what this Movement that is in charge of Uganda and this government believes in; Pan-Africanism. (Applause)

Let me say a word about his mobilisation here. Actually, Prof Dani Nabudere after Moshi, as Ndugu Eriya Kategeya has said, became a minister; first of all, Minister of Justice and then a reshuffle came, Prof. Dani Nabudere was made minister of culture, but he was also in the Uganda National Liberation Front (UNLF); he was secretary for political and diplomatic affairs. So, using that political position in the executive committee of UNLF, he decided to spearhead mobilising in cells under “mayumba kumi” and he did, I must say, excellent work in that respect. After the departure of Idi Amin, the situation was very bad. There was lawlessness and the like, but the people of Uganda organised themselves under “mayumba kumi”. They were able to handle their security and they were able to handle their politics. Actually, “mayumba kumi” was more or less close to what we have now as LCs.

It is true that UNLF had some problems. Actually, there was a sharp difference in Uganda. All of us were together in UNLF, but one team said “No, for us, this umbrella must break”. Some of you must have heard the late Godfrey Binaisa, President of Uganda, saying that he had the umbrella and I think it got torn. 

The Democratic Party and the Uganda People’s Congress, which were known to be bitter rivals of the time, decided to join hands. For what purpose - to ensure that UNLF was disbanded. So, eventually UNLF was disbanded and then many of us who believed in the UNLF said, really, let us organise ourselves in a third force. For quite a number of months, we did not even have a name for that third force until eventually, in Kampala City Council Hall, on the suggestion of Ndugu Ephraim Kamuntu, we agreed that we should call it the Uganda Patriotic Movement. 

We very well knew that the situation was hostile and it was difficult to make any major headway, but we believed firmly that big trees start with a small seed. So, we decided to plant the seed. I am really very humbled that this small seed has become a huge tree engulfing the whole country. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, as I really try to conclude my contribution, in 1973 - many of you remember that January and February - the regime of Idi Amin got some people and decided to execute them. Abwoli Malibo was executed in Kabarole; a number of people in Mbale, in Kampala, in Kabale and Mbarara; Karuhanga, Bitwali Joseph; so it was a difficult situation. 

I was then a fourth year medical student at Galloway just at Mulago, and I had been the president of the National Union of Students of Uganda. Idi Amin and his government had banned the National Union of Students of Uganda. A comrade of mine, unfortunately, late Mugabi Kibedi, came and said, “I have information that they are coming to pick you.” So, to cut the long story short, he drove to Busembatia; I got a train from Busembatia and arrived in Nairobi. After arriving in Nairobi, the next question was, “Now where do I go?” I knew that Prof. Dani Nabudere had just been appointed Chairman of East African Railways. So, I got a taxi and said, “Take me to Prof. Nabudere’s house.” The driver asked me where Prof. Nabudere’s house was and fortunately, I knew it was Muthaiga. He drove me – he was knowledgeable about that city - and put me in the compound of Nabudere. Nabudere was not in, but fortunately, his dear wife, Aidah was present. So, Aidah paid for the taxi and the Nabuderes, for about a couple of weeks, took care of me in Nairobi. I really pay great tribute to him - and I ended up continuing with the route until I reached Zambia, where I completed medical school. 

But the point I am making is that Dani Nabudere had special interest in young people, and I must say that by the way, the young people never betrayed him. As Ndugu Eriya Kategaya said, after the then President of Uganda, Apollo Milton Obote was shot at in 1969, there was a lot of panic in Kampala for those of you who may be as old as I. Many people were arrested and among those arrested was Nabudere. So, why was Nabudere arrested? Because he was a scholar and not involved in any subversive activities – the reason was that Nabudere was the Chairman of the Uganda Vietnam Solidarity Committee. 

The people of Uganda – when the war by the Vietnamese people was raging and the people of Vietnam were demanding their independence and freedom from foreign domination, the people of Uganda under the chairmanship of Nabudere, decided to organise themselves and give them moral support. I am happy to say that I happened to be a small official of the Uganda-Vietnam Solidarity Committee. We had some contacts – we were so concerned about Nabudere’s detention because it was not in any way justified. 

At the annual delegates’ conference of the National Union of Students of Uganda, the students passed a resolution in about 1970, demanding the release of all political prisoners and I am happy to say that as a result of that resolution, the then government of Milton Obote released some prisoners including Ndugu Dani Nabudere. Actually, Dani Nabudere was not released on the day that Idi Amin took over; he was released before. When he was released, the student community sent a delegation to Budadiri, his home area, led by the late Omwony Ojok, to express solidarity with the arrival of our hero, comrade and our friend.

I want to say that recently, Dani Nabudere was slowing down in a lot of activities. He was not engaged too much in the formal jobs. In fact, he had also decided to even retire from the Marcus Garvey Institute, leave it and give it its own separate administration. So, Dani has been concentrating on research in historical memory. He formed the Historical Memory of Uganda with association of people like Justice Tabaro and others, while some of us played some peripheral role. 

It is amazing that Dani Nabudere, a big academic was now concentrating on going to Luweero, working with the peasants and talking to them about reconciliation with other Ugandans, especially Ugandans from Northern Uganda. He would then go to Gulu and meet the wanainchi and discuss with them the importance of reconciling with people in Southern Uganda, especially in Luweero Triangle, by discussing the details of what actually happened during the previous conflict, especially the Luweero war. 

I was fortunate to meet those groups a couple of times at Hotel Africana, and to open one of their conferences. It was extremely refreshing to see people from different communities discussing and agreeing that this is really the time to ensure that they forge their national unity and their togetherness.

The other contribution that Dani has really made and I am glad, Mr Speaker, because it is an area of your specialisation and you have made enormous contribution - some of you may have seen Dani Nabudere’s articles in our daily newspapers about the ICC - and he was critical about the ICC because he did not think that we needed to take everybody to the ICC. He believed in the capacity of Uganda and many African countries to be able to have a system of justice that should try these people. 

It is partly Dani Nabudere’s contribution that led to the Government establishing a Special Division of the High Court of Uganda to be able to try war crimes. (Applause) It is a big tribute to him that today we can have that special court – and by the way, Uganda is one of the few countries, and I actually do not know of any other African country that has been able to develop to that degree – that is able to try these cases. So, Dani Nabudere has made an enormous contribution in that area. 

In original thinking, the point made by Ndugu Nandala-Mafabi is absolutely right; Dani was a thinker. He would not just think, but he had the capacity to articulate his views and actually, Dani was a very dominant person. The presence of Dani – you could not avoid knowing that Dani was there. He would either laugh or articulate something with a lot of wit or you would want to listen to him.
 
So, this man we have just lost – his departure, his death and his loss is not just a loss for the Mt. Elgon region or Uganda, but actually a loss for Africa and humanity.

The last comment I would like to make is that this man was not just a nationalist and Pan African. He was actually an internationalist who believed in especially the politics of tri-continental - the people of Africa, Asia and Latin America working closely together so that they rid themselves of the shackles of Colonialism, Neo-colonialism and Imperialism. He also believed that these three continents should work closely together in order for them to be able to achieve their goal of independence, freedom and democracy in their respective countries and continents as soon as possible. This great man is gone.       

He has done very many things, he has written so much - books, papers- how shall we pay him? I am sure that Dani will as much as possible want to see the struggle continue to ensure that our country, our continent and world become better, more independent and more democratic. If we fight for democracy, for independence, for the unity of the people of Africa and better life for all the people of Africa, we would be paying tribute to this great man who has made an enormous contribution to this country, to our continent and to the world. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Member. I recognise the presence of hon. Lydia Wanyoto Mutende, who has no voice in this House, but a representative in the East African Legislative Assembly. She is in the gallery and she is part of the family of the late Nabudere. 

Hon. Members, we are going to find a way of streamlining this debate so that we make short statements in paying tribute to the late Dani Nabudere. 

5.26
MR PHILLIP WAFULA-OGUTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I would like to thank Government for honouring Dani and allowing us to talk about him in this august House. I would also like to thank the Prime Minister for moving the motion. 

It is interesting that those who spoke before me and I, differed with Dani’s ideology. We did not see things as he saw them. Even in the political struggle, we sometimes differed on the route, but we are unanimous that Dani was a great man. 

I first met Dani when I was a young man in secondary school. I even joined the Vietnams in that committee; thanks to the lectures he used to give us when I was in Bukedi College Kachonga. Even when I went to Teso College Aloyet, Dani would always come to see whether we were organised and discussing. 

Dani played a role in my education and in where I studied. My going to study in China was influenced by Dani. I read so many books which Dani brought to us and he shaped my thinking. There are many young Ugandans who were influenced by Dani; as a philosopher and thinker; as a mobiliser and a nationalist; as a democrat and a Pan-Africanist; Dani was everything rolled into one person. He was a very strong person and sometimes very domineering, as hon. Rugunda was saying, but he was always right to the point. 

Many people who listened to him in his lectures - whether in secondary school or in universities - know that he always left a big impact on them and some of us followed him. 

Dani was a socialist democrat, but he was also a federalist and he respected culture. The institute he set up was to promote Ugandan culture. One time, I had an argument with him over the restoration of kingdoms in Uganda. Dani was a strong supporter of that. Today, I support it also. I later realised that it was a sensible thing to support. Dani respected the cultural values of people. He lived an exemplary and principled life. There are a few people these days who live that way.

He was not materialistic. Dr Rugunda said that he built a nice house, which we saw on television the other day. But he did not live in that house; he gave it out. Dani lived a simple life. 

When he was in charge of politics, he was strong. He was the initiator of the Dar-es-salaam ad hoc committee to which I belonged, and he was our chair. I was the treasurer and that committee organised the Moshi Conference, although we disagreed and I did not even attend the meeting. 

But when Dani was in charge here, in 1979, that is the time we the journalists enjoyed total freedom of the press. That period between 1979 to 1980. You may ask any journalist of my age; we enjoyed total freedom of press; thanks to Dani.

He was not corrupt at all. He was in charge; at that time he was Prime Minister of something. He had the power, but he got nothing illegally out of Government. Today, we have made stealing a norm. When I read the papers and listen to the news in our country today, I feel sad and ashamed that every story is about theft of public resources. We would honour people like Dani if we lived honest and simple lives. We live sometimes beyond our means, but the meaning is that the public should maintain that lifestyle for you when you do not qualify to have it. 

Mr Speaker, you said we should speak little and I will. People like Dani - and they are many - are the real heros of this country. We have had many who have received medals as heros and sometimes, you do not even know what those people did. Sometimes even their name is hardly known in the village where they grew up. But Dani’s name is beyond Uganda, East Africa and Africa. 

When Dani was in Dar-es-salaam University, who did not want to listen to Dani? A person who did not have a PHD or masters -a simple  Professor - but Dani was an authority in Dar-es-Salaam University.
I went to Sweden one time and Dani’s name was there. He influenced many people and things in our country. These are the heroes; these are the real heroes we should be honouring.  

Finally, I just want to say that may be one time, this country will see some reason to create an avenue for a forum or a house for people like that so that they can contribute their last years or 10 years in life to politics. Maybe a Senate or House of Lords - no, we do not have Lords - but a senior house. If we had a house like that and people like Dani were there, we would have got what hon. Nandala-Mafabi was saying. 

I would like to send my condolences to the family. It is true we come, we are born, and we must die. Some people die. Some people come to the world and pass through like air. Some live a full life. Dani lived a full life. That is why we are talking about him this afternoon. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the time of two minutes begins now. I ask my people in charge of these machines to regulate; two minutes strictly. 

5.36
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will be very brief but elaborate. I rise to support the motion and to thank the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister for the nice comments he has made about the late Prof. Nabudere. 

Prof. Nabudere, in my view, was a hero and he is one of the Ugandan people who would have deserved to stay here as we pay tribute to him because of the record he left. We recall the advice he gave to the Moshi spirit in Tanzania. The words of wisdom that echoed from him are still in the minds of people who attended that meeting. That is why I beg to pay tribute to him. 

If there is any person whom I admired, it is Prof. Wadada Nabudere. I came in touch with Prof. Nabudere when I was a student at St Henry’s College in Kitovu. At that time, Kitovu was a shining star among schools of that magnitude. I remember Prof. Nabudere watching me intently with joy and love as I performed the role of a leader of the opposition now being occupied by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I was the leader of the opposition in a mock debate, which I won while playing the role of Basil Bataringaya at that time. 

I remember Professor Nabudere telling me, “You know, you boy; watch out. You might become a Member of Parliament in future.” So, I am not surprised that I am now a Member of Parliament. I know that one day, I could even command State House.

Prof. Nabudere, in terms of appreciation from the side of the Opposition; we pay tribute to him in a special way. Recently, when we were organising ourselves under the IPC spirit of cooperation, we had a task of finding a presidential candidate. We selected him as one of the three eminent persons who would be advising us, and he advised us wisely, although -(Member timed out.)

5.39
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this motion and thank the Deputy Prime Minister for bringing it. But I do not think I can adequately give tribute in two minutes to somebody like Dani Nabudere.

Coming from a political sphere, I had read a lot about the late Dani Nabudere until we were able to interact. At first, it was in 2006. This was at a conference where we were trying to seek how to deal with the question of truth and reconciliation within the context of Uganda. He brought out that very important aspect of the historical memory, because there are many events which have occurred in history, but we have different memories of what happened. I thank my brother, Hon. Rugunda, for pointing out something which was very important, that in 1980, the third force actually realised they could not go very far. 

Coming from the side of UPC, together with our brothers in the DP, we believed in multiparty democracy. When you go back to that stage, across Africa; I think there were only two multi-party democracies, which were Botswana and Mauritius. The rest were either were one-party states or military governments. The decisions of Ugandans to bravely embark on a democratic path is something which needs to be appreciated. I hope the work of the historical memory in society can bring out some aspects with the aim of reconciling and coming up with a clear past, which can be acceptable to all parties. 

Around the 1980 elections, as a Congressman, I still ask and as far as I know, those elections were never rigged because as the third force has mentioned, they were beginning; they could not field enough candidates, yet UPC and the DP were ready and it was really a race between the two of them. 

5.41
MS FEMIAR WADADA (FDC, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. I thank you all for sitting here and sharing with us this sad moment. I also thank those in the gallery for doing so. 

In just a period of three months, we have lost another one. First it was hon. Wanendeya, now it is the professor. But as the saying goes in the Bible, wise men came from the East. We still have them. Prof. Dani Nabudere is a symbol of principle and consistency. He was such a pillar that his legacy will live on forever because this is the man we all leant on for knowledge. 

I admired him for whatever he was doing. He is the reason I am consistent in whatever I am doing. We have lost another one in Ugandan history. He was a library on his own. Uganda, as we speak now, having somebody like him; will really take us a lot of courage to do so because the Government of Uganda , sees themselves as the only ones who are very wise. But there are very many people who are wise in this country, who can help us move ahead. I have heard that Prof. Dani Nabudere had an institution of his own - Marcus - which, of course, shows that he wanted Uganda to have knowledge and he was fighting ignorance. Here, we are fighting for ignorance. We want our people to be ignorant so that they can never know what to do next. Please Ugandans, this is the time to honour those people who have fought for our country and who have wanted us to be the Uganda that has always been. I mean Uganda, the Pearl of Africa, which is now just by name. 

I am saying this because we have destroyed all the areas that used to make Uganda the Pearl of Africa. In that regard, I would like to request the House to observe a moment of silence in honour of the late Prof. Dani Nabudere. May the Almighty God judge his soul with mercy. I thank you.

5.45
MR WAKIKONA WANENDEYA (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Mr Speaker, thank you. We are mourning somebody in whom we had value. And as hon. Ruhakana Rugunda said, it could be Elgon, but now we have known that he was known in the whole world.

I knew the late Prof. Nabudere when I was still a young boy. Actually, at times I used to live in his house. If I am 62 years now, then for the last 58 years I was used to this man and always joked with him. There was no difference between the children of the late Prof. Nabudere and those of Wakikona. The late would not allow such a thing in his house. He used to say that there should be no segregation in his home. He would try to fight against tribalism. He cherished the Ujama thing to develop in Uganda.

While we were still in Nabumali High School, the professor and his deputy, Mr Maumbe Mukhwana, would teach us the Marxist dialects on the ideas that did not allow the whites to milk the blacks. He used to say that some of us would be leaders in future and indeed, I am now a leader. So, you can see that this process started –(Interjections)– surprisingly, hon. Nandala-Mafabi is milking me.

The ideas of having to get very rich were never in the late Prof. Nabudere’s life. Even recently, – hon. Nandala-Mafabi said something, but there was a small mistake. When his brother Mashate died, I represented the President at his burial in Buyobo. But while there, the late called and talked to President Museveni. This made me to ask him whether he usually talked to the President. In his response, the late said: “Yeah! We talk. We are friends and we are together only that we don’t follow the same lines.” He also told me that they used to have a common front, but that if you have two mothers in the house, you do not lose the father. You remain the children of that father.

The late was a bookworm. If you slept in the late’s house, you would sometimes wonder when you saw him in his pigeonhole reading late in the night. I do not know, but maybe I will ask Mr Muduli whether he stopped reading before he asked for water during the hour of his death. 

The late was very frank. He did not care. He would tell you exactly what was on his mind, but would give you the chance to respond. And if you answered in disagreement, he would tell you so.

Mr Speaker, that said and done, I must say that we are losing an encyclopedia in Uganda. I was with Prof. Rugumayo recently – you know, we already lost hon. Omwony Ojok. Those were people who used to keep us going. And when we start seeing such men die, we might start to imagine that soon we will also be going – (Interjections) – but hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I will not go before you. (Laughter)

Anyway, sometimes when you reach the age of 78 like the late was – yesterday, as we were burying somebody called Rwakibale in Fort Portal, who was 83, the Bishop said the Bible says that the maximum is 80 years. We have lost a very important person because in Bugisu, people are supposed to die at a very advanced age. For example, my grandmother died at the age of 120. This is because we normally use those drugs in the mountains which do not affect us so much. Therefore, at the age of 78 for the late, we still had a lot of hope in him. 

You know that he had started another movement that was benefitting some people. And when we used to ask him why he was doing that, he would tell us to continue with what we were doing. The important thing is that the late was somebody who would ask us never to quarrel. That is why you see hon. Nandala-Mafabi and I - the Leader of the Opposition - are very friendly. We never quarrel. When he says something stupid and I tell him so, he will say, “but you are also very brown in the face.” We will eventually agree like that and move on. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, let us keep what the late used to do; we should live together; to reconcile and never to stick to some class. Whether you were a sweeper or manager, in the late Prof. Nabudere’s eyes, you were a human being. He would always respect anything from you. That is what we have lost in him.

To the family, I know that Mr Muduli and the old woman are here, please keep peace and live together in order to keep what the late used to do to people. We shall keep meeting and we are ready to offer advice whenever necessary. May God rest his soul in eternal peace. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we do not have details – please, the Speaker is talking – of the arrangements for the final send off, but certainly, I urge Members to go and pay their final respect and tribute. Today, we do not have enough time to articulate all the issues that we would have loved to say. But your presence there will say all what would have been said in this House.

In that regard, I am going to urge Members to allow that a question be put to the motion. Okay, if that is the consensus of the House, I now put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I had stood over item six because I needed to consult the relevant law. I have read the law. For the record, let me read it; “Section 75 of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2003.” 75(1) says, “The National Council shall from time to time formulate a development plan for the expansion of public tertiary institutions consistent with the national plan for the economic and social development of the country.

(2)	The minister shall on the advice of the National Council, by statutory instrument, establish public tertiary institutions in any place in Uganda.

(3) 	An instrument made under sub-section 2 shall be laid before Parliament.

(4) The minister may, on the recommendation of the National Council and with the approval of Parliament, upgrade a tertiary institution to a public university.”

Hon. Members, my guidance on this is that the motion that is before the House is improper before the House because it was not required by the law. I do not know where they extracted this procedure from - to extract a motion. All that was required from the minister was to lay the instrument, which was already made in July, before Parliament.

I am, therefore, going to ask the hon. Minister of Education to withdraw this motion and we proceed. 

5.55
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Jessica Rose Alupo): Mr Speaker, I religiously withdraw the motion because of the reasons that you have given. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion stands withdrawn.

MRS WINFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a matter of procedure to request and invite you to use your powers as provided by Rule 22 of the Rules of Procedure and we shift item No.12 on the Order Paper to appear as the next item on the Order Paper given the urgency and the importance of this matter to this nation. 

Item No.12 reads: “Motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to institute measures to address maternal mortality and other matters incidental thereto.” 

Mr Speaker, you are aware that we have mothers in the gallery who have been here since morning and you are aware that this House has considered matters of maternal mortality and maternal health as matters of great importance to this country. You are aware that this House on several occasions has even tasked the ministers not to come with loans unless they have taken consideration of issues to do with maternal health and maternal mortality. It is against that that I rise on a matter of procedure to urge you to use your prerogative given to you under Rule 22, to bring this matter forward for debate. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Member. I have listened to the request and the submission you have made in support of your request. I am persuaded by your statement and I accordingly use my powers under Rule 22 of our Rules of Procedure to ask that the next item to be presented will be item 12. The Order Paper is accordingly amended. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO INSTITUTE MEASURES TO ADDRESS MATERNAL MORTALITY AND OTHER MATTERS INCIDENTAL THERETO

5.58
MRS BETTY BAKIREKE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, and hon. Kiiza for that kind gesture to the women of this country. For that matter, may it please you, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MRS WINFRED KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. I want to first apologise to my sister, hon. Betty Nambooze, for having interrupted her. The issue that has tempted me to rise on a point of order is that the motion is very critical to this country. All of us are here because we have mothers who gave birth to us and maybe, some of us could have been unlucky that at the time when their mothers were giving birth to them, died under circumstances that could have been avoided. The motion before us is urging Government and is addressed to Government. 

Mr Speaker, it is unfortunate that as the motion is being addressed, the Prime Minister gets out of the House. The Government Chief Whip is not here. Is it, therefore, in order for the Prime Minister to leave business that is directed to Government before it is even tabled.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, your point is well received. You saw the hon. Prime Minister consulting with me before he left. He has an urgent medical matter to attend to and he has delegated to hon. Ruhakana Rugunda to stand in his place. 

MRS BAKIREKE: Mr Speaker, I was thanking you for the kind gesture –(Interruption)

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, this is a very important matter and you realise that the relevant minister is not here. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right to wait for the relevant minister? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we have just said that the Prime Minister assigned the responsibility to the hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, who actually happens to be a medical doctor. 

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, there is no doubt that the Leader of Government Business is around. So, there is no cause for concern. I think this motion is very serious and very important. As a firm believer in improved maternal and child health, I would have been much happier if a more well attended House would embrace this very motion because one of the critical aspects of this motion is mobilisation, so that the political leaders - the Members of Parliament - are sensitised and after we have passed the motion, they go into action. (Applause) If we try and hurry this important motion now, we will miss that great opportunity of mobilising everybody. So, Mr Speaker, I wait for your guidance. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you moving a motion to differ debate on the motion or what?

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, because of the critical importance of this motion and the need to have full participation by the honourable Members of Parliament so that they subsequently become instruments of promoting better health for mothers and children, I move that we debate this motion at another agreed time when Members of Parliament are fully informed about the Order Paper, so that they can come and fully participate.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have a seconder? Okay, the motion is seconded. The motion which was supposed to be presented by hon. Nambooze has not yet been presented, so there is no substantive motion on the Floor except the one that has been moved by hon. Ruhakana Rugunda. 

This motion has been seconded. Does he need to speak to it or he has already spoken to it? I think he has sufficiently spoken to it. (Hon. Members rose_)

If you have an alternative view to this, I would allow you to speak, but if you are going to agree with him, then there will be no point for you standing up. 

6.04
DR SAMUEL LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The views expounded by hon. Dr Rugunda are very noble and welcome to the House. The only trouble I have with them is that this motion is overdue and what we want really is the power of the resolution not the number of the Members of Parliament who are around. If we can agree and decide to defer it, then it should be made clear that if it is deferred then it should be the first item immediately after coming back.
 
We might have a problem; this motion was there yesterday, but it was not debated. Today, it has been saved by the Opposition Chief Whip who requested to bring it forward. We stand a risk that if we delay it without ruling that immediately we resume, it should be one of the most important items to come, it could be delayed for many more days and yet mothers are dying. As we speak now, 16 mothers are going to die today. So, the more we delay, the more we have a lot of debts and they cannot be retrieved. 

So, we want this motion to be quickly concluded and then we can be able to implement the aspects of this motion. My only amendment is, we can go that direction, but we have to insist that it should be taken as an emergency motion immediately after resuming.

6.06
MRS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (INDEPENDENT, Woman Representative, Sheema): I agree with hon. Ruhakana Rugunda. However, given the fact that this motion carries a lot of issues, I suggest that hon. Nambooze presents it today, and then we discuss it when we come.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The House that will be sitting will not have listened to the presentation; so, the motion may not be captured properly. If you are going to agree to deferring, you should defer the whole thing; that the motion is presented in a full House and then people debate it on the same day. If they present now and debate takes place when we come, people will not even know what to debate.

6.08
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu East, Kalungu): I just wanted to say that at the beginning when the Opposition Chief Whip stood up to request you to allow this motion to come on the Floor, you really agreed to it. Two, I realise that what hon. Ndugu Rugunda talked about as using this as a mobilisation tool, is very important, but there are other things. 

The major problem is, not knowing what maternal health is in this country. But when you read this motion, you will see that our prayers are really towards Government taking action. I think the resolutions that we are going to take here are not necessarily calling for knowledge about maternal health, but Government’s action so that we get this problem tackled.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The way we can handle this is to defer this matter conditionally, and the conditions we will attach will come as a directive from the chair. There will be that remedial action in the meantime, which should be taking place and statistics be collected so that by the time we come to debate this motion on that day, the ministry and all the other people can update people on steps that have been taken, so that we do not sit here and wait for that day and the minister starts talking as if they are receiving it for the first time, because this motion has already come, and it has been circulated.

MS RWABUHORO: Thank you Mr Speaker. I thank you because you seem to concur with us on deffering this motion, but can we get clarification from you whether we are going to deffer it and make sure that it is comes as the first item on the next Order Paper.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If this House agrees that we defer, I will direct that it should be the first item to be discussed on the day when Parliament resumes. Do I now take it that we defer the presentation of the motion to a subsequent debate?
 
MRS BAKIREKE: Any person bringing a motion would like to have a full House. Uganda is a very interesting country. Each day new things occur and they seem to be more important as days progress. 

I have considered your kind suggestions and guidance, but the most important aspect in this motion is the resolution of this honourable House.

This House has just passed a motion paying tribute to the late Wadada Nabudere. We do not want to indicate in any way that we considered it to be a less important motion and for that matter, at times, not in this House, people can try to kill a motion by way of saying that we are supporting and we shall reserve it for the next day.

With that in my mind, I humbly request that these Members who are seated here are the people who have decided to stay behind for the mothers of this country. They are the committed Ugandans and they will always be remembered for this.

I beg that you receive this motion and if possible discuss it and grant the prayers as presented.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for deferment by the hon. Ruhakana Rugunda.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO CONGRATULATE SUSAN MUWONGE THE FIRST WOMAN RALLY DRIVER TO WIN THE NATIONAL MOTOR RALLY CHAMPIONSHIP TITLE IN UGANDA

6.14
MRS MARY NYAKIKONGORO (INDEPENDENT, Woman representative, Sheema): I rise on a motion for a resolution of Parliament to congratulate Susan Muwonge, the first woman rally driver to win the national motor rally championship.

“WHEREAS Objective No.17 of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, requires the state to promote recreation and sports for citizens of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS Article 33(5) of the same Constitution provides for affirmative action to be accorded to women for the purposes of redressing imbalances created by history, tradition or custom;

AWARE THAT motor rallying in Uganda and Africa as a whole is a sport widely dominated by the male gender;

FURTHER AWARE THAT Susan Muwonge has participated in several motor rally competitions since 2005 and has won in some of these rallies including the Mbarara Independence Rally and KCB Pearl of Africa Rally;

RECOGNISING THAT a 300 kilometre national rally championship was on 15th to 16th October 2011, conducted at Festino City Race Circuit at Mukono, in which Susan Muwonge drove a Subaru N10 Standard, a car with less power and inferior to her competitors’ machines, and won with 220 points ahead of her closest male challenger at 120 points, thus emerging the National Rally Champion for 2011;

NOTING THAT starting and nurturing talent is a responsibility of not only the government, but for all Ugandans, and this triumphant feat is an invaluable creation to Ugandan women;

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by Parliament that Parliament of Uganda extends the glowing appreciation and congratulations to Susan Muwonge for the triumphant win in a male-dominated sport of racing, and for being crowned as the National Rally Champion;

THAT Parliament acknowledges that motor racing promotes patriotism, nationalism, discipline, fitness, friendship, harmony, unity, peace and responsibility among others, and is invaluably a great entertainment; 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, the Government of Uganda increases the annual support to the sports sub-sector to facilitate the development of sports countrywide.”
 
I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded. It would have been nice if the person we are congratulating was here. We would have made her rise and we recognise her presence. That notwithstanding, the motion is in place and I think it does not need any justification from you. So, I will allow the Members to speak on it. If Members are unanimous, we can take a vote on it. 

6.18
MR MICHAEL MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I rise to second this motion on the Floor of Parliament. Honourable colleagues, I have been a very serious rally driver. During my time, I was code-named “Flying Mike.” Susan Muwonge, as a woman driving a rally car - it is not an easy task. I must commend the mover of the motion, the honourable Member of Parliament for Sheema, for recognising the talent that my friend Susan Muwonge has been able to display in the cockpit with the Subaru N10.

Hon. Colleagues, rallying is very complex and extremely expensive. The Subaru N10 rally prepared car is equipped with superior equipment; a part that is separate from what you have in an ordinary street car and it is all about risk. The level of risk in rally driving is very high. I remember a friend of mine, the late Riaz Kurji, died in Mityana. He was being followed by Susan Muwonge. Kurji overturned in a blind corner and he never saw the next light after the next turn. Susan Muwonge overtook him and I want to say that it is that art of display of sportsmanship and the ability to manage a car - to steer a car and bring it to its final stop when the rally ends. 

Susan Muwonge is one of the best-rated rally drivers on the African continent, and she has been able to show that women can do it –(Applause)- It is important for us to note that these were areas where women were not able to step into, but I want to say that she will encourage many other young females or ladies to join rally driving and to rise to a level of national rally champion in the country like Susan has done. No wonder, the Uganda sports fraternity - the association of writers in sports - have again awarded her sports person of the month and she has again been given the sports person of the year. This has been a major achievement. 

Before I sit down, I want, therefore, to urge Government to understand that sports brings Ugandans together. I have seen occasions where the Uganda Cranes was playing with Kenya and Ugandans came together in Namboole, putting aside their political differences, religious differences, ethnic differences or divide, and coming together as patriots – nationalists, to support our national team. I want to urge colleagues that at an appropriate time, we may urge or move a private motion to bring in a private member’s bill for the establishment of the Uganda sports authority, because it is high time the Government of Uganda puts money directly from the Consolidated Fund to support talent in Uganda. You saw the way Ugandans came together; you saw His Excellency the President going to Namboole. I saw the FDC President going to Namboole; I saw the King of Buganda – the Kabaka - and the Speaker going to Namboole; and many other people. I want to say that it is important that we, as a nation, get to understand that the more money you put into sports, the more money a country can earn; the more exposure we can put our youthful population to, and encourage Ugandans to unite and build the spirit of patriotism, nationalism and togetherness. I want to once again commend the mover of this motion for having thought about Susan Muwonge; to recognise her on the Floor of Parliament. I thank you comrades.

6.24
MR MAJEGERE WAIRA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Mr Speaker, I should also take the chance of welcoming you back. It has been a long time and you have been missing in action.

I want to support this motion. I am a real fan of car rallying and I have been following these people everywhere in Uganda: Bushenyi, Mbarara, Luweero and Mukono. Unfortunately, I have never seen some of the movers there. (Laughter) Yeah, this is a fact. I have never seen them there, but what I know is that I have had a chance to move with these people. The game is so interesting and maybe I can describe Susan Muwonge, with two words: “consistency” and being “steady”. This is because there are some other car rally drivers who can really fire up the machines, but you find that they cannot finish. They always fail to finish. There are some good car rally drivers like Sebuguzi and so on, but they always fail to finish, every time the lady comes up as the leader. I was even in Mityana when Riyaz Kurji overturned his car and he was killed. I have been to several places in Entebbe. 

The only problem with this game is about safety because I have witnessed people being killed by these rally cars. People get very excited and they forget about safety. So, as we applaud Susan Muwonge, we should urge the organisers of these car rallies to put much emphasis on the safety measures and even when they are going to drive, they should make sure that they inform the public about their routes or flight plans. For instance, maybe when they are going to drive in Buikwe or Mukono, the people are got unaware. So, it is important that when this game is going to take place, they inform the public that there is going to be a car rally and they are not caught unaware. 

Lastly, I want to thank hon. Nyakikongoro for bringing this motion and recognising this lady because it is not easy to find a lady who can fire up a machine when even the men can fail to drive at a very high speed. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.28
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to welcome you back. It is good to have you in that chair. 

I would like to thank hon. Nyakikongoro for moving the motion congratulating Madam Susan Muwonge on winning the rally. It is good for her to win the rally. It is good to recognise our national heroes. 

But I would like to disagree a little bit with colleagues who spoke earlier and who said that sports, especially rally driving, is complex and it is tough. I would like to recognise Susan Muwonge for being a woman driving in such a complex sport. I would love to recognise her for her skills, her stamina, her ability and for her setting a new record in driving, but not because of being a woman. It is indeed evident now, that she went in, she won in a complex sport, thereby proving that women manage complex sports as much as men. If we simply recognise her for being a woman, we run the risk of negating the principle of equality of men and women.

I think this motion, for me, brings out something very fundamental and the hon. Nyakikongoro simply mentioned it, but without putting the emphasis: Sports and winning goes with funding. It has been seen that whether it is football, netball or rally driving, it is not about physique; it is about motivation and attitudinal disposition, and it is important that we take this kind of occasion to urge Government to take sports as a priority, and to increase the budget and funding of sports in this country. 

My focus really goes not just at what is at the national level, but to develop sports right from the district and sub-county levels. Let us look at the leagues evolving down there and invest a little more. Let us look at the district sports offices, the equipment and facilities at their disposal, and put in a little more money. So, I hope as we now go into discussing next year’s budget, we look at the extent to which sports in this country is funded.

Finally, Mr Speaker, this brings to mind the fact that our own parliamentary team right now is preparing to travel to Bujumbura for a competition. I hope we have given it the necessary support, facilitation and strengthening, because when they go out there, it is not just about Denis Obua playing or hon. Nalubega playing. It is about Uganda; it is about this Parliament and the image we are projecting out there; the uniform, their facilitation, their per diem. I hope we take advantage of this motion to request that the parliamentary team be given the full facilities and support that they require. I thank you very much. 

6.31
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the mover, hon. Nyakikongoro, for moving the motion, and the seconder. When we honour women who have excelled in different fields, we are trying to encourage many girls out there to see the example of such women and give them confidence that they can also make it in any field that they are trying to pursue. So, while I agree with my colleague that the principle of equality between men and women should not be negated, I also want him to understand that the intent of the motion is actually to give courage to other women out there to have confidence that there is no field preserved exclusively for one gender. Therefore, for a field that has been dominated by men for such a long time, it is to honour the lady who has for the first time emerged and opened the way for other women and for other girls to say, “Oh yes, I am capable of venturing into any field.” 

So, I want to thank hon. Nyakikongoro and the House for the support. I also want to restate the argument we have made over and over again on this Floor that women are capable of performing in any field, and that we only ask for opportunity because if Susan did not have the opportunity, she would not have had the platform to show us that actually awoman can win a car rally and become a champion. If we did not have hon. Kadaga to have the opportunity to be a Speaker, maybe people would have kept wondering as to whether a woman can make a Speaker. If we didn’t have a woman as the Minister of Finance, people would keep wondering as to whether women can hold money and the economy. So, we want women to be given the platform so that they act as role models. We have seen women sitting on the front bench of this House and they have done a wonderful job, which gives courage to other women who are seated on the back bench on the NRM side, hoping that they can also make good finance ministers. 

So, Mr Speaker, I support the motion because it is critical that we give opportunity to women; we recognise women who have excelled in fields that are not yet predominantly occupied by women so that other women and the girls can emulate them. I thank you and support the motion. 

6.35
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to support the motion  by giving the following views: In Uganda today, we have high levels of unemployment of the youth; we have people who are trying to do a lot of disorganised activities because they don’t have anything to do –(Interjection)- like walk-to-work indeed! (Laughter) If we could, therefore, invest a lot in sports academies, we would have done a lot for the youth of this country, who are looking for what to do. (Applause) What is needed is for Government to take the initiative.

We didn’t have many celebrated musicians in Uganda, but when the current Government decided to invest in music, you can see the number of musicians that have come up singing in all our local languages and others. So, if we can do the same for sports, we can save the youth and subsequently the country. We shall have created more employment opportunities for the youth; it will be a source of income for them and we shall be expanding the source of revenue for this country.   

I have noticed that Ugandans really like sports. When you consider it from the angle of football, even the Members seated here are ardent supporters who would prefer to be close to their televisions watching Arsenal and ManchesterUnited playing. 

Why can’t we support sports so that we can even have a women team? And it shouldn’t only be one; we should have many. Ugandans were so happy when Inzikuru got a gold medal through athletics, but we have never followed up to support her further. The young lady is moving around looking for the few MPs that she knows to support her so that she can go out for training and further the career she had started. The current Government has let her down. So, can’t we pick it from there? 

Mr Speaker, sports is another way of avoiding these minor diseases because when you get involved in sports, you become physically fit. So, let us encourage it in order to avoid some of these diseases. 

MS ALUPO: Mr Speaker, I would like to give her very brief information. I would first of all like to thank her for being a very strong sports lady and a supporter of sports.  The information I have for her is that currently, Government, and in particular the Ministry of Education and Sports, is in the process of establishing a first class high altitude sports school in Kapchorwa, and we are in advanced stages, whereby we have already developed the master plan. We are moving very well with the parliamentary Committee on Social Services. We think that that will make a very big landmark in attracting talented sports children across the country to develop their talents and eventually put them in practice. Thank you, Sir.
 
MR WAIRA: Thank you. I would like to inform the honourabale member that although I am not in the Ministry of Education I have at least been reading in the newspapers that Inzikuru was built a very fantastic house. It is a tiled house – I expected the minister to remind the Member of this fact - built by the NRM Government. Inzikuru was given a Delica car by this NRM Government and other things. (Applause) I thank you. 

MS OLERU: Thank you very much for that information. What I was driving at is that, that was when she struggled on her own and went up to that level where she managed to bring the gold medal here and was appreciated. But then after that, as Government, we would have continued to follow up how far she has reached and where she is now. The follow up is what we didn’t do. I am giving you first-hand information. Just yesterday, Inzikuru was in my office. She is looking for money to go to Tanzania for training and to pay the coach training her. So, those are the issues that I am trying to bring up here and it doesn’t mean that I have said that we have totally let her down.  I have appreciated what the government has done for her. Indeed, she has a house, but she is looking for somebody to rent it, so that she can raise money to go for training. So, can we get somebody to rent that house in Arua so that she gets the money to go for training?
  
Thank you, hon. Minister, for the information, but what we are saying as Members of this House is that, we are all committed to see that the budget for sports in your ministry is increased so that we train more youth in order to get employment and stop these other unnecessary disorganised activities which they are doing because they are not employed. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. After the very eloquent submission from the hon. Member from Yumbe, I think this debate should be brought to a close. I put the question to the motion for a resolution of Parliament to congratulate Susan Muwonge, the first woman rally driver to win the National Motor Rally Championship in Uganda. 

(Question put and agreed to.)


MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT 
TO ESTABLISH A NATIONAL SALARIES AND RENUMERATION COMMISSION

6.44
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to establish a National Salaries and Remuneration Commission:

“WHEREAS the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the National Objectives and Directive Principles of the State, Objective XI(i) provides that, ‘The state shall give the highest priority to the enactment of legislation establishing measures that protect and enhance the right of the people to equal opportunities in development’; 

AND WHEREAS the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the National Objectives and Directive Policy of the State Policy, Objective XIV provides that, ‘The state shall endeavour to fulfill the fundamental rights of all Ugandans to social justice and economic development and shall, in particular, ensure that-
(a)	all developmental efforts are directed at ensuring maximum social and cultural well-being of the people; and
(b)	 all Ugandans enjoy rights and opportunities and access to education, health services, clean and safe water, work, decent shelter, adequate clothing, food security and pension and retirement benefits’; 

AND WHEREAS Article 172 of the Constitution provides that subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the President may, acting in accordance with the advice of the Public Service Commission” -(Interruption)

MS JUDITH AKELLO: Mr Speaker, we have just deferred a motion, which to me was very important to the whole House because of the kind of quorum that we have. This is equally an important motion, which requires that a full House is present as well as key ministers responsible to finance this commission. Ministers of gender and so on must also be here in order for us to go on with this motion. So, is it really procedurally right for us to proceed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you proposing a motion that we defer?

MS JUDITH AKELLO: Yes, Mr Speaker. I want to move that this motion be deferred to the next sitting, most probably when the House is full.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Hon. Members, the motion is clear. We have taken an earlier decision on a subject of this nature and of equal importance. I put the question to the motion to defer this particular motion for debate until Parliament resumes.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Hon. Members, we have one last item and that is on our colleague who has since passed on. I would seek the indulgence of the Members that we could give it some time because the honourable member has passed on.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY GLOWING TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR ESELE JOHN PETER

6.48
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to move a motion for the resolution of Parliament to pay glowing tribute to the late Dr Esele John Peter moved under Rule 43 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament:

“WHEREAS Parliament learnt with profound shock and disbelief the death of the late Dr Esele John Peter, which occurred on Friday, 28 October 2011;

AND WHEREAS Dr Esele John Peter was an illustrious Member of the Seventh Parliament, that is between 2001-2006, representing Bukedea county, a member of the sessional Committee of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries and also a member of the Standing Committee of Science and Technology, who is remembered for a very prolific and articulate representative of the people of Bukedea; 

NOTING with appreciation that he was not only instrumental as a crop scientist, but has also held responsible positions as a director, manifesto implementation in the Office of the President and the Chairperson Board of Directors, Cotton Development Organisation (CDO)

AWARE that the late Dr Esele John Peter was one of the crop scientists, where he distinguished himself as an effective analyst and advisor to His Excellency the President of this country, on agriculture and other matters of national concern;

COGNISANT of his invaluable experience and articulation on issues as an advocate for agricultural research and a consultant;

APPRECIATING his intellectualism and leadership skills demonstrated as a leader, administrator at Serere Agricultural and Animal Production Institute and other agricultural research institutes;

SATISFIED that the late Dr Esele John Peter indeed dedicated all his life to serve this country and, therefore, deserves the recognition of this Parliament;

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by this Parliament today 10th November as follows:

1.	That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives and friends and to the people of Teso and Uganda at large for the irreplaceable loss of a distinguished son of Uganda in the names of Dr Esele John Peter.

2.	That it takes cognisance of the dedicated services and contribution that the late Dr Esele John Peter, who has in the course of his illustrious life rendered to the people of Uganda as a politician, a senior research officer, as an administrator, an intellectual and a Member of Parliament.

3.	That the Almighty God sustains the bereaved and grants our departed colleague Dr Esele John Peter an eternal rest.”

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded. Hon. Member, it might be difficult for prayer number three for Parliament to pass a resolution to God –(Laughter)– so you might consider that particular aspect. We can only do prayers, but we cannot resolve to -

MR KASAMBA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. But as we resolve, we pray to God that our resolution is carried forward for eternal life.

Mr Speaker, we have just paid glowing tribute to our senior citizen, the late Dani Nabudere. As one of our colleagues said, wise men come from the East. Here now we also pay tribute to one of our brothers, who has so distinguished himself in the names of Dr Esele, who was a former Member of Parliament in the Seventh Parliament and he represented Bukedea County. Unfortunately, he passed away on 28 October 2011. 

The late Dr Esele was born in 1953 to Lucy Adong and Sylvester Otialuk in Kakere Village, Bukedea sub-county in Bukedea District. He attended Kakere, Okunguro and Bukedea primary schools, before joining Teso College Aloet. He graduated from Makerere University with a Bachelor of Science in Agriculture in 1977, and later went to Nairobi University for his masters, still in science. In 1998, he went to Texas University where he did his PhD, still in Plant Pathology.

Dr Esele was an accomplished scientist. On finishing his academic studies, he worked with various research stations under NARO and he discovered different varieties of crops that our people in this country are enjoying, especially sorghum and cereals. He improved a variety that is internationally recognised and classified, famously known as Epuripur, a type of sorghum that grows very fast, is creating food security in this country, and can be used in baking and brewing. He is also renowned for the SECEDO sorghum variety, which is also a famous breed. You can imagine how he dedicated his life to improving the very many varieties of sorghum, groundnuts and cotton. 

He was a very serious cotton breeder. He was facilitated under CDO to improve eight varieties of cotton under the Serere Research Station, which the cotton-growing industry is enjoying of late. He developed varieties of high-yielding finger millet.

Not only did Dr Esele do research, he was also a very progressive commercial farmer. I remember we were together in the Seventh Parliament and we were sitting together on the Committee of Agriculture. We visited his farm – his home in Bukedea and we saw the type of commercial agriculture he was practising. He had over 50 acres of cotton. He also had large acreages of sorghum and groundnuts. So, he lived a very exemplary life of which, as Members of Parliament, we feel we have lost a great politician and scientist.

Dr Esele held a number of responsible positions. He was one time a director of Serere Research Station; he was a Chairperson, Board of Directors of Cotton Development Organisation; at one time he was Chairperson of the Uganda National Cotton Federation. He was also Chairperson of the National Agricultural Organisation Council. We have really lost a dear gallant son of this country. 

In 2007, he was director for manifesto implementation in the Office of the President, having lost during the 2006 elections. From 2001 to 2006, the people of Bukedea voted him to represent them at Parliament. During that period, he served on the various committees of Parliament and he did a commendable job. 

He is among the very few Ugandans who have lived to change lives of the very many peasants whose life is based on agriculture. We should commend him for this tiring effort. He created hope by his innovations and by bringing about drought-resistant and short-span growing sorghum and millet, for which this country should commend him. 

The late Dr Esele was a strong supporter of the NRM Government. His contribution to the NRM success in terms of mobilisation and sustenance of the NRM principles and ideals will always be remembered. It is my prayer that the great innovations of the late Dr Esele should continue to benefit his beloved family and children. The royalties and patent rights over his works should be followed up. We are yet to pass the patent rights laws for this country. It is very unfortunate that Dr Esele has died, but it is my prayer that the royalties that the companies producing Eagle beer enjoyed by many Ugandans, should at least be recognised and benefit the bereaved family. 

Mr Speaker, the late Dr Esele was a parent who lived a successful life, and the country should recognise him for being an eminent researcher who lived a modest and humble life. Moreover, he died while preparing to make a presentation at Namulonge Station after suffering a heart failure. It is my prayer that this Parliament recognises this simple, dedicated and trustworthy Ugandan who worked to change very many lives in this country. May the soul of the late Dr Esele rest in eternal peace! For God and my Country. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Kasamba. I will now open the debate, but we shall have to regulate the time so that we can finish quickly. There is no seconder here and, therefore, I will treat the rest of the Members as contributors to the motion. Each of you will use two minutes so that we can accommodate as many people as possible.

7.02
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion moved by my friend, hon. Kasamba, and to appreciate that whereas Dr Esele came from Teso, somebody from Kakuuto in Buganda is the mover of this motion. That act is lauded and tells what kind of person Dr Esele was. On October 28th, a dark cloud hung over the Teso sub–region. Dr Esele suddenly passed away while on duty.

I had the privilege of working with Dr Esele in the Seventh Parliament. I was also privileged to be his chairperson in the Teso Parliamentary Group. Dr Esele was no doubt an accomplished scientist. Hon. Kasamba has mentioned about his skills in breeding and improvement of the quality of lives of the people of Teso. It was Dr Esele who bred a millet variety called PESE; standing for the initials of his name Peter Esele. In Ateso, PESE means girl. This little girl PESE was a high-yielding variety associated definitely with Dr Esele. 

Dr Esele Peter was a practical farmer. He did research alright, but he also did farming. This year alone, it is known that he had put down 500 acres of cotton. Unfortunately, he has passed on and is unable to harvest this cotton, but I am sure that those who live on will be able to carry on with the good work that he started.

Dr Peter Esele had a very humble personality. Those of you who were here in the Seventh Parliament will bare me witness. Soft-spoken, gentle and not quarrelsome. I remember those times when tempers would flare during meetings of our association between I and the others with hot heads, Dr Esele would stand between us and say, “Cool down, we are after all brothers and sisters coming from the same region”. That was Dr Esele. 

Dr Esele was diplomatic in whatever he did, wherever he went while presenting scientific papers, and while submitting on the Floor of the House. He carried himself as a diplomat. No wonder we in the region miss so much of his humility. I knew Dr Peter Esele as a truthful and honest person. When the people of Bukedea decided in the primaries that he was not going to be their candidate on the NRM ticket, he stepped aside because for sure, he knew he could do other things even outside Parliament. 

This is a message that Dr Esele passes to all of us. We should know that however long you stay here, there will come a time when you will be out of this Parliament. Are you prepared to be out of this Parliament? As he sleeps in Kakere, where we placed him on the 31st of last month, he is asking each one of us to be hardworking and not only thinking of politics, but thinking about life after politics. Are you prepared for life after politics? 

I would like as I conclude, to appeal to the government. While we were laying Dr Esele to rest, it dawned on us that he left a very large family. This family has got members who have had an education. Unfortunately, just only a handful of the children are employed. I know hon. Kasamba has revealed here that he was a strong NRM cadre and somebody who diligently served this nation. There is an appeal by the children brought to us; “The political leadership of Teso do not forget us. Tell Government, Dr Esele afforded us education. Dr Esele was a nice father to us. Dr Esele has left just a few of us with jobs. We would like to carry on with his legacy. Please, if possible, find employment for some of us” —(Member timed out.)

7.08
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to, as I begin, beg you indulgence that you give me quite more time since I am one of the seconders.

The late Dr Esele comes from the constituency I represent and when we heard about his death on 28th, we quickly moved in and participated until we buried him on Monday. 

There is a lot I can talk about Dr Peter Esele, but the most important thing is the food security we now have in Teso, and I would say, even the whole of Uganda and beyond up to India is because of his innovativeness and because of him putting into practice what he learnt. He had a Doctorate of Philosophy and in nothing other than, seed production. His professional achievements are wide. I would like to read a few: 

•	He developed strategies for the control of blast disease in finger millet and grain mould disease in sorghum. 

•	He also developed and released sorghum varieties as said by the mover of this motion: Epuripuri finger millet and then PESE I and II finger millet.

•	He also assisted in the development and release of eight cotton varieties: BPA 85, 89,95,97,99 and SATU 85, 95, 97.

•	He assisted in the development and release of three groundnut varieties: Egola I, Serenut II, Serenut I. 

All those were the achievements of Dr Peter Esele. Indeed, now I believe Teso is the biggest producer of groundnuts in this country and we even export it to Kenya -(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Two more minutes.

MS AKOL: He also assisted in the development and release of two pigeon pea varieties, SEPI I and SEPI II. He facilitated and participated in technology transfer activities. 

He also had various awards. He was awarded membership of honour of Society of Agronomy, Texas University. He was also awarded an outstanding graduate student award, Texas University in 1991. He was awarded the Uganda Tea Authority award for best Bachelor of Science Agricultural Student of Makerere University and so many others. 

But I want to say this. I joined politics just before Dr Peter Esele left the Seventh Parliament. He is the one who mentored me together with the late Omongole Tom. It is because of Dr Peter Esele that I am here. He is the one who fought for the creation of Bukedea District. He fought for it in the Seventh Parliament, but unfortunately, he was not there to participate in that debate in the Eighth Parliament that actually created the districts here in Parliament. 

He was not a corrupt person; he was very honest; he never cheated and lived by his sweat as demonstrated by my previous colleagues who have talked about him. He was a big farmer, especially of cotton, and on 9th October, Independence Day, that was the last day he had time to talk to his people in Bukedea. He talked of creating a regional cotton farmers association for the Teso sub-region and said that he would put the headquarters in Bukedea. But he has not lived to do that.

I want to urge the minister responsible that in memory of Dr Esele, please establish this regional headquarters for that association he talked about of cotton farmers in Bukedea -(Member timed out.)

7.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg you to give me more time because the late hon. Esele worked with us and he died while on duty. I want to support the motion and I thank the Members for bringing this motion. People live and die, but what is most important and remembered is not how they lived, but rather what they contributed to society. 

Dr Esele John Peter worked as a civil servant and also as a researcher. While doing research - most of the improved varieties in agriculture are also very much associated with his work. The late Peter Esele became a leader and we met him in the 7th Parliament. He worked as a member of the agriculture committee and his technical advice was always taken seriously. 

His contribution to the Teso community on the NAADS programme will always be remembered because the Teso community was one of the early adoptors of improved varieties and new technologies. 

In the 7th Parliament, the late Dr Esele fought very hard to have Bukedea District, but unfortunately, when the district came, he was not elected, but he was not done –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Two more minutes.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: He continued working for Government and the people of Teso. He was absorbed in the manifesto committee, which is a planning committee in the President’s Office. Because of his knowledge and experience, he continued working and serving on the NARO Council. He also worked as the Chairman of Cotton Development Organisation. 

While serving as the Chairman of the Cotton Development Organisation, he made very significant achievements. Cotton was faced with a lot of challenges and very negative politics that was threatening the collapse of the industry, but I want to inform this House that during the term of Dr Esele, cotton production doubled from 60,000 bales to 140,000 bales, and we were moving to 220,000 during his time. 

Mr Speaker, time is not on my side, but allow me to thank the Teso Parliamentary Group for working together and giving him an honourable send off. Allow me to thank Parliament under your chairmanship for honouring the late Dr Esele. I also thank the President’s Office for all it did to give him honour during his burial and also support his bereaved family. 

I want to take this opportunity to say that we should emulate Dr Esele so that at a time when we are not here, people can talk about us. Contribution to the society is very important and the late Dr Esele contributed to society and in Uganda, he is on the record of achievement in the Ministry of Agriculture. The Ministry of Agriculture mourns him and we shall be remembering him for his contribution in science, especially crop science.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Member of Bukedea County, hon. Ekuma. I will give you four minutes as the area Member of Parliament.

7.18
MR GEORGE EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would really want to add my voice and support the motion that has been brought to the House in honour of the late Dr Peter Esele. I really want to say sincerely that death has robbed the people of Bukedea and Uganda at large of a man who can never be replaced. 

Dr Peter Esele was a hardworking man who provided landing for the people of Bukedea. We got a district status because of his hard work and cooperation, and no wonder today in this House, the motion has been moved by a friend who is from outside Teso. So, Dr Esele was a person who really cherished unity and making friendship in this country. 

The people of Bukedea and Uganda at large will remember Dr Esele for one thing: He fought to eliminate famine from Teso. The researchers have talked of the food varieties that he came up with and this really saved the people of Teso and Uganda at large because millet is being consumed in Kabale and every part of this country. Even Karamoja depended on Teso. I really want to thank the Government of Uganda who preferred to work hard and together with Dr Esele. The Government supported Dr Esele in his endeavours to promote his research. I thank the Government! (Applause)

Even after his demise, the Government still said this is a person who was a resource for this country and it worked very hard to ensure that he was given a decent burial. My thanks go to these other departments: NARO, CDO, NAADS, President’s Office and State House for the great contribution that they made towards the burial expenses and the decent send off of such a gallant son of Bukedea and Uganda. He was a gentleman who had wealth of knowledge, a person who really reflected erudite knowledge in research. 

Today, it is very difficult to get people who are committed to reading books. When I was at Makerere University Business School pursuing my MBA, I remember Prof. Munene saying that it is hard today to have people who will sit, read and research because everybody is rushing to get wealth. Time for reading and researching is not there for most people, but Dr Esele was one Ugandan who spared his time to read for the people of Uganda. I, therefore, want to thank this House through you, Mr Speaker, for finding this time to pay tribute to such a great man, researcher and humble son of Teso.

During the burial, the family made an appeal to the Government of Uganda that Dr Peter Esele has passed on but he has left about 18 children. Some are of school-going age while some have finished their education and they need jobs –(Interjections)- yes, the true friends of Dr Peter Esele should now come up and say that those who have completed their education should be given jobs - that is Government. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you. I will have hon. George Mike Mukula, hon. Jessica Alupo and finally, hon. Ssempijja. The timeframe remains. 

7.23
MR MICHAEL MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I rise to support the motion on this illustrious son of Uganda, who was an intellectual, great patriot and nationalist. Let me first of all take the opportunity to thank hon. Kasamba and the seconders of the motion for having found it appropriate to bring this motion to remember this great son of Uganda.

It is very rare that once in a while, the people in Uganda recall the efforts and energy that one has put into this country. The late hon. Esele was the Director of the Manifesto Implementation Committee, a directorate in State House. Let me take the opportunity to thank His Excellency the President, the Fountain of Honour, for having recognised the talents, skills and the intellectualism in Esele. 

It is important for us to note that he was a member of the central executive committee. The director of the manifesto committee is a very important person. The budget of Uganda is attributed and embodied into the workplan of the country. This is a man who worked selflessly to ensure that this manifesto was implemented to the letter.

I also want to take this opportunity to thank honourable colleagues who attended the burial of the late Peter Esele, and to thank the leadership of Bukedea District, the Members of Parliament and the entire group that attended the burial. We commend you for such a wonderful status you accorded to Dr Esele. 

I also want to take this opportunity to put it on record that the contribution from Government, particularly from His Excellency the President of Shs 5 million went a long way in giving a deserving send off to the late Peter Esele. 

Finally, I want to thank all the Members of Parliament who have stayed today to remember Dr Esele. It is important for us to note that at a time like this, one recognises the efforts one has put in this country. So, I must thank you honourable colleagues –(Member timed out.)
 
7.26
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Jessica Alupo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I want to thank hon. Mathias Kasamba for moving this motion, and also to say that I stand by him in support of the motion. The late Dr Esele served this Government in different capacities as it has already been highlighted. For example, he was the Director of Serere Research Station at one time. He was also a key technical person in NAADS. He also served this Government in the Seventh Parliament and so on.

Therefore, there is no doubt that Government is in line with the movers of the motion. I would, however, like to restrict myself to one of the very key qualities of the late Dr Esele, and that is having been a very intelligent man, a nationalist, soft-spoken, and simple. Hon. Ruhindi was whispering to me a while ago that when he was in the Seventh Parliament together with Dr Esele, he was a darling to all. 

I admired Dr Esele on the aspect of being a practical person – (Member timed out.)

7.28
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion to recognise and pay tribute to Dr Esele John Peter. I interacted with the late when he was a Member of the Seventh Parliament. The Parliamentary Committee on Agriculture had visited Masaka and they spent three days in my district. Then I realised that Dr Esele had a lot of enthusiasm and he really wanted to develop agriculture in this country.

I am also encouraged by the attributes mentioned by the mover and others who have talked well about the late, especially his efforts in research and living by example. Many people in this country do not live by example. This man was a researcher and an agriculturalist, but he was also practicing agriculture on his farm. 

We also want to remember him because of all that he has done in the agricultural sector –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Members. That brings us to a close of the debate on this motion. I put the question to the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay glowing tribute to late Dr Esele John Peter. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Hon. Members, I want to thank you very much for enduring up to this time and ensuring that we go a long way in finishing the business that was put before us today. 

Hon. Members, we have deferred two motions; an additional two motions were not presented because the mover was stuck in a meeting of the Parliamentary Commission, so he could not be here to move the motion - the one relating to the IPU. But of particular interest is the motion on maternal mortality and other incidental matters that on the advice of Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, who is standing in as the Leader of Government Business, has been deferred. 

I had said at the beginning that we would defer this matter, but also not without interfering with the working of the Executive. So, some preliminary steps should be taken by the Executive to make sure that some remedial actions are taken so that by the time we come to debate this motion later, it is a comprehensive debate that ends up with conclusions on this pertinent issue so that we do not have to debate and say, “We are going to come back with a statement after three days or a week”. It should be a complete debate that should end with a way forward that Parliament will pronounce itself on. That will be to the great gratitude of the mothers who are here and those who left knowing that their matter had been deferred. Some of them were not very happy. In fact, most of them were not happy, but it is in their interest that this matter is given a comprehensive treatment and it is in that spirit that we have agreed to defer this debate to when Parliament resumes. 

I am also directing that Clerk puts this matter on the first items of the Order Paper when House resumes on the date I am going to announce very soon. 

The other motion is on the establishment of the National Salaries and Remuneration Commission, which has also been deferred without presentation and debate. These two motions will receive priority when the House resumes.

Hon. Members, we said that by close of business today, we would have tasked our committees with a lot of work. And a short break would allow them to complete this work so that by the time we resume, Parliament will have a lot of work to do and that would be good. 

The Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline has to handle the amendments to the rules and also the matter that was referred to them by the House yesterday. 

The Committee on National Economy has to handle all the loan requests and be ready to present the motions back to Parliament when the House resumes. They have the opportunity to work on this without working on anything else and, therefore, focusing their time on it.

We also have the ad hoc committee on energy - the issue of electricity. Their term is also coming to a close. They should be preparing the report so that when the House resumes, these matters are ready for debate.

I also talked about reports from delegations which have represented Uganda - represented this Parliament, outside this country.

We also talked about the issue of Bills. As Parliament, we have pronounced ourselves that we are taking over those Bills. Some of them will require reprinting. We urge the government to use these two weeks to have those Bills ready. The ones they consider very urgent be reprinted and ready for re-introduction to Parliament so that those ones which can proceed without having to be reprinted can go ahead and receive the decision of this House as appropriate.

I also talked about the budget orientation workshops, which are going to be organised very soon so that we avoid the difficulties we faced during the last budget cycle.

Hon. Members, I have now received information that the burial of Prof. Nabudere has been fixed for Tuesday at 10.00 a.m. So, as I said earlier, let us echo what we said here by showing a big presence to escort and send off a son of Uganda, whom we have all recognised has made great contributions to this country.

House adjourned to Tuesday, 29th of November at 2.00 p.m.

(House rose at 7.36 p.m. and was adjourned until Tuesday, 29 November 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)

