Tuesday 14th November, 2000

Parliament met at 2.47 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

 (The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, on your behalf, I want to welcome back our colleague, Omodi Okot, who has been away. I think he was indisposed –(Interjections)- I am welcoming hon. Omodi Okot. I thought you knew that he was a bit sick. I thought you were informed.

MR. OMODI OKOT: Mr. Speaker, some Members may not have known that when I was sick, you took trouble to come and see me in my sick bed.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, I think you have noticed item number three on the Order Paper. It appears that for technical reasons, we have not been able to dispose of this particular Bill. I now appeal to you to put in effort and we remove the technical obstacle that has hindered us, so that tomorrow we dispose of this matter. I will not deal with it now. I will proceed to item number five.

MR. PINTO: Mr. Speaker, before you go to that item I would like to raise a point of procedure. You recall that there was a Committee dealing with matters relating to the NEC Pharmaceuticals. I was a member of that Committee. We finished our report, and I have been pestering the chairman because that report has not been presented to Parliament. The chairman informs me that the Committee did its work and that report has not been presented. Could I seek your guidance as to when such an important matter, which even interrupted some business of Parliament, is going to be brought and debated in this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I may not be in position to give you a positive answer, but I understand the Business and Welfare Committee met some time last week, and I think the chairman of the Committee is also a member of that Committee. I do not know whether this issue came up.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As the Member has said, we finished this report about two months ago. I presented it to the Clerk. I have contacted the Clerk a few times, urging him to let us present this report immediately after the budget, and he has been promising to put it on the order paper. Unfortunately, I was not able to attend the Business and Welfare Committee meeting, because I was attending a Sessional Committee meeting, but I understand that it never took place. So, the meeting has not taken place.  

MR. NYAI: Welcome back, Mr. Speaker. It is true that a meeting of the Business and Welfare Committee of this House was called. One day before that meeting was to take place another notice was given to postpone it to a later date to which Members would be informed. I am yet to be informed, as a member of that Committee, but the meeting never took place.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Pinto, I can only say that I will take up the matter and in due course we will be informed what to do with the report.  

MR. PINTO: I am grateful to you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for granting me the opportunity to present a point of procedure. For many months now, this House has been fed with items on the order paper menu, which are a semblance of what we are seeing today. Items like the Political Organisations Bill, 1999 and the Parliamentary Elections Bill, 1998 have been commonplace on the order paper. I would like to get assurance from the leader of Government business that what we are seeing here will be heeded to, because we have been taken for a ride for many months.  This thing has been happening from time to time and there has never been any serious implementation in scientific terms.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I do not think this will require assurance from the Government. This is business for the House. You get the assurance from the Chair. If we finish the two Bills pending, one which has been hindered by technicalities, and if we finish this one also, you will see that what we have been putting on the order papers is not just to deceive you, but it is something concrete. Be assured we shall deal with the matter.  

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS BILL, 2000

(Debate continued)

MR.OMODI OKOT (Kole County, Apac): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for great work done, but I have one or two reservations.  

If the law to be enacted from this Bill is also to be used for the forthcoming presidential elections, then the time is unfair for other candidates, except the incumbent. I am saying this because it puts the incumbent at an unfair advantage over other contestants. In the first place, the President himself is part of the process of making the law, so for that matter he is already at an advantage. He knows what the law is likely to be, so he can get prepared much earlier than the other contestants can. 

Some of the requirements in this law are to his advantage. The requirement of 100 voters from two thirds of the districts in the country is not a problem to him.  In the first place, he has participated greatly in creating some of these districts. About two thirds and more of the 50 districts in Uganda today were created during the time he has been President of this country.  So, that alone places him at a much greater advantage to other contestants. 

A close study of political instability in this country shows that political chaos in this country is attributed to elections. Political chaos in this country is mainly attributed to election malpractice. Let us look at examples. When Amin overthrew the Obote 1 Government, he gave 18 reasons as to why he overthrew that elected Government. One of the strong reasons was election malpractice. When NRA decided to go to the bush, an act whose consequences we very well know, it was also blamed on election malpractice. I am only saying that it is important for us to pay particular attention to matters pertaining to elections. It is very important, Mr. Speaker.

Having said all that, I would like to say something about the nomination fee -(Interruption)

MR. PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I do not want to interrupt my colleague, but there is a statement that has just been made, which I am trying to understand. The statement was on the unfairness in the relationship between the new districts and the former districts and how that has constituted an advantage. What alternative could he suggest, because this is a reality? Progressively more new districts are created, but he has left it hanging. I have not quite understood the point my colleague wanted to state. Could you assist me understand this please.

MR. OMODI OKOT: It is true that I have to make this clear to my colleague. The perception people have about some of these districts that are emerging now, appears to be political. And this is true, because their pronouncements, in some cases, are made at rallies. What else do you need to hear about that! This happened in a place yet to be made a district, and I stand to be corrected. When the President addressed a rally in Kaberamaido -(Interruption)

MR.ERESU: I would like to inform the speaker on the Floor that the demand for the district of Kaberamaido was not only made at the rally and responded to at the rally, but it is a demand that had been there for 22 years.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. Member for giving way, and I welcome him back from hospital. The fact that a current President serves and there is development taking place may be to his advantage or otherwise to his disadvantage, if development has not taken place. So, because districts have been created, roads have been made, schools have been built, hospitals have been attended to, democracy has been ushered into the country, decentralisation has taken place, it will not necessarily make the President win elections.

MR.ONGOM: Is hon. Karuhanga in order to put words into the Member’s mouth, when he did not mention all those things in his speech?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I think this was started by hon. Pinto, who did not appreciate the point that hon. Omodi Okot was making, that the President is more conversant with the districts that have been created.   Hon. Karuhanga was merely expanding on what has been said.

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would just like to give some information from the Constitution on this matter of creating districts. Article 177 reads as follows:
“(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, for the purposes of local government, Uganda shall be divided into the districts referred to in clause (2) of article 5 of this Constitution.  

(2) The districts referred to in clause (1) of this article shall be taken to have been divided into the lower local government units which existed immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution.”   

Article 179 of the Constitution reads as follows: 
“(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may – 
    (a) alter the boundaries of the districts; and  
    (b) create new districts.”  

So, it says “Parliament”, so that when the proposals come here we can either pass them or reject them. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.PINTO:  Mr. Speaker, I wish to seek clarification from the hon. Minister who has volunteered this constitutional information. While I appreciate what he has said, I still remain in doubt as to what criteria Parliament uses in determining new districts. I have asked this question six times and the Minister -(Interjection) 
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, this is incidental, we are not dealing with a Motion of creating new districts. It only came from hon. Omodi Okot that districts are being created. Maybe when such a Motion comes before us, is when you can ask about the criteria of determining new districts.  

MR.OMODI OKOT: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Allow me to say that the subject of this Motion is referring to the conditions and the requirements which a candidate should go through. Let us make reference to such factors that are contained in the main Bill.  

Let me say something about nomination fee. I would like, once again -(Interruption) 

MR.KUTESA: Mr. Speaker, I would like some clarification from the hon. Member on the previous point, before he moves on to his next point. I thought the main point he was making was that the current Bill gives undue advantage to an incumbent. He was saying that the incumbent goes round the country and does things in the name of the presidency. 

I want him to see if there is any parallel between an incumbent President and an incumbent Member of Parliament, who has been doing the same for all these fives years. And I know my good Friend, Omodi Okot, has been traversing his constituency building schools, donating balls, and making promises for these five years.  Does he really think that he has taken undue advantage of anybody who is going to challenge him in future? Should the law, therefore, be made so that as soon as you are elected, you do nothing until the time for campaigning with the other people who want to contest? Should you begin doing something in your constituency at that time, so that you have a level playing field, even as a Member of Parliament?

MR.OMODI OKOT: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After all that my hon. Friend has said, I want to remind him of one thing; whatever good things or whatever bad things happen in a given Government, as of now, all thanks and attribute goes to one man, the President. It is difficult for me to claim more than that, just as it is difficult for him to claim more than he expects to get as a Member of Parliament.  

I want now to proceed on the question of nomination fee.  Allow me to thank the Committee for seeing it wise to lower the fee from 8,000,000/= to 2,000,000/=. It would have been very unfortunate, because it would have barred people who could not afford and yet they may be capable.  Personally  –(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the Bill states a fee of eight million. The Committee has only made its recommendation. We do not know whether the recommendation by the Committee will be adopted or not. So, take it that the Bill says eight million shillings.

MR.OMODI OKOT: I would like to observe that it would be proper for the figure to be brought even much lower than two million shillings. Can I get anyone here to prove to us that at the end of every month he has a saving which is a million or more than a million?  There may be a few here and there, but I know quite a number who cannot. An amount as big as two million may, in one way or the other, prompt somebody who wants to contest to become corrupt here and there, in order to raise money, especially when such persons still hold public offices.  So, I think it will be reasonable for us to create a situation where as many people as possible can willingly enter the contest without any bias.  

Allow me to talk about a candidate who fails to get 20 percent of the votes cast and he loses his nomination fee. I think this is also unfair. 20 percent is a very big proportion. Sometimes in an election where there are three or four people competing, 20 percent may enable you to win an election. So, I think that instead of 20 percent we come down to 10 percent, so that when a candidate –(Interruption)

MR.ERESU: Mr. Speaker, I seek clarification from the Member holding the Floor. He has made a very serious statement with respect to savings of Members of Parliament. As far as I know, our salary is less than one million. He asked us whether, by the end of the month, we are able to save at least one million. I ask him to clarify as to where I would get that money, which is above my salary, to save.

MR.OMODI OKOT: Mr. Speaker, if I got the hon. Member correct, I want to thank him very much for supporting me. He has supported me in my claim that it is very difficult to get a Member of Parliament who saves up to one million shillings in a month - (Interjections)- No, not contesting or standing for President. I am just saying it is difficult to get two million shillings in a month. So, if it is difficult for me, who gets allowance every now and then, I do not know what the situation is for somebody in the village or somebody whose earning may depend on a very unreliable source. Let me now talk about something –(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have taken a lot of our time.  Please wind up.

MR.OMODI OKOT: I will conclude quickly. In the last presidential election there were three candidates, and the method of canvassing for votes was on individual merit. One was going the other way, and the other one was this way and so on and so forth. I am aware here that this same Committee is coming up with a proposal that campaigning for parliamentary elections will be made on individual merit.  

I am only saying that, to elect one man and call him ‘His Excellency’ and make him citizen number one, make his wife first lady, make his son first son and so on, makes him a very important person. I am of the opinion, therefore, that the forthcoming presidential campaign be made on a joint front. The reason is because there is a lot of buying going on here, and a lot of envelopes are flying. If these gentlemen are forced to campaign together by the law, it will be very difficult for envelopes to fly around.  

I will say this, although it may annoy some people.  There are certain physical traits which can easily be distinguished on me and on anybody else. If these gentlemen are together, even if they are nine or ten, it will be very appropriate and easy for the electorate to look at them, compare, and make a choice. Stories have it that in 1984 –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please wind up. You have taken very long!

MR.OMODI OKOTI: Okay. In 1984, at the republican primaries, a candidate lost because he appeared so ugly in a group of contestants. So, it will provide voters an opportunity to make a choice and decide on such a choice.  

As I conclude, I would like to say that campaigns conducted in a manner conducive to the law will produce the right choice. In a situation where one, two or three or five people begin campaigns much earlier than others, this leads to corruption, which produces a result that is not reliable. So, if it were possible, we should forward the point that election campaigns must begin at the right time for everybody. I support the Motion. 

MR.NSUBUGA NSAMBU (Makindye West Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Hon. Members, I have been asked to deliver to you a message to thank the Committee, which considered this Bill, but at the same time draw the attention of the Committee Members to some issues. The people of Makindye West consider clause 23 (6), (7) and (8) as sections that create benefits to the incumbent President only. These are sections, which create offences against agents and contestants, and try to control their language and at the same time net out very heavy punishments. With all that, we very well know that the incumbent President, constitutionally, cannot be sued.  So, you will find that only the new contestants will be the ones subjected to the provisions of that section. 

The punishments are so harsh! I can only compare them to those that chairman Muwanga provided in the other elections. These campaigns are like two co-wives, each one criticising the other in front of their husband. We do not want to be restricted. The accusations that are going to be made are far reaching, but the Committee is now bringing in this section to protect the Government and its incumbent President from being criticised! I can only imagine if what has been mentioned by Col. Besigye was spoken at a campaign rally, by now Col. Besigye would not be competing any more, because he would be appearing in courts of law!  

Secondly, clause 24 also deals with sectarianism. I really hate this, because I escaped going to Luzira because of these sectarian systems. We are working on sectarianism, but those who feel pinched want to arrest us, just because we have said that such and such a group is getting a lion’s share. The question of sectarianism is in-born in us, and it is not our fault. Uganda is a small country, but you will find so many tribes and everybody who gets into power wants to consider the people of his own tribe. So, the question of tribalism, sectarianism or even religion must not appear in this Act. This is how we shall manage to straighten the people who undertake to stand as presidents.  

I have also considered the question of the nomination fees to be paid. I consider trotting the whole of Uganda and campaigning in a general election for presidency is not a joke. It is so painful and tiresome. I believe that a man who gets 5 percent should be able to recover his deposits, considering what he does and problems he goes through while campaigning. I would also like to see this man not only protected at the site of campaigning, but also protection should be given to him throughout the campaign period. That is how we shall avoid being stoned. I remember in the last election one of the campaigners was stoned, but if there were some people protecting him, probably this would have been avoided.

The number of people required to nominate a candidate is unnecessarily big. I would like it reduced –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nsubuga Nsambu, currently we are dealing with the Bill, we are not dealing with the Constitution. Isn’t the number in the Constitution? Can we really deal with it when we are dealing with this Bill?  

MR.NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  You cannot cry until you are hit. This means that we have seen the abuse. And having seen a precedent that the Constitution can be amended, this is the only time I have to speak about it. It is up to the Members of Parliament to see whether it is not justified. All I am saying is that 100 is really too big, it should be 50 –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nsambu, I only raised this because, if it is a constitutional requirement that you have to have 100 voters from each district, it is futile to raise it when you are dealing with a Presidential Elections Bill. We cannot deal with that issue, but I think your observation is taken.

MR.NSUBUGA-NSAMBU: Mr. Speaker, lastly, this is a message from Makindye. The people of Makindye have learnt that there is an inquiry, which is going to be instituted, on the utterances of Col. Besigye, and that a certain Ugandan Judge has been appointed to head it. The people of Makindye are saying that they are not happy with that appointment. They would prefer to get a Judge from outside Uganda. This is a serious matter, and it must be considered by somebody who is not a civil servant in the Ugandan Government. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR.KYEMBA HENRY (Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you very much indeed, Mr. Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to say something on this very important Bill for our country.  

This is a very important Bill before this House, and it is interesting that we are debating it at the same time when one of the world’s greatest democracies can hardly find a way of electing a President without waiting a lot for the results. 

This is a very important Bill for the country and for this House. I want to confine my comments basically to three aspects, transparency, fees or commercialisation of the exercise, and the time for campaign.  

If we are serious, and I know we are, we must be certain that the Bill we are passing in this House is as transparent as we can possibly make it, so that people of Uganda accept the results. If we fail in anyway in convincing the people of Uganda that the Bill we are passing in this House is not transparent, then we have a problem. 

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Committee for the time they took to examine the various clauses and to come up with some proposals, which are somewhat different from what is contained in the original Bill. I say this because many of the elections that are held in various places are subject to all sorts of litigation, and the only beneficiaries are basically the lawyers who will take these matters to court. I hope this Parliament will be able to come up with a law that is able to deal with the matters of choice, so that the ordinary person in the countryside in Uganda can be assisted. With such a law, if the ordinary person wants to choose Candidate A, he will be able to do so with the least fuss.  

The issue of fees for candidates has been mentioned time and again, both for the President and for Members of Parliament. I think it is true that for any person to stand for elective office, he should be able to convince the electorate of his seriousness. On that basis, I would be inclined to agree with the general principle that it is necessary for the candidates to show seriousness by paying a certain deposit for him to undertake the exercise. The problem is for us to decide what the most optimum fee, which would be considered serious for a candidate, could be. 

This country is already suffering from the commercialisation of the electoral process. We know it, whether we want to believe it or not. It is a matter, which many candidates who go in for elective office suffer from. I would like to urge my colleagues to give serious consideration to the right amount that we need to set in our statute books, so that people do not just stand because of their wealth. 

Certainly if you are going to be President of a country, eight million is chicken feed. Obviously, it is chicken feed if you consider yourself to be the President of a country. But is it right for we as Members of Parliament to say that you must put in some unrefundable eight million shillings to show your seriousness? Personally, I do not think so. We can certainly put it in the statute books that you give in eight million shillings. I am sure that is small change for a head of state. If he does not have it, he will recover it when the time comes. 

I definitely would like to appeal to my colleagues on this. Maybe the two million may be a bit too low, but I am definitely against any suggestion that the figure should be so high as to make it prohibitive for the candidates. We should try and make sure it is not punitive. It should just be an indication of the seriousness of the candidate, so that we move forward. On that basis, I would definitely go in for a reduction of the eight million shillings maybe to five million shillings, if not less.  

My third point is in connection with the time for campaigns. Hon. Members, the time for campaigning is really supposed to be the tail end of anyone’s campaign strategy. If anyone of us is waiting for the elections to be announced to start a campaign, I think you have already lost. Campaigning is a matter which goes on over a period of time. You move around to be seen and heard, but to wait for an election campaign only for you to be known in various districts of Uganda, when you want to be the President of the country, I think, is a problem for you already.  

We only know too well that campaigns are extremely rigorous exercises. We have lost hon. Members, who aspired to be Members of this House, although we cannot say that their demise was associated only with election campaigns. We know that an election campaign can definitely kill, and I would be one of those who would be cautious about advising long campaigns for this kind of election. Elections are terribly expensive, so the energy must be gathered. I do not think it is fair for us to just say that because Henry wants to be known, we must give him three months or six months, and he will be happy. I think we must consider the question of cost and the question of wear and tear of the individual in these campaigns. I would, therefore, go along with those who advise us that the election campaigns must be really restricted to manageable lengths, rather than extend them any further. We already know that the –(Interruption)

MR.KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank hon. Kyemba for giving way. You have persistently and consistently kept on saying manageable times and the like, would you be specific enough and let us know what you have in mind. You are not helping Members of Parliament by dodging what you want to say.  Thank you.

MR.KYEMBA: Thank you very much, hon. colleague, I am not avoiding anything, in fact, what I am trying to do is to get a consensus with my colleagues on this matter.  Besides, there have been suggestions that we should extend the campaigns to three months, I am definitely not for that, I am for less. When the time comes, we will make some proposals on the Floor of the House.  

Lastly, I would like to say that our Electoral Commission is working under extremely difficult conditions. I do not know how they can possibly get this election in place with the kind of timetable that we have. We are now debating the law and the Constitution provided that by February or March we must have had an election. Really, it is difficult, first of all, to debate the law having in mind the candidates that are going to stand. Secondly, there is the physical problem of putting things in place for the election, including voter registration and identity cards. These are matters, which hon. Members must accept, will need to be addressed as a matter of urgency, so that we can have a credible election where we have fewer complaints and that sort of thing. 
I wish to conclude, Mr. Speaker, and thank you for giving me the Floor.

MR.LUKYAMUZI KEN (Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am going to be very specific in my analysis of the report, and I will concentrate on campaigning and the presidency as an institution.  

Since the Presidential Elections Act of 1996, have we made any progress in regard to the flaws, which were registered as a result of those elections? It is not enough to simply say that whenever there is a problem when you go in for an election, you must necessarily solve that problem. We should have taken a leaf from the research department of the Electoral Commission, to learn what can be done in regard to the flaws that were registered or associated to the 1996 presidential elections.  

One such aspect was the public claim that the register was inflated in a number of constituencies. If that is true, what has the Electoral Commission done to ensure that the inflation of the register is minimised? I put that to the Minister of Justice as a challenge and a very important challenge. 

The people of Lubaga South, who I consulted over the weekend, were of the view that if we are seriously addressing the parliamentary and presidential elections, the three cardinal electoral Bills should have been discussed coherently, namely the Political Organisation’s Bill, the Parliamentary Elections Bill and this one. The two should have come in first before we tackled the Presidential Elections Bill. This is the vision of the people of Lubaga, and I feel proud to present it now.  

I would like to quote –(Interruption)- I can only give in to a clarification point if I am guaranteed replacement of time –(Interruption)

MR.KUTESA: Mr. Speaker, it is not his right to decide to accept it or not. I would like clarification from the hon. Member holding the Floor. He says that the people of Lubaga, whom he consulted last weekend, instructed him to come here and say that they would have wanted these three Bills to be discussed coherently. Now, he is either misquoting the people of Lubaga South or he has not fully told them about our procedure here in this House, because it is impossible, to my understanding, to discuss any two Bills coherently. So, I would like to understand from hon. Lukyamuzi whether he actually thinks it is possible to discuss these Bills coherently, which, according to our procedure, is impossible or whether we have difficulty in understanding the word ‘coherent’?

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. I do not think hon. Kutesa has a right to think for the people of Lubaga South. But just to assist him understand what the people of Lubaga South were saying, in a nut-shell, they were saying that the Political Organisations Bill and the Parliamentary Elections Bill should have come before the Presidential Elections Bill.  

I would like to specifically quote part of recommendation number 2 on page 4 of the report:
“The committee also recommends that a presidential aspirant should be allowed to go out to consult and prepare for nomination twelve months before the nomination day or days” 

That statement perturbs me. Why recommend something that is not practically possible. To me that is a nightmare. When someone dreams, and when the dreams are so unrealistic, the dreamer may collapse in his sleep. So, certainly we should address a recommendation that is practically possible –(Interruption)

MR.OGALO: Mr. Speaker, could I just give some clarification to hon. Lukyamuzi. This recommendation is in respect of future elections. It is clear in the report that it is not for the elections of 2001.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but the question really is, do you have to legislate for me if I intend to contest in a year’s time? Do you have to legislate for me before I start my consultations? Do I have to be permitted by a specific law to do that? We are dealing with candidates who are standing for elections. We actually have nothing to do with a person who has not been nominated.

MR.OGALO: Yes, Mr. Speaker. The Committee thought that, if we say it is only after 60 days that you can go out to campaign, if you have not exposed yourself to the country, you may not be well known in order to contest as a candidate. In the past we have had pronouncements from the Electoral Commission that unless you are nominated you cannot go out and either consult or canvass for votes. So, what we were trying to do here was to give an intending candidate - that is why we have called him an aspirant – at least a legal basis by which he can have a right to go out and consult the public. This is instead of limiting to him only to the few months, like in the present one. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the question is, if I have not gone to the Electoral Commission, do they really have powers over my private consultation?

MR.OGALO: Mr. Speaker, to us they do not, but the problem seems to be that when the Electoral Commission says so, the police follow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, that is a different matter.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Indeed, Mr. Speaker, the police follow. No independent presidential candidate can presently move to Mbarara or Kitgum and have a campaign for the presidency. The question is, why? I put it to the chairperson that if people who are intending to contest for the presidency - other than President Museveni - have not utilised the recommended 12 months, then it goes without saying that there is a flaw, there is a gap which should have been bridged. If you tell us that those who intend to contest in later elections will make use of the 12 months, what about those who intend to stand today? What about the Sebagalas, the Besigyes, and those other people who are not Museveni? –(Interjections)- Mr. Speaker, I beg you to ensure that I am not interrupted, because my time is running out.  

Another very important aspect, which I want this august House to observe, is with regard to the candidates’ meetings. Is the vision of the presidential candidates’ meetings realistic? If the parliamentary candidates’ meetings have proved difficult to implement in some areas, what about the vision for the presidential candidates’ meetings? How much machinery does the Electoral Commission have, to ensure that such meetings can take place? Was the Electoral Commission dreaming about a reality that could take place in the years ahead?  Can we implement that assertion? We may not be able to implement that. 

So, I strongly recommend that we open avenues for private campaigning for individual presidential candidates as much as possible. If anything, from now onwards the Sebagalas, the Semwogereres, the Lukyamuzis should feel the campaigns for presidency. I do not see why you put in place limitations that are going to cause chaos in our country –(Interjection) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You mean you are declaring yourself a presidential candidate?

MR.LUKYAMUZI: There are possibilities that I may contest -(Laughter)- There are possibilities.

One of the Members, who spoke earlier than me, made some comment on the need to take action on the incumbency.  The kind of action that I want taken on the incumbency is not necessarily punitive. Much as the incumbent President can freely rotate in the country and campaign, certainly when the time for serious campaigning comes, certain action should be taken to ensure that he does not use up all the opportunities that would have also been accorded to the rest of his colleagues. 

Let us be practical, this Bill has recommended that the presidential candidates shall make use of the Government owned media. What attractive Government media do we have today? If we go by realism, the FM radios and private T.Vs have almost taken over from what used to be popularly known as ‘Government media’. Today if you have money and you to advertise, you can be attended to by the private media at a much faster and meaningful rate than Radio Uganda or U.T.V. If you have very little money, that is when you go to UTV or Star Radio. But to be serious, as a person who regularly carries out meetings in my constituency, even if I put only one announcement on CBS (Radio Buganda), the people of Lubaga South will have heard in that week. And the money I will have spent on that announcement would be spent for five announcements to be broadcast on Star Radio. 

So, the Committee should have understood that much as they recommended that the candidates can use Government owned media, the real situation is that, what we call Government media today, does not sale at all. They do not have capacity to reach the people, so let us be serious.  There is need for the Committee to devise ways and means through which the private media should be subsidised to ensure that it gives publicity to the candidates. The times of vesting in Radio Uganda and UTV are long gone; their publicity is no longer there. Times have changed, and we must think according to the changes in the offing. Clause 23(2) should therefore be squashed, because the kind of media we are talking about is none existent.  

During my weekend consultation, the people of Lubaga South told me that, since Uganda has gone through very turbulent times, there is need to attract those intending presidential candidates if we want to groom leadership. They proposed a nomination fee of 1,000,000/= as opposed to the Shs. 8,000,000 proposed in the Bill, so that the likes of poor Lukyamuzi and others can stand.

I would like to challenge the Committee on this very important point. After noting that the candidates’ meetings cannot operate under the presidential elections, what do we do next? After making sure that the presidential candidates’ meetings cannot work, because they are also about to fail to work at parliamentary level, it goes without saying that we should come out with a new programme. We should come up with something capable of enabling the individual presidential candidates’ tours to the 700 gombololas take place without the interference from the authority or the Executive. 

According to the Bill, the candidate is free to go and campaign, but he is obliged to inform the Electoral Commission and then the police. If I have qualified as a presidential candidate, and I have my security and everything, and I know that we have only 60 days to the elections, why should I not freely move and when I reach Rukungiri I just inform the police there. Why create limitations of no necessity? I have come to shade light over this practice, so that we do not go back into a practice that has failed in our past.

According to the present law, since competitors are going to compete on individual merit, every individual contender, from today onwards, should be free to go to Rukungiri, to Kitgum, and just inform the Police so that he starts talking to the electorate. Limitations should be laid off the course if this country is going to pave way for a future that is not contestable.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR.NYAI DICK (Ayivu County, Arua): Mr. Speaker, allow me to pay tribute to the Committee for a very good job done.   It would be regrettable if this Parliament were to pass a Bill that is more of a political document than a technical handbook which the Electoral Commission can use for supervising and superintending our elections. It is in this vein that I wish to add my voice to what hon. Nsubuga Nsambu has said. 

I find it strange that this Bill should contain penalties against persons who are standing for the highest elective office in our nation. These are people who want to be role models for the rest of Ugandans. It should, therefore, be incumbent on them to set good examples to everybody and restrain their language. Some of them who are used to having very robust language will tone it down. It is gentleman and ladies contesting, so they should not be reined in by the threat of penalties or fines or other things. I believe that my colleagues will understand that in this light, we should trust the credibility of the persons who want to lead us. In Ayivu, -  (Interruption)  

MR.KUTESA: Mr. Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity, and I also thank hon. Dick Nyai for giving way. My understanding is that penalties only apply to those who breach the law. If these eminent Ugandans are going to run for presidency, the highest office, and the penalties are in place and they do not breach the laws, these penalties will not be applied to them. 

So, I would like to understand from hon. Dick Nyai whether he would rather have no penalties at all and simply believe and trust in the goodness of these eminent persons, because some of them are so ‘eminent’ that they have had to serve sentences elsewhere. What is he suggesting? Is he saying that we should not put anything in the law to guard against a possible breach of rules, or would he rather we have these penalties? Since these eminent people are so good and are unlikely to breach the law, then these penalties will not apply to them. I cannot understand hon. Dick Nyai’s fear of having penalties in place and yet we have wonderful people running in these elections for the highest office.

MR.NYAI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think hon. Sam Kutesa has made my work much easier, because the penalties of slander and things like that are civil cases and are already provided for in our Penal Code. You do not need to introduce them into this Bill to intimidate the other candidates, whereas the incumbent is immune from prosecution, from slander and things like that because he is the President. So, for the duration of the presidential elections, the candidates should all enjoy the same immunity as the incumbent President.  I think it is only fair, because I know, and most of us here know, that His Excellency the President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, at times also uses very robust language. Ordinarily I would say he is slandering other people, but you cannot take him to court! So, they should be equal. It is on that line that I would like to persuade my colleagues to remove the penalties from this Bill.

I do not know what this Parliament is trying to do. We are being ruled under the Movement Act, which stipulates that all Ugandans over 18 are members of the Movement. The Constitution says that any Ugandan, who is above the age of 35 years, and is eligible to be a Member of Parliament (that is he has an ‘A’ Level certificate or its equivalent) is allowed to stand for the presidency of this nation, but now we introduce a money qualification! Are we saying that the poor should not rule Uganda? Are we saying that even if somebody is very brilliant, but he cannot raise the two million, then Uganda should lose the benefit of such a wonderful person?  

I find the issue of 2/= million or 8/= million absolutely ludicrous! I find it ridiculous for a simple reason. You ask me to give a deposit of 2/= million, and when I am duly nominated, you then go ahead, out of taxpayers money, to buy me expensive cars, give me escorts, give me fuel, and the total amount is in excess of 100/= million.   What are you asking the 2/= million for? Why do we not say that any Ugandan who is a good Movement person and he has individual merit, which is not going to divide this country, can stand. Forget your 2/= million!

The second paragraph on page 4 of the report reads as follows: 
“The Committee observed that the Bill is silent on this important aspect of the Presidential Elections. Where there are many candidates, it is highly likely that a second election may have to be held.”  

Is it the wish of this Parliament and of the authors of this Bill that there should not be many candidates for presidency and that the presidency is such a bad thing that not many people want to aspire for it? I do not believe so. I believe that it is healthy in a nation like this for many people to offer themselves and compete, unlike those who think that they can be rude and abusive.  

Hon. Kutesa, I can assure you of a tradition we have in Ayivu. If two of us are wooing one girl and you go to that girl to abuse Dick Nyai every day, and everyday Dick Nyai also goes to that girl to tell her what he wants to do for her, in the end Dick Nyai will marry her, you will not marry her. The issue of insult is actually counterproductive. I believe, therefore, that it would be healthy for us to have many candidates, and let us agree to put in this Bill that when none of them gets 50 plus one –(Interruption)

MR.WANDERA OGALO: May I inform hon. Dick Nyai that in our amendments we actually provided for that procedure. So, even if there are seven or ten, you can have a re-run. 

MR.NYAI: I thank you, Mr. chairman. I am heartened by that, and I hope we shall adopt it. If there is a re-run, that re-run must also establish a clear 50 plus one. I believe we shall go a long way in doing this. 

Finally, I would like to comment on a very simple thing, and this is about the third very important Bill, which is being brought too close to the period. We knew that a Bill like this would come the moment we promulgated the new Constitution in 1995. It is a pity that we are to do this like the referendum, which has just gone off, and then people are forced into choosing how a president is going to behave. We are going to do civic education, we have to do everything in a rush, and it is a pity. I hope that it will not be repeated. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR. MALLINGA STEVEN (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would have felt much happier if at the time we are discussing this Bill, we already had the Political Organisations Bill in place, so that we can tell which way the country is going politically and then we can debate about electing a president. However, we cannot help it, we have to go ahead and talk about this Bill.  

I consider this to be an extremely important Bill, so we should not rush it. We should digest it because the future of this country depends on who is going to be the leader. We have seen how bad leadership in the past has driven this country to the bottom just because we did not have the power to remove or we did not elect such presidents. And we had nothing in place to protect the population against such, I would call, incompetent presidents. 

I think it is important that the people of this country be given enough time to listen to the candidates and understand what their policies are before they can make up their minds to elect such people to lead the country.  Sixty days is just not even enough time for a candidate to cover this country.  I believe there should be another system. Those who aspire to be president should have the freedom to tour the country and talk to groups for a year, and then there should be serious presidential campaigns for four months. We suggested 60 days, we suggested 90 days, but seriously, who can cover this country and explain to the people of this country his policies in that period of time? It is impossible! We are going to have people voting for a candidate –(Interruption)

DR. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank my honourable Friend from Butebo for giving way.  We are talking about a presidential candidate somewhat loosely, but the Constitution has a different view of the matter. Article 103 (1) and (2) of the Constitution says: 
“(1) The election of the President shall be by universal adult suffrage through a secret ballot. 

(2) A person shall not be a candidate in a presidential election unless – 
    (a) that person submits to the Electoral Commission on or before the day appointed as nomination day in relation to the election, a document which is signed by that person nominating him or her as a candidate; and 
    (b) the nomination is supported by one hundred voters in each of at least two-thirds of all the districts in Uganda.”  

This is the constitutional definition of a presidential candidate. I thought that Parliament would do itself justice by taking this into account when making these proposals.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think there is one problem. Suppose I want to sensitise people in Uganda about agriculture or trade, and that is a policy, can’t I do it? What I can do is to liase with the Ministry of Internal Affairs and tell them that I want to go and meet the people, and then I alert the Police, and I can do it. But here we are talking about a presidential candidate, as the Minister has said, and you do not become a candidate until you have submitted your papers to the Electoral Commission. But you can have access to the people by making arrangements with the security agency, namely the Police. Maybe we have difficulties in arranging such meetings and maybe we are hampered by the Police, I do not know, but I think that is what we want to look at.

MRS.SALAAMU MUSUMBA: Mr. Speaker, I would like the law simplified for me as regards the request that I see hon. Mallinga trying to put forward. I would like to see it simplified by people who have read books. I am told lawyers have. I would like to see an aspirant programmed, because you cannot become a candidate for a big post like a president of a country until you have aspired and maybe toured the country. So, how do we factor in all these processes into a Presidential Election’s Bill, because there are actions that build up to a presidential election?  

What I seem to hear from the two previous speakers is that you just appear from nowhere. But if you are building up a structure of presidential candidacy and presidential elections, which is, by the way, very new in this country, would you not rather make it clearer procedurally, so that everybody knows how to go about it? Everybody is tempted for various reasons to announce and seek protection from the public domain, so how do we avoid that? 

I would have expected the hon. Minister of Education, as a professor, to add value to the debate and not to just read for us all these restrictions that we know. Let us add value to the debate, because even the American system, which has survived all these years, still has problems. Since we are trying to replicate that which has developed, at the point when we want to imitate it, I think we should benefit from the wealth of knowledge that many of the Members seated at the Front Bench seem to have, so that we enrich our presidential election debate here in the House.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think you have heard about what they call Kakuyege; is there a law for Kakuyege? It is up to you to go and access people. If you want to do it through meetings, it is up to you to seek for permission from the Police or alert the Police that you want to address people about certain issues. Can’t you really do it?

MRS.SALAAMU MUSUMBA: Mr. Speaker, in Uganda today you cannot do it. You cannot do it, because I remember that Mr. Ssebagala was shot at in Mbarara. So, some places are no-go places. I do not want us to pretend as if we do not know what is happening, we would render ourselves very useless. We, the people who should be regulating a process, do not know what the public knows. 

I am very disappointed if all these lacunas are not addressed, because you leave it to the police, with their high handedness, to torture people. They could have shot Ssebagala and then how would we explain anyway?

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi) Mr. Speaker, as far as I can gather, if the hon. Lady will listen, the Police in Mbarara never shot at Ssebagala as a presidential candidate. They simply enforce the law they need. If you really want procedure, this can be fixed easily. 

What the Minister was saying in this debate is that as long as Article 102 defines a presidential candidate, we either amend that first and then we put in place the procedures we want, or we do not. Now, since we have not done that, our debate should be limited. So, we either amend this Article of the Constitution, which defines the presidential candidate and when he or she may be called a presidential candidate, or we do not. Now, some people say we should do so, possibly by implication, in this Bill, but I think that is not possible unless a formal amendment comes to do this.

DR. MALLINGA: Mr. Speaker, I have lost a lot of time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, please.

DR. MALINGA: Mr. Speaker, from what the hon. Members have said one thing comes out clear. I think there is a difference between declaring candidacy and registering as a presidential candidate - (Interruption) 

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, with due respect to the speaker holding the Floor, I rise up on a point of order. A whole Minister of Constitutional Affairs, hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi, whom I greatly respect, stood up just now to give information to one of the speakers holding the Floor. He spoke on a matter related to what took place in Mbarara regarding the fate of Ntege Nasser Ssebagala. The information we all have, which is also documented, is that when Nasser Ssebagala went to Mbarara to try and meet his prospective supporters, police shot at him and even the window screen of his car was totally smashed, and he nearly got killed in that vehicle. All this is on record. Following that documented evidence of what occurred, is it in order for a whole Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to come here to this august House and give contrary information to what took place, when it is on record? I am challenging him, and I can give this documentation tomorrow in this august House. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What you are asking me to do is to accept your statement and disallow his statement. On what basis should I do this? That is your statement and he also made his statement. So, I cannot say he is out of order, unless I am conversant with all facts pertaining to the incident. I am sorry, I cannot rule on that.

DR. MALLINGA: Thank you for your wise judgement, Mr. Speaker. I was just making a point, and I think we should understand declaring candidacy and registering for candidacy. Once one has the intention to run for president for this country, he should be allowed to tour the country and explain his policies. 

Thank God I am not a multi-partyist at the moment, but God forbid if a multi-partyist wanted to become a president of this country and then he goes to see the Minister of Internal Affairs, for example, to accompany him to Sese Islands so that he can explain his policies. The Minister would be scared of what would happen to her position and would never allow that man or that woman to accompany her –(Interruption)

MS. NAMUSOKE: Mr. Speaker, I wish to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that I would never be afraid to accompany him anywhere in this country. I have the protection, but it is not even the duty of the Minister to accompany anybody who is going to carry out campaigns in this country. All you have to do, if you want to go and campaign, is to inform the police well in time so that you are given the security in the place where you are going, and the people that you are going to meet are also given the security. 

The problem is that sometimes the people who go to campaign adamantly refuse to inform the police, and when police see that there might be a breach of the peace, they ask them not to hold those meetings. It is on that basis that they go out and stop such gatherings. Thank you.

DR. MALLINGA: Thank you very much, hon. Minister. That is why I emphasise that politically we have to develop if this Bill is going to function. People must be free to run for presidency and we should encourage them. The only way democracy in this country can develop is if we encourage people to run for presidency.  

I come to the question of fees, and I will base it on the Bible. The Holy Book says that many will be called but few will be taken. Not everybody is free to enter the Kingdom of God. The road is narrow and it is difficult - (Laughter)- therefore, we should scrutinise and exclude some. Not everybody running for the presidency should be included. We should increase the fees to find out the seriousness of the candidates and what support the person has in the country. 

If you are a poor person and unable to raise 10 million shillings, you will mobilise and get support from those who want you to become president, and they will raise that money. But if you do not have support, you will not be able to raise that money. Therefore, the fees must be kept high to make the road narrow and difficult – (Laughter)- Otherwise, we shall have unnecessary candidates in this country, and we shall miss serious candidates who want to become president and who will contribute to this country. They will be glory seekers. Anybody who wants will just come in with one million shillings and want to be president. How many candidates are we going to have? 1000 maybe, but before one runs for president, one should have the support. Even if it were 20 million shillings, his supporters would raise that money. So, this is a serious Bill – (Interruption)

MR.DICK NYAI: Mr. Speaker, the oration by hon. Mallinga about many are called and few are chosen was absolutely tremendous, but I would like him to explain and clarify a little more. Is the support a person receives only gauged by the amount of money he is given by his supporters? I would like him to clarify, because I believe some people can support me morally. 

DR.AJEANI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The hon. Member holding the Floor says that the quantity of money you submit to qualify whether you are serious or not should be taken into account. Everywhere in the world this country is known as the most corrupt country today. We all know that. What about these people who just steal money? 

Somebody has not been stealing money and he comes out clean and says he is fade up with corruption. He has no money, but he wants clean people to come out and work with him. Simply because this person has not stolen money, and therefore does not have the access money, you want to rule this person out. You are part of these people who are stealing. Are you not?  Thank you very much – (Laughter).

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, I would like to seek further clarification from hon. Mallinga. If we are serious in what we are talking about today, is it easier for an intending presidential candidate to secure the support of 100 registered voters from two thirds of all the districts of Uganda, including those that intend to be created, than it is to get 8 million shillings?  

DR. MALLINGA: Mr. Speaker, there are two points that were raised. Hon. Ajeani raised the point of corruption. The people of this country should be able to judge. If the man who is intending to stand for presidency is corrupt or has obtained money illegally, then do not elect him.  But I am talking about somebody who has broad support. 

Hon. Lukyamuzi, if you are going to traverse this country to get signatures that are required for you to stand for presidency and you cannot raise 8 million shillings, it is a paradox!  I cannot understand it.

I would like to end by saying that the presidency is a serious office. It is what shapes the future of this country. We ought to have serious people who have demonstrated the ability of basic economics to amass and be able to mobilise funds. If you cannot raise money through friends who care for this country, forget the presidency. I would like to end here, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you very much.

MRS.ZZIWA NANTONGO (Women Representative, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for the report to this House on this very important Bill. I share some views with some Members who have already spoken on the Floor. I will limit my observations to a few issues on which I may differ or which they may have not touched on.  

First and foremost, I have heard some Members say that the House should have considered the Political Organisations Bill before this Presidential Election’s Bill. I would like to totally differ. In the just concluded referendum campaigns and elections, the people decided that we should go with the Movement political system. In effect, that means that the next elections are going to be held under the Movement system of Government.  The Constitution ably stipulates the conditions under which the Movement arrangement or the Movement system operates. So, I do not think it is very relevant to have the Political Organisation’s Bill. It can even be considered by the seventh or eighth Parliament or even the tenth Parliament, God willing.  

I think I should mention that I share the views of hon. Mallinga on the nomination fees. Even if in the report here the Committee has mentioned that the objective of the nomination fees is to contribute to the election costs, I would have felt more comfortable if the Electoral Commission came forth and really gave what it costs to hold a presidential campaign. I have seen it somewhere, but I think it should have been ably reflected basing on the 1996 elections. We would then know that this contribution should go to a particular vote, for instance, printing of the votes or publicity for that matter. 

I still know very well that this is a very exorbitant cost, both for this country’s budget and maybe on our human resources. So, that is why I would like to support the view that since all of us may wish to aspire to become president of this country, it is really those few who are called. The criteria for the cost should also be one of the very many reasons why some people should be eliminated. If somebody has the ability, if somebody is popular and has been building himself or herself for that office, he will have many supporters who will come forth to contribute to his wish and ability to become the next President. The Committee recommended that they reduce it to two million, but with due respect, I still feel it should have remained at eight million for that particular office.  

My third point is also about the campaign period. I think the campaign period of 60 days is little, because this country has 45 districts, and as has been observed, maybe by the time the campaigns begin we may have 51 districts. And in most cases, these campaigns are not really conducted at the district level only, they have to go to the sub-county, and I think we have over 700 sub-counties. In that respect, it makes it very difficult. Even if you divide out this time, some of the districts have about five or six sub-counties. It may not be very practical for a candidate to be in six or seven sub-counties in one day. So, the situation is almost practically impossible. That is why some people are looking at the new entrants as being at a disadvantage, since they may have not had enough opportunities to present themselves before the people in that particular respect. 

So, I suggest that the Committee follows its earlier recommendation or maybe the recommendation of 90 days, even if it is for this forthcoming election, though of course they have said that for this one the time has elapsed. If we pass this Bill now, it will give the Electoral Commission an opportunity to make sure that it puts its house in order quickly, and then we shall have the opportunity for the people to have 90 days to campaign.

I want to get two clarifications before I sit down, Mr. Speaker. The first is about the recommendation on page 5, which says that the Electoral Commission does not have the capacity to determine which foreign governments, institutions, bodies, or persons have demonstrated an intention to overthrow the Government of Uganda. The recommendation says that this should be a function of the Executive and Parliament. 

With due respect, since we normally know that these candidates may seek foreign assistance, which may even be in terms of hostility or otherwise, I think the Electoral Commission should be facilitated. They should be facilitated so that they have the ability to determine. We should not leave it in the hands of the Executive or Parliament, because by that time both the Executive and the Parliament would really be in disarray. 

Look at a situation whereby 65 per cent of Parliament are out there campaigning for a particular candidate or for candidates. They will not be in a position to be rational or impartial enough to say this candidate or this country is bringing in this kind of hostility. So, if the Committee allows, I request for a provision to be made so that the Electoral Commission is facilitated to detect and is able to give due judgement. These kinds of interventions that are hostile to the country can later on be handed over to the appropriate organ.

The Committee recommends as follows on page 5, recommendation 5:
“The Committee recommends that the Minister of Public Service shall lay before a statutory instrument specifying what Government facilities are ordinarily attached to and utilised by a President”.  

I really find this a bit late, because we know, under the circumstances, that there is a Presidential Emoluments Bill, which we passed into law. We know certainly that the office facilities, which are enjoyed by the incumbent, and some of these other ones, were casually mentioned in the 1996 Presidential Elections Bill, but it may not be possible to just mention that the Public Service, for instance, comes up with a law. I still suggest that the Electoral Commission should be mandated to list some of those facilities, which we know for sure are always at the disposal of the incumbent President or those office bearers. And if possible, this should become part of this Bill. They should be listed and then passed as part and parcel of the Presidential Elections Bill.  

So, those are the observations I wanted to make, and I thank the Committee for the good work done. Thank you.

MR.TOSKIN BARTILLE (Kongasis County, Kapchorwa): Mr. Speaker, I would like to join those who have said that this Bill is very important, and I would like to add that it is actually time bad. When we consider that the presidential elections are likely to take place by February, then we must agree that we are really behind time.

The lateness in passing the laws to enable the elections take place has caused us problems. The Electoral Commission should now be seriously in the field organising people and allowing civic education to take place. The longer we stay, the more we shall cause confusions when the time of elections comes in. So, I wish to appeal to the House to pass this law as soon as possible, to enable the Electoral Commission do its job.

I also want to add my views to the issue of the nomination fee, which has been brought up by a number of speakers. I want to state, very clearly, that when we are looking for a presidential candidate, we are looking for a very important person, somebody who is going to occupy the most important office in this country.

Members have come up to say that we should not limit, we should not create a situation where some people get eliminated from participating. But I must say that this is a very special office, and therefore, it also needs very special people. This country has known leaders who come in to enrich themselves. The office of the President is an office where you are not just going to rely on what the Government coffers are going to give you –(Interruption).

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to thank the hon. Member holding the Floor for giving way. The Speaker holding the Floor is making remarks about something very important on the presidency as an institution. Much as the Constitution says that everyone is free to contest that office, he is saying that this office is for special people. What does he mean when he says that it is for special people? I need some clarification on that.

MR.TOSKIN: Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, what I am saying is that this is a very special office. All of us are free to campaign for it and to aspire for it, but we must bear in mind that it is not just like any other office, like going to L.C.1 where anybody can go in and come up. 

I say all this because the office itself does not need a person who is going to look into the Government coffers in order to provide for the people. These are people who are providers. People are going to come to you and they will need support from you. Hon. Members, you know that we have the experience. We are Members of Parliament, and you see the sort of demands we get from our people. If we are going to rely on what we receive from this Parliament, I am sure we will not be able to meet the demands of our people. And here is a national figure, who will actually almost be a charitable institution, therefore, he needs to have his own provisions in order to meet the demands of the country.  

My fear comes from what we saw during the last referendum elections. People came and enlisted themselves to stand, and what did we see? In some of our constituencies, we never saw even a sign of some of the aspirants, not even posters. What were people looking for? People were looking for a way of getting money out of Government. We are not going to allow this type of situation. 

We also must know that we have voted a little money for the Electoral Commission. It did not have unlimited resources. These candidates are going to be supported. This country, I am sure, cannot support more than 20 presidential candidates. And one Member suggested that we should even give them enough funds to campaign. He suggested 50 million each. Now, if we are going to have 20 people and you are going to give them 50 million each and to facilitate them with vehicles and so on, you will be impoverishing the country. 

So, I want to state that we must look at the social and economic status of the person. He must be a person of integrity, and integrity here means that you can even afford some of your basic needs and you are not going to come to the state to beg for money in order to enable you run for elections. The little you will get is just enough facilitation for you. I even look at eight million as little money. It is really very little money, but since the Committee has put it at eight million, we would rather leave it at that and not anything less than that.  

The other point I would like to make is on financing. The Committee has said that the Electoral Commission may not have the capacity, and therefore it should fall to Parliament and the Executive. I do not think that anybody has the capacity to stop anybody from looking for money.  People should be free to look for money, but where we have people who are working to overthrow the Government, then we have the External Security Organisation and the Internal Security Organisation. Those should be able to warn us on some subversive intentions of some candidates.  So, I would like to suggest that nobody is stopped from looking for funds, and people are already looking for funds. Some candidates have just come back from the Arab countries looking for funds. There are some aspiring candidates who are still moving around the world begging for money from the streets and so on. Allow them to do so.  

The other point is about the penalties. I quite agree that people should not be intimidated at the time of campaigns, but I must insist that there must be a limit to what we can say during our elections. We have experienced this; people are going to mud-sling, people are going to create false documents, purportedly produced by some candidates, and some of these can be very embarrassing indeed. What I am saying is that we should have at least some limit to what we can say during our campaigns and what we cannot say during our campaigns, otherwise you are going to encourage social disorder.  There will be social disorder, and you will not be able to control that type of thing. You will find candidates fighting or supporters fighting during campaign time, and this is one of the reasons.  

We must also provide a clear law on the whole electoral process. I want to agree with the Committee that we must state clearly what happens if there is a tie or if none of the candidates gets the required percentage as the Constitution provides. It is important, especially at this time when we know about the situation in one of the most important countries in the world. The United States is now engulfed in a big problem. These are lessons we must learn from, so that we come out with clear laws and rules concerning our elections.

Finally, I would also like to say something about the time for campaigns. I want to agree that people going to campaign, especially for presidential elections, need enough time. The stress does not come from getting too much time, the stress actually comes from having too little time to reach everywhere. Definitely the candidates are going to be people of different abilities.  Some are going to fly, some are going to go in four-wheel drive cars, and some may not even be able to afford four-wheel drive cars. So, there must be enough time for these people to canvass for votes. I would like to agree with people who have suggested three months or 90 days. That is good enough. 60 days are definitely not enough, especially taking into account that very soon we are not going to have only 45 districts but more districts than that -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not know whether this point has been addressed. Well, I do not want to debate, but we have agreed that a person becomes a presidential candidate when he is nominated. We have agreed that the Constitution requires a candidate to get at least 100 signatures from at least two thirds of the districts of Uganda. Now there is the new system of voters’ cards. They are going to register people so that cards are issued with their photographs. Therefore, for you to be competent to be one of the 100 voters, apparently you have to have received a new card with your photograph, otherwise you will not be a voter. So, I do not know whether this debate takes into account all this, when you talk about the 90 days or the 60 days. I do not know, maybe the chairman or the Minister will assist us later on this.  

MR.TOSKIN: Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much for your input. I was only trying to say that at the time when we already have presidential candidates, these people will have to move. We must give them a time limit in which the campaigns can take place. What we are only trying to say is that there must be time. On top of all other necessities, this time factor is very important, because sometimes this has been used as a tactic to eliminate some people from having enough time to campaign. It has happened, and it may only be beneficial to people who are already in power and already in the seat, but those who are just coming in would need enough time to interact with the people, and it might be a problem for them. I want to thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MS. ZZIWA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Arising from your clarification about 90 days, I would like clarification as to whether there is no possibility of extending the election date. I ask this in view of the fact that there is a new development on the voters’ cards, and all this needs time. With the procedure that the Electoral Commission has to put in place, and maybe since the dates are constitutionally proposed, I just wonder whether we cannot have an extension of maybe a month or so, because the 90 days seem more legitimate than just a suggestion.

MR.OGALO: Mr. Speaker, since the days are stipulated in the Constitution, we know that the presidential elections should be some time in February or March. If you are to extend so that you provide for 90 days, it will go beyond that period stipulated in the 1995 Constitution.  Therefore, it means that you will have to have a constitutional amendment in order to have the extension of the elections.  

MR.OKUMU-RINGA (Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join my colleagues to support the report of the Committee on this very important Bill. Before I proceed, I would like to recap on the issue that has just been raised, which is the provision in Article 103(3) of the Constitution. It reads as follows:
“The election of the President shall be held during the first thirty days of the last ninety days before the expiration of the term of the President, except in the case of  
    (a) the first election under this Constitution…” 

It goes on to give other exceptions, but the point I am raising is with regard to this very specific constitutional provision. The hon. Minister responsible for this Bill is fully aware, and Members of the Front Bench have been aware of this. The whole country has been aware that elections would take place. Now, this Bill has come this late, so we would require the Minister, when he winds up, to shade some light as to why it has delayed. This is a very important matter.

Having said that, I support the provisions and particularly the report of the Committee. The Committee has been very modest in its general report, and I would like to support them. And since my colleagues who have already spoken have literary repeated most of these points, I will try my best not to repeat them, so allow me to highlight one or two issues.  

With regard to the nomination fee, as many Members have already spoken, I think the 8 million shillings is not a big fee. It is not much money for somebody who is aspiring to become a President. In fact, there should have been more stringent conditions to the nomination rather then the monitory condition. This is because, if we have 10 to 15 people aspiring for the presidency, it is like a mockery to the whole process. So, we are looking forward to a situation where not just this law, but genuine political sobriety and general social sobriety will prevail in the minds of the aspirants. So, those who will come to declare their candidature should be people who are serious and who will meet the litmus test of the presidency.   

The 90 days, which were proposed by the Committee in their report on page 4, may not fit within the current constitutional provision. The Committee says, on page 3 of the report, that all stakeholders who presented their views to the Committee proposed 90 days for this exercise. This would have been good if this law was passed some three or five months ago. In any case, this law should always be passed early enough to give the intending candidates and their supporters time. It would give people who really want to participate in the electoral process time to understand the law. But now, the proposal for 90 days, in terms of the constitutional provision, is not viable. The first election, which was held under this Constitution, was held on the 9th of May 1996. The President was sworn in on 12th of May 1996.  Now, when you compute, it gives you 11th March, and that is within 30 days of the 90 days of the election of the first President. So, that gives 11th March, therefore, you do not have much time. So, while this provision is good, it may not be helpful.

Financing has been a very big problem. Those of us who operate at the district level have seen what it means to conduct elections. Those of you who have gone through the electoral process have seen what it means. So, the issue of financing must be properly addressed so that the institution responsible for conducting elections, the Electoral Commission, should be adequately financed. The donors and sources of funding, if any, should be clearly sought and also put aside. The last minute approach to support candidates, like what we saw during the last referendum where supporters of sides had a lot of problems, should be avoided. Maybe the hon. Minister could make specific proposals. 

My last point is with regard to the role of the mass media. This has not been adequately addressed, even by the Committee. I know there is a provision in the law, but the role of the mass media should be critically looked at, although not with the view to stifling the functions and operations of the mass media. In the society of today, they are considered the fourth estate, and you must have seen what the fourth estate has done to the presidential elections in the United States of America. The newsmen announced the result of the presidential elections before actually voting ended, and it has caused them a lot of problems.  I am sure we can also learn a bit from them. The role of the mass media I am referring to is really the adherence to existing laws, which guide the operations of both electronic and print mass media. This is because if there is no proper enforcement, we are going to have a lot of problems, because retracting anything uttered or written is easy, but the message will have –(Interruption)  
  
MR.ERESU: Mr. Speaker, the hon. Member holding the Floor has mentioned something very pertinent with respect to the mass media. I have the Bill in my hand, and when you look at clause 23(2) of the Bill, it reads as follows: “All presidential candidates shall be given equal time and space on the State owned media to present their programmes to the people.”   

The clarification I am seeking from the hon. Member holding the Floor is whether he thinks that we should put it in the law, so that it becomes mandatory that all presidential candidates present their programmes, plans and aspirations to the people of Uganda on the state owned media, both television and radio. Should we put in the law so that it becomes mandatory?

MR.OKUMU RINGA: I thank the hon. Member for seeking clarification. I am fully aware of this provision, which is contained under clause 22 of the Bill. My concern is far from what is provided for in this Bill. My concern is more with regard to existing laws, rules and regulations.  I wish it was used by operators of both electronic and print media. 

I am only saying that those responsible for the management of these important institutions should be aware of the harm they can do when they utter false statements or publish statements that may be detrimental to the general well being of candidates or the general conduct of the electoral process. That is where my concern is.  

I am aware that the laws exist, rules exist, but the level of enforcement may vary from area to area. For example, an FM station in Rukungiri, Arua, Mbale or in Soroti should be subjected to the same rules or regulations in its operation, so that those who are managing or operating such important mass media institutions should be able to know the impact of whatever they may broadcast through their airwaves or through the print media. That is where my concern is. And I am aware that there are laws that exist, but because of the importance of all these elections, it would be good if the Ministers responsible for the management of these laws take note of this concern.  

My last point is with regard to the need for this country to work towards a united front because of the fact that elections will always divide people. Even in one family, people will be divided over electoral issues. But the issues being presented will have to be looked at in a way whereby we develop a culture of tolerance, a culture whereby we go through the electoral process without dividing the country and without causing chaos. And at the end of it, we shall all say ‘yes, we have one candidate who has been elected as President’, so that this country can move forward. We can build a constitutional culture and an electoral process, which must be credible, so that tomorrow or after five years, those who will aspire to lead this country as a new breed or a new generation of leaders should be able to say that they will build on the contribution made by other leaders. We should not destroy what we have all worked to put in place so far. 

I would like to thank the Minister and the chairperson responsible for this Bill and all my colleagues for this articulation. I support the Bill. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Before I end today’s business, I want to repeat the appeal that I made at the commencement of the proceedings. We should try our level best to ensure that we complete the urgent business before us. You heard hon. Lukyamuzi lamenting about dealing with the Political Organisations Bill. I want to assure you that if you help us dispose the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Bill and this one, then I think very soon we shall deal with our Bill. So, I appeal to you, hon. Members, to please appeal to others so that tomorrow we have quorum and we dispose of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Bill. And then we can also deal with this one, which is very urgent, so that the Electoral Commission can know what to do with the coming presidential elections. With this, we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.18 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 15th November, 2000 at 2.00 p.m.)


