Wednesday 15th November, 2000

Parliament met at 2.50 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday you heard several Members during their contributions to the Presidential Elections Bill ask why certain Bills, for instance the Political Organisations Bill, have not been considered. I promised that if we clear the Bills that are pending before us, namely the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Bill and the Presidential Elections Bill, we will definitely move to the Political Organisations Bill. But we had technical hurdles, and that is why we could not complete the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Bill. I say, technically, because we had reached a stage where we had to make a decision and adopt the report of the Committee, but we could not do that unless we had the required number of 93 Members present. That is why we proceeded with the general debate on the Presidential Elections Bill. 

It seems we have exhausted debate even on the Presidential Elections Bill, because yesterday I followed the contributions, and I realised that there were two or three issues that were being aired out, therefore, there was a lot of repetition on the same issues. So, we have exhausted debate. 

Now, the Minister of Education was here to give a report, but I have counted the number of Members present and we still have the technical hurdle. We cannot pronounce ourselves on the Committee’s report. I will suspend the proceedings for 15 minutes so that each of you can mobilise others who are not here so that we can make a decision.   

(The Proceedings were suspended for 15 minutes at 2.54 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.15 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

DR. MALLINGA: Mr. Speaker, in August this year, this House deferred the debate on the Deployment of Forces outside Uganda Bill, because at that time the feeling was that there should be a more comprehensive Bill, which would cover areas of recruitment, training, and deployment both within and outside Uganda. And it should also cover terms and conditions of service for officers and men, promotions and appointments, and procedures of deployment. At that time, the Prime Minister did promise that such a Bill would be before the House by 15th November. Today is 15th November, and I do not see such a Bill on the order paper, nor has there been a circulation of the Bill to the hon. Members.  Mr. Speaker, can I kindly ask the hon. Prime Minister to explain the fate of that Bill. Thank you very much -(Applause).

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Nsibambi Apolo): I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I am delighted that such a question has been asked. First of all, the promise was not made by the Prime Minister, it was made by one of the Ministers, and when he does so, I take responsibility. That is why I require the Ministry of Defence to explain.  

My position is very clear, if the Ministry has a deadline and is unable to deliver on that deadline, it is incumbent upon that Ministry to come here, at least a day in advance, and say that they are unable to meet the deadline.  That is my very clear position, and I do not want to turn into a headmaster to deal with my Colleagues. My Colleagues are mature people, and I have been accused of turning into some kind of headmaster. I intend to give my Colleagues the dignity, which they deserve, and without any hesitation I am pleased to call upon the Minister of State for Defence to clarify.  I thank you. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Mr. Kavuma Steven): Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I thank you for this opportunity, and I want to thank the hon. Member who has raised the question, without notice though. 

I would like to state that I have already informed my boss, the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, about what I am going to say now. I informed him in writing, and not one day before, but a number of days ago when we anticipated these problems, and it was in answer to a query he legitimately raised.  

It is true that some time recently Government, through my Colleague the Minister for Security, who was then holding a brief for me and for which I thank him, did undertake to table before this august House a consolidated Bill regulating the UPDF. This was in answer to the call from this House, when in their wisdom Members changed their minds from debating a Bill dealing with the deployment of troops outside this country as they had previously asked. This Bill had been presented to Parliament in good time, and I want to report that since that undertaking, we have made a lot of progress. My Ministry has continued to work very hard in order to answer the call of Parliament, and now a huge comprehensive draft law has been prepared by my Ministry.  

In the process of putting together this consolidated Bill, it became clear that there was need to hold further inter-ministerial consultations, especially with the Ministry of Finance, because the new format of the Bill had additional financial implications. Government must harmonise its position through effective consultation through the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of Finance, in accordance with the laid down procedure of handling Government business.  

It also became very clear that important policy organs of the army, principally the High Command and the Army Council, had to look at some of the provisions of this huge Bill, consider them and approve them. This has to be done before the Cabinet paper is prepared and the principles of the Bill are submitted to Cabinet for consideration and action. I am glad to report that the process of conclusively dealing with this consultative process is in full gear, and very soon these will be completed and the Cabinet paper will be submitted to Cabinet for consideration. Thereafter, the Parliamentary Council will be instructed to draft the Bill in accordance with the approved principles of the intended legislation, which will now be considered and approved by Cabinet before it is published in the official Gazette, ready for submission to this honourable House.  

I must say that the question of coming out with a consolidated law regulating the UPDF is not only very important but it is also a complex matter. It therefore, required exhaustive work within reasonable time, in spite of all the speed we have tried to handle the exercise with, so that when we come out with our intended Bill, it will not be found wanting in matters dealing with the regulation of one of the most important pillars of this state. 

I am glad to say that it is my considered opinion that within the next four or at most six weeks, this Bill will have already reached this House. We will have exhausted the remaining part of the consultative process. I used the word ‘within’ deliberately because -(an hon. Member rose)- since I am about to end, I would request the hon. Member to seek an opportunity after that. As soon as we are through with the remaining bit, but within that framework, this Bill will be before the House. I thank you.

CAPT. GUMA: Mr. Speaker, those of us who have been looking directly at the hon. Minister of State for Defence - I mean those of us directly opposite him - have been looking at his face and eyes, and the impression I get is that hon. Kavuma does not even believe in what he has been telling us. He does not believe it!  

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for hon. Guma to impute bad motives on the part of an hon. Member of this House who was telling the House the truth and nothing but the truth?   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The import of what hon. Guma has stated is that the hon. Minister is misleading the House by telling us something he does not believe in or which is not true. That is imputing improper motives on the Minister. Therefore, he is out of order, unless he can substantiate.

CAPT. GUMA: Mr. Speaker, let me put some flesh on my statement. First of all, I highly regard hon. Steven Kavuma. Therefore, I think he should have come here earlier, because the statement clearly says by 15th November. So, why did he have to wait for a Member to rise up on the Floor of Parliament? We all understand how Government sometimes works. We know that there are bureaucracies involved in consulting members of the High Command and consulting this office and the other. So, if he had come here two or three days before the deadline, it would have indicated some degree of responsibility. We would know that the Minister is concern about what Parliament said. But to wait and play it cool, hoping that the MPs have forgotten what they passed, to me, is really a sign of indifference! It is like saying ‘you know these MPs and this House, we can tell them this and that and they will really accept.’ So, I find this extremely unserious on the part of the Minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To be fair, so that we do not really go very far, this afternoon hon. Steven Kavuma was in my office and he came to inform me that he would like to make a statement on the issue tomorrow. This happened about one hour ago. In fact, he came to me and told me that tomorrow he was going to make a statement about the delay, unfortunately he did not alert the hon. Members, but he was in my office.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: The Minister mentioned that Members of Parliament had changed their minds from considering the deployment Bill, which we had asked for. I remember very well that I quoted the number of days in which we had been asking for this, and there was no change of mind. This Bill has actually been overdue. For the last three years our Committee has been requesting for this Bill.  

Secondly, I think we should come out with a time limit. Saying as soon as possible within four to six weeks is not enough. This is not the first time we have had those promises. So, we want him to commit himself here and say that they are coming out with it within maybe a month’s time on such and such a date. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

DR. MALLINGA: Mr. Speaker, I think this matter is of great importance to this House, and also to the Committee on Defence. I will therefore, request to move a motion, that this House notes with great concern and disappointment the failure of the Minister of State for Defence to Table before the House the Comprehensive Bill on Defence by the 15th of November 2000, and therefore, directs that the same be tabled –(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Under what rule are you moving this motion?

DR. MALLINGA: Generally, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you have heard a statement from the Minister, and he actually came to my office.

DR. MALLINGA: Mr. Speaker, it is Rule 44 of our Rules of Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t you prepare your motion and then we shall deal with it formally?

DR. MALLINGA: Okay, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He has agreed. He is going to prepare his motion, so let us proceed with other business. The statement we have on record is that within six weeks we shall have the Bill.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, the Minister of State for Defence has committed himself to bringing the comprehensive law within four to six weeks. This was arising out of his failure to meet the deadline of an existing motion in which he was supposed to have Tabled this comprehensive Bill before 15th, which is today. Arising out of a procedural matter, the Minister said he wanted more time, but it was not through a formal motion. In fact, I am surprised that the Minister is sitting back and thinking that the House has extended the period. As far as I am concerned, there is no authority from this House to extend the period by another six weeks. It is completely unparliamentary and totally wrong. No procedure has been followed.  

Now that he has made a statement, hon. Mallinga, who had asked the procedural question, is following the existing motion and trying now to put his procedural question together. Mr. Speaker, if you say we should delay and proceed with another one, I do not know at what stage he is going to bring the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What happened, hon. Omara Atubo, is that the Government or the Minister presented a Bill, and the Bill that he presented was only for deployment of troops outside the country. During the course of debate here, Members were not satisfied with only the deployment part, so they said they wanted a comprehensive Bill dealing with the armed forces. As a result of this, the Minister withdrew the motion, promising to bring another comprehensive law by a certain day. That is what happened. Now the Minister has been explaining that he has been unable to do so, and he wants more time, and within one and half months he will bring it. I think that is what happened.  There was no motion as such, but he withdrew his Bill and promised to bring another one.

MR. ERESU: Mr. Speaker, I beg to move a motion invoking Rule 8 of our Rules of Procedure to suspend Rule 39 and 40, so that hon. Mallinga may move his motion. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Mallinga himself has agreed to take time and prepare a formal motion. Let us move to other business.

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I would like to seek simple clarification. The House asked somebody to bring a Bill by a specific date, which is today, that person has failed to do so, now we are saying that this same person can do it in another 6 weeks! I would like to alter that slightly. It should be given to the Leader of Government Business, in whom we have fully trust, so that when he gives us his word. We know it will be fulfilled. I think that should be the position.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, we started with the Leader of Government Business who assigned the function of replying to the query to the Minister working under him. I suppose they co-ordinated in making what statement he has made.  But you can hear from the Prime Minister himself.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said earlier on, it is not proper that I should turn into a headmaster to flog my Colleagues. My Colleague is an hon. Member of this House, he has explained what has transpired, and he has said that within six weeks he will be ready. Six weeks from now will be 20th December, according to Prof. Kagonyera who is a very good mathematician. So we do have an exact date, by 20th December. Therefore, I really give the responsibility to the Minister to ensure that he complies with the deadline. I have also made it clear -(Interruption) 

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I apologise for interrupting the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, but I think there is something that is being missed here. There is a motion, which says that by 15th November the House will have received the Bill on the deployment of troops and on UPDF in general. This has not happened. What is now expected of the Prime Minister is for him to move a motion seeking an extension. And it would be up to him, but we could debate this motion and we may reduce it as we deem fit. 

What the Speaker had explained to us earlier on as voluntary information, which I was expecting to have come from hon. Steven Kavuma, Minister of State for Defence, was that he had been to his office to seek permission to address the House tomorrow, a day later. But, I would have expected a ministerial statement seeking to move a motion for the House to allow a new timeframe, just like the hon. Chairman who is now probing Defence is about to move a motion asking for extension of time because they have not finished their work. I think this is what the debate is narrowed to. 

It is not a question of telling us the problems or that it will come within two months, we are not interested in that, we are interested in a motion either moved by the leader of Government Business or by the Minister of Defence. If they fail to do so, it is now up to us to move a motion saying that we expected something from the leader of Government Business but it did not happen. So we move a motion to demand that action be taken on the Prime Minister or the relevant Minister so that he performs his functions. He is supposed to have performed certain functions, which he has neglected, refused to do, or inadvertently forgotten. Apparently, however, he did not forget, because the Speaker has told us that the hon. Minister has been to his office to seek for permission to be on the order paper to make a statement a day late. 

So, I do not know whether the Prime Minister is really focused on that, because it is not a question of telling us by the 20th of December, you have to get permission to say so! So, there has to be a motion, and since no such debate is on the order paper, and this matter has come up as a matter of procedure and not as a substantive motion and we do not see any motion coming from the Government side, I think that hon. Mallinga should be given time to formulate his motion. In the course of today's business, he should move a formal motion and we debate on it. On the other hand, the Prime Minister, now having been forewarned and forearmed, could discuss with hon. Mallinga and they agree to come to the House on a united front and we move on.  Thank you, Sir.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I thank you, Mr. Speaker. What I will not accept is to turn into a punch bag for a responsibility, which was clearly assigned. Therefore, I do hereby direct the Minister of State for Defence to interface with hon. Mallinga so that they come up with an appropriate request.  But I do not accept to be turned into a punch bag, because this will mean that I will take over responsibilities that are clearly assigned to people under Article 113 and 114 of Constitution.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it seems we do not remember the sequence of events. The Government, through the Minister, brought a Bill on the deployment of troops outside the country. During the debate there was an indication that Members wanted to throw away this Bill because they wanted a more comprehensive Bill than the one that had been presented. When the owner of the Bill realised this, he withdrew his Bill promising that by 15th November he would bring a comprehensive Bill. This is what happened.  

There was no motion saying that he brings a Bill by 15th November. He just withdrew a Bill promising to bring another one. There is no need for the Government to now seek a motion to bring a Bill to the House. Any time, even before the 6 weeks, he can bring a comprehensive Bill. He does not require the permission of this House to bring the Bill. So what is the motion for? There could be a motion by hon. Mallinga, maybe saying that he does not want six weeks but he wants one week. If we pass such a motion, then that would be a different matter. So, since there is really no motion, let us proceed with today's business.

THE UNIVERSITITES AND OTHER TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS BILL, 1999

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Dr. Khiddu Makubuya):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House took several days considering the Bill entitled “The Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Bill” and passed it with some amendments.  I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Dr. Khiddu Makubuya):  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.  

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE UNIVERSITITES AND OTHER TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS BILL, 1999

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Dr. Khiddu Makubuya):  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Bill, 1999” be read the Third Time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to)

THE UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS ACT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I congratulate you for passing the Bill.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS BILL, 2000

(Debate continued)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yesterday we had only hon. Alex Onzima remaining, but since I do not see him here, I call upon the chairperson to make his concluding remarks and then the Minister will also conclude.

THE CHAIPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr. Ogalo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to thank Members for their contribution to the report of the Committee. I would like to comment on two or three issues that were raised. 

On the issue of the 8/= million to be deposited by the presidential candidates, the Committee proposed to reduce this to 2/= million. And there was cause for it go back to 8/= million, on the grounds that it is a way of showing seriousness on the candidates’ part. 

Apart from the 8/= million, there is another constitutional requirement to the effect that such a candidate will need 100 voters from at least two thirds of the districts in Uganda. This means that a candidate will have to go and get support in 30 districts and get 100 signatures from each district. It is my view that this already shows that a candidate is serious, because there is no way you can move to 30 districts and get support when you are not serious. That is why the Committee felt that we should reduce the amount from 8/= million to 2/= million. 

There is also another argument that when you make it so high it sends wrong signals to the electorate. The voter will ask himself why this man who wants to serve should pay so much to serve him. This is the danger of commercialising politics. I think we are now agreed that this is a real danger to our country. Money has always tended to play a very important role in our politics, and it is dangerous, because if you peg money to service, in the end you are undermining democracy. It will not be the ideas that will bring you here, but rather it will be the money which will determine whether you come here or whether you are elected as President or not. 

So, the Committee was of the view that we should start a process of decommercialising the politics of this country. One of the ways of doing this is not by going out there to show the voters that you need money in order to stand, but by just putting a nominal fee of 2/= million, which is refundable at the end. If we continue putting in the minds of the voters that money is of essence in terms of elections, this will endanger our politics.  

Alot has been said both after the presidential and parliamentary elections. Accusations of bribery have been made during parliamentary elections. There were things like buying salt and buying sugar. All these things add up to commercialisation of politics, and they do not portray the true nature of politics. So, we should be moving away from that, and we think that 2/= million is fair. 

Indeed, if you look at both the Parliamentary Elections Bill and the Presidential Elections Bill, you will find so many offences created. All these offences are being created to try and minimise bribery and corruption during elections. So, this is actually recognised as an evil in our society.  That is why both electoral Bills are creating so many crimes, and we hope that the Electoral Commission will be able to reinforce the law. It was the Committee’s view that it is necessary to begin on the road of decommercialising politics.  

One Member raised the issue of offences and he said that there are too many offences created. The impression that the Member had is that nothing had been done about that.  We have provided amendments, which we shall move at Committee stage, and if approved by the House they will do away with some of these offences. It was also our belief that it is not proper to criminalise all the statements made by the candidates in the course of their campaigns.

Lastly, there was an issue as to whether the Electoral Commission was in a position to determine which foreign Government, non-governmental organisation or individual has demonstrated an intention to overthrow the Government of Uganda. So, after that, the Electoral Commission can then blacklist those countries and those organisations or individuals. The Committee suggested that this should be the function of the Executive and Parliament, but there were some sentiments that we should leave this to the Electoral Commission.

The Electoral Commission is not in a position to determine which country has demonstrated an intention to overthrow the Government of Uganda. Such information will be known to the Government through its agencies like ESO, ISO and indeed the Army. It is those bodies that can then advise the Executive arm of Government about hostile governments or hostile individuals to Uganda. So, it is the Executive which would then be able to table this in Parliament for purposes of getting the peoples’ representatives make an input to determine who is hostile and who is not. What does the Electoral Commission know about our relations with foreign countries, really? It is not even their function, constitutionally. They do not know it at all!  So, this is why the Committee moved away from the suggestion that the Commission could do this, and we suggested that the bodies of Government could do it.  

The Committee believes that the function of the Electoral Commission is to organise elections and conduct elections, it has no role in diplomacy, war or international relations. Accordingly, it cannot be able to determine which country is hostile to Uganda so that candidates should not seek funds from there for campaigns.  

Once again let me thank all hon. Members who have contributed to this Bill. In a special way I also thank those non-governmental organisations which were mentioned in the report. They found time to come and make some input to the debate. I thank you.

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members.  At the very onset, I would like to thank all the Members who have participated in this debate. It has been lively and responsible. There are not very many issues raised, and I shall just comment on a few that were raised.  

First, I would like to comment on the lateness of the Bill.  Hon. Okumu-Ringa Patrick said that the Bill came late. I would like to tell this House that the Bill was actually published on 15th September this year. That is about two months ago. So, it could have been debated then.  

Secondly, there have been other urgent pieces of legislation, particularly the budget. Between July and about mid-October this House was engaged in debating the budget, and I think that was proper. Then there were also other Bills such as the Constitutional (Amendment) Bill.  These had to be disposed of in the circumstances. The Bill has come now, so let us dispose of it. 

I would like to comment on the campaign time after nomination day. I had admitted that 60 days in possibly 50 districts is a bit on the lower side, and I am prepared to concede with 90 days after the nomination day. 

There was also the other question about campaigning before nomination day. Some Members have been saying that if the incumbent intends to stand as President, he has an edge over the other candidates who are not incumbent. I was really intrigued by a distinction that was brought out by hon. Steven Mallinga. He said that we should distinguish between declaring intention, intention to stand and registering as a candidate. 

Registering comes within Article 103(2) of the Constitution. Under there you have declared yourself as a candidate. He was saying that when you say that you will do something 20 years from now, that does not matter. And I say ‘aye’ to that. I agree with him. If anyone wants to be a presidential candidate anytime in 2006, he or she can now start doing certain things. And mark you, what does one really want? One wants to expose oneself to the electorate. I do not have to say that Mayanja Nkangi will stand in 2006. The only thing I will do is to go to Kalungu and I say ‘gentlemen or ladies, the policies underlying this budget are not quite right.’ The next day I will go to Kabale and say, ‘the Government has got policies on agriculture, but to me they are not good enough.’ 

If I were in that position, I would do all that. I would go through the whole country. When I come to stand, people will then ask, ‘who is Mayanja Nkangi anyway?’  ‘Oh, that man we saw!’ You are already exposing yourself to potential voters, and when the time comes for you to seek registration for your candidature, you will be known. I really think that the only thing that you need in this case is not time conditions, you only want to be able to talk to people. What do you think they need? The Police Act only. You go to the Police and tell them you want to do so and so, subject to how they gauge the security issues or conditions, they will act. That is all you really need. So I do not really think that even 12 months is necessary. It is an unnecessary restriction for those who we want to be Presidents of this country.  Now, nomination fee –(Interruption)

MR. ONGOM: Mr. Speaker, the scenario that the Minister has just painted for us seems to be rather vague.  Maybe I have an intention to stand later on as a President, I can go round the country talking about how rotten this Government is and so forth. But that does not really give the impression that I want to stand. Supposing I am not yet a nominated candidate and yet I want to tell the people that actually come next election, I have every intention of standing for the presidency? The position we have now is that such people who talk frankly and want to stand are actually not being given the opportunity to go round and talk freely. We have had people who have been chased away from rostrums, security people have interfered with them, and the Minister says that does not matter! Surely, it should matter if somebody is going to be frank and say that they want to stand during the next election for the position of the President. This is what we are concerned about, not just going around beating about the bush.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much. I would like to thank hon. Mayanja Nkangi for giving way. The Constitution of Uganda is very elaborate about the freedom and rights of every Ugandan to contest the presidency. Would the hon. Minister of Justice explain to us why Government is worried about the participation of many candidates in the presidential elections. Why should Government be worried that so many candidates are contesting for the presidency?  Do you have a personal investment or a personal interest in the institution? Isn’t the institution for all of us?  Could the Minister explain to us?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Speaker, if hon. Ongom will allow me, let me start with the easier question. Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi made a statement, apparently of fact. He said ‘Government is worried’. Where is the evidence? Government is not worried. I can make this statement because I am part of Government, but he cannot make it.  In the absence of the evidence, we are not worried. He can stand, and so can other people. Let me go back to the other issue –(Interruption).

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much for giving way, hon. Mayanja Nkangi. Mr. Speaker, there is evidence on the ground with reference to the Constitution of Uganda. One of the people who can ably talk anywhere in Uganda or outside Uganda representing Government in Uganda is the President. Of recent, it has been on record that President Museveni has expressed his interest to contest with Col. Besigye for the institution of the presidency. So, that is the information I am giving you.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Speaker, the question put to me earlier on was why Government is worried about the participation of many people. You are now saying that a specific person is worrying the Government. I can tell you that the person you are talking about is campaigning even now, but nobody is stopping him. When you say that the President is worried about many people, I want to tell you, as the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, this Constitution will defend the person if the Government infringes on his rights of freedom of speech.  

Having said that, hon. Ongom is saying that it is no use distinguishing between declaration of intension to stand and actually going to the Electoral Commission to say that you want to be a candidate, in other words, registering for candidacy for the presidency. To me, that difference or distinction is vital. The distinction is vital. So, the question really arising is this; can I say anything before the nomination day? The answer is yes, according to our Constitution. There is freedom of speech, freedom of assembly and so on, subject only to the Police Act. You are not given a right to say anything you want to or meet at any time if the meeting might potentially cause a breach of the peace. That is all!

The hon. Members say that some people have been stopped. If people have been stopped illegally or unlawfully, then I say those people have got a right to raise the issue legally and lawfully. Furthermore, Mr. Ssebagala, former Mayor of Kampala City, has been campaigning for almost one year now. Who has stopped him? Let me say this, if we Members of Parliament and citizens of this country cannot stand by our rights, so much more trouble for us! We have got a right to speak out to an assembly, so go ahead and do so, but do not say that today you are a candidate for presidency, because that will bring you straight to Article 103 of the Constitution, otherwise you can speak. As a politician, if I want to stand I would only want to access people. I would talk to them so that people know about me, judge my character, my ability and potential for a candidate, so that some time if I declare myself as a candidate for the presidency, my capabilities are known. Once I mention my candidacy, everybody will say ‘yes, we know him.’ This is really what a potential candidate should do for this office.

We suggested a nomination fee of 8/= million. One Member had said no money at all, and hon. Ken Lukyamuzi had said one million or two million so that he could stand. Even 10 million was mentioned. All these figures have been mentioned. The first thing we should decide on, as far as I can see, is the principle on whether money should be paid at all. That is a principle, first of all. Incidentally, the Committee, by implication if not expressly says ‘yes’, and we in Cabinet say ‘yes’.  We say yes because there has to be a way of eliminating frivolity from this campaign. Everybody would stand, 20 or 60 of them, because anybody can come in against the promise of facilitation of 40 million shillings to every candidate. They give you 40 million shillings and you put in 5 million. This is a wonderful investment! Is this country prepared to encourage such ‘political investment’? My answer would be no. I think we should say, in principle let there be some way of gauging the seriousness of a candidate. However, you asked the question –(Interruption)

MR. KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. Minister. In the law we are going repeal, the nomination fee was 2/= million and only three candidates stood. How can the Minister relate that to the present scenario? I thank you –(Mr. Lukyamuzi rose_)

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Speaker, I do not want to appear to be rude, but I have been quiet all the time, so I should be left to say what I want to say to Parliament. However, I will give way this time.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged. Mr. Speaker, I seek some clarification. Nearly all the Members of this Parliament know what it means to stand for Parliament. Would the Minister of Justice clarify as to whether it is easier for a candidate to find the 100 supporters in two thirds of all the districts of Uganda than it is to find 8 million shillings? I say this, having gone through some experience related to finding a political system, namely the democratic federal system, which I had earlier proposed. I discovered that it is not easy, at all, for anyone to just surrender his signature. Some of these people might fear that someone is going to go to their bank and eventually detain them. So, would the Minister tell this House whether it is easier for an intending candidate to get those signatures than it is to get the money?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Lukyamuzi, the Minister was not dealing with the signatures, the Minister was dealing with the nomination fee. Yesterday we said that the issue of the signatures is constitutional and this Bill has nothing to do with it. So ask him about the money and not the signatures, which he has not even been talking about. 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: I am extremely indebted to you, Mr. Speaker. Hon. Kaggwa Medi asked what the position is now. He said that last time we had three candidates and now we have got more. That is freedom! It is acceptable! You may as well say 2/= million then and now 8/= million. All that depends on how much is really gauged to be proper under the circumstances. It is scientific. It is really subjective. But we think, if you really want to hold the highest office in this land, you do not have to have the 8/= million, we figure that you must have support people who support you really seriously, so they will help you raise this required fee. In fact, it is also refundable. So, I do not really see a problem here. The question is really how much? I would be prepared to concede, if it was properly moved, to come down from 8 million shillings and go up from 2 million shillings to say 5 million shillings. 

On penalties for defamation, there are some hon. Members who said they should say anything. They said it does not matter because they are campaigning. I think that is basically wrong. If in fact the potential presidential candidates are such ladies and gentlemen, and I have no reason to say they are not, then the law will not affect them. Nobody worries about a law or a sanction when in fact he or she is not going to break the law. 

I have known of cases, and I can tell you that this was about four years ago. Someone went to my constituency and said that I was still a Minister of Finance. They said that the Minister of Finance is campaigning and is stealing money from the Ministry of Finance. That was terribly defamatory! If you are going to let such statements be made in the name of promoting a candidate, I think that is wrong. So, I will support the penalties in the Bill. We can consider the period at committee stage. Hon. Ogalo has made some suggestions for the committee stage. We shall consider them.  

Some Members of Parliament argue that the incumbent has advantage over non-incumbent candidates. So they say that to be level, the incumbent’s movements should be restricted. I say that this will be politically improper, if not legally improper. A President is given five years.  He has a mandate of five years. The Government of the republic must go on.  The term of the mandate is a crucial term. How can you tell him or her that he/she may not propagate policies or bring legislation? That cannot do! If you want to compete against him or her, have better policies, talk about them, seek to show the incompetence or the deficiencies in his own policies. I do not think it can stop him or her from going around the country. Those are the sort of things about the office.  

The registers that were used in June for the referendum have been rectified. They will be used for the 100 names, which potential candidates need. Otherwise, the Electoral Commission ensures that whoever is entitled to vote will be allowed to vote when the voting time comes.  

On election tie-ups or failure to get 51 per cent of total votes, I want to thank the Committee and also hon. Members who have actually pointed this out. We need a specific legislation to cover a situation where many of the candidates get 51 per cent or more of the votes cast, so that a re-run is necessary. So, we need a specific law on that one.  

‘Can the Electoral Commission itself identify saboteurs?’  Mr. Speaker, the Government is not expecting the Electoral Commission to do this. The Government expects the Electoral Commission to know where to get the information.  We expect them to liase with those agencies of Government, which know about this. So, when it comes to a candidate appearing before the Electoral Commission, the two communicants can tell the candidate that they have got a list, so that they may know so and so. We do not expect to turn this thing into some sort of espionage. We simply expect them to know where to get the information and the information will be there.   

Finally, an issue was raised on the timing of the Political Organisation’s Bill. An hon. Member said it should have come before this Bill. The Political Organisations Bill is dated 1998, that is two years ago. It came here and it should have been debated. The issue was because it was realised that Article 269 of the Constitution sort of placed restrictions on certain things that could be done by political parties and they would not go unless a referendum was held. So, the Bill was, if you like, tactically set aside for sometime. Now that the referendum has been held, it becomes incumbent upon this Parliament, under Article 83, to regulate the systems. And we are going to do this possibly next week.  I beg to move, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is that the Bill be read a Second Time

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether we should start the committee stage now. I think this is a convenient time to adjourn. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.25 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 16th November, 2000 at 2.00 p.m.)



