Thursday, 11 November 2010

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting. This afternoon we have teachers and pupils of St Peter’s Primary School in Namilyango, represented by Hon. Betty Nambooze. They are here to observe our debates. Please join me in welcoming them. Please stand up so that we can see you. You are welcome.  Also present is the family of the late James Mwandha.

Hon. Members, as you can see, we have an overloaded Order Paper, but I hope we will be able to do some work today. On item No.3, we have a resolution to pay tribute to the late hon. James Mwandha who died yesterday. I want to inform you that I will allocate not more than an hour on this topic before we get to move to another.

Item No.4 is just the issue of putting a question because there was already a debate and what remained were details of allocation, which is not the work of this Parliament, but of the Executive. I hope they will be able to solve it. After that we will then move on to the motion on CHOGM.

So, still you can see that we have a lot of work to do. I want to make an appeal that even after you have been nominated on 25th and 26th of November, we should put in a week, after which I will give you a Christmas recess. Let us compromise on this so as to clear as much work as possible before we go into the campaigns.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE JAMES MWANDHA, FORMER MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT REPRESENTING PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES

2.55
MR WILSON WILLIAM NOKRACH (NRM, Persons with Disabilities Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move a motion for a Resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Hon. James Mwandha. This motion is moved under Rule 44 of our Rules of Procedure.

“WHEREAS Parliament has learnt with profound shock and sadness of the death of hon. James Mwandha, which occurred on 9th November at Mulago Hospital;

AND WHEREAS the late hon. James Mwandha diligently served this country as a Member of the National Resistance Movement and the sixth and seventh parliaments where he exhibited great skills of a legislator;

AWARE that the late Hon. James Mwandha was the assumption of the right and dignity of human kind, especially the marginalised groups, persons with disabilities, whose cause he articulated with a lot of zeal;

AND FURTHER AWARE that the late hon. James Mwandha held several   political positions, including being the Chairperson of the Commonwealth Persons With Disabilities Forum, the Chairperson of the National Action on Physical Disability, and a Member of the National Union of Disabled Persons of Uganda where he played key administrative and decision-making roles in matters that have helped to unify persons with disabilities and created a sense of direction in pursuit of common interests for persons with disabilities both at domestic and international levels;

RECOGNIZING that the late hon. James Mwandha, a survivor of the deadly polio was an intelligent man; had an admirable Masters Degree in Business Administration from the University of Berths in England and was a Member of the Institute of Chartered Secretaries and Administrators in the United Kingdom;

NOTING that the late hon. James Mwandha held several senior positions in the Public Service of Uganda; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:

1.	That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, friends and persons with disabilities and the nation as a whole, upon the loss of this illustrious son of Uganda;

2.	That it takes cognizance of the distinguished services rendered and contributions made by the late hon. James Mwandha in the political, human rights and Public Service of Uganda; and

3.	That Parliament prays to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved and the soul of the late hon. James Mwandha in eternal peace.”

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Well, it is seconded.

MR NOKRACH: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I move this motion in memory of the great contributions my late colleague made. Those who were in Parliament earlier on will recall that the late hon. James Mwandha was a very articulate man and a fighter for human rights.

In areas of disability, he was a fellow consultant because we started the disability movement together. We will all recall that he did quite a lot of good work for this country and his curriculum vitae shows a lot of commitment and serious work that he did in this country and outside this country. He is s great loss not only to the disability movement, but countrywide. We shall always remember him for his wisdom, commitment, and his ability to give good advice to people.

And in the area of disability, we have lost a consultant. Mr Speaker and hon. Members, upon this background, I move this motion and I beg you to support it. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Yes, hon. Magoola.

3.00
MRS BEATRICE ZIRABAMUZALE MAGOOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to second the motion though sadly, but my brother has gone to heaven. I knew the late James Mwandha when we were both children. We were born in the same village and we went to the same primary school. It is at that school that I saw a crippled man growing up, as we used to call him. He was energetic, jolly, and friendly and I saw him each day growing into a man who was going to be beneficial to this country.

As a politician, I saw him join politics. I used to laugh at him because during the campaigns, four cousins stood in Bugweri; he was not a party to them for a while and one of those four was my elder brother. But it looks as if someone whispered to him that, “Look at those fools; the four cousins are standing against each other; you go and join the group and let us see what fire comes out of that”. Surprisingly, James Mwandha became the winner and we were all saying, “Look at the fools; cousins fighting one another,” and there he became the MP for Bugweri.

He was a very fantastic worker as a legislator. He cared for all of us. He cared for the young ones; he cared for the elderly; and he cared for those who were disadvantaged, the PWDs. I could see him meeting them whenever he chose whether at his house here in Kampala or in Bugweri. I am sure they are going to miss him; we are all going to miss him.

Late hon. James Mwandha as a legislator

I saw a very eloquent man; a man who used to read books so that when he came to deliberate, he knew what he was talking about. People used to say, “That man also!” You know people have got their way of putting things, but they were looking at a man whose brilliance they never thought could come from a man who had suffered from polio; but there he was.

James Mwandha as a community member in Kampala, in Bugweri or in Busoga as a whole, was a very sociable man. He would laugh and talk to all ages. He would talk to the young ones; he would talk to the sick; and he would talk to the elderly, and he liked and loved his family members. I happen to be a family member; a cousin.

I really want to praise him for having turned into a real model for his family as a reader. All his children have grown up as children who are read, because they were born into the culture of reading widely; and all of them have really soared high wherever they have gone.

We are all bereaved, but I think we should celebrate because James Mwandha has really suffered. Being lame is not something that one would wish to be; but there he was working with different groups of people, visiting several families and you would think that he was more able than those of us who had two legs.

We are going to miss him, but I want to say this to my dear “wife” in Lusoga, that be brave because you have done a good job for all of us. None of us would have been able to look after James Mwandha, but you did.

I want to inform my nephews and nieces that you had a great father; a father who cared for all of us and a father who had a good word at a bad time for any of us. 

I would like to inform you that we are missing a legislator whom we lost at the time when he lost his campaign, but wherever he was - I remember meeting him in the council for Busoga University. I have never heard of anybody who is as wise as James Mwandha has been. We pray that his soul rests in eternal life. I thank you.

3.04
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I support the motion. As a Leader of Government Business in Parliament, I used to relate very much with the late honourable Member of Parliament. As already noted, he was very articulate and convincing. In fact, if he had a major issue and he supported it, then you were sure that many Members would support the issue.

Furthermore, when we were Members of the Constituent Assembly, he is one of the people who recommended that persons with disabilities should be represented in Parliament, hence Article 78 of the Constitution. I refer you to Article 78(1)(c), on the composition of Parliament: “Parliament shall consist of:
(c) such numbers of representatives of the army, youth, workers, persons with disabilities and other groups...” and those who have disabilities who are Members of this Parliament have been able to raise important issues which we have captured.

One of them is to enable persons with disabilities to access buildings. For example, I am very happy that Members with disabilities can now access Parliament and when I had a major accident, the helicopter crash, I had just recovered and I found it difficult to use the steps. I had to access Parliament using that avenue provided for persons with disabilities.

So, many of us here may feel that we do not have disabilities, but anytime it can occur to us. So, it is very important to ensure that we cater for persons with disabilities. As already mentioned, he played a major role internationally in making the international community understand the unique problems facing persons with disabilities in developing countries.

I wish also to thank him and his dear wife who is here, for having educated their children very well and one of the children is a Clerk to Parliament. May the Almighty sustain the bereaved. 

3.09
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, Persons with Disabilities): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion and I want to say that it is very sad that we have lost hon. James Mwandha. To some of us, he has been a father; a brilliant advisor; and we had confidence that whatever he told us would contribute to the continuity of the disability movement. Before coming to Parliament, I was a very energetic person and I always wanted to know about issues in Parliament reflecting disability. 

Most of the time, we went through hon. James Mwandha to ensure that our issues advanced through the different committees are reflected in Parliamentary work; and when you went through hon. James Mwandha, you would be very sure that your matter would go through. 

As I come to Parliament now, sometimes you see me quiet; but at the back of my mind, I ask myself whether I can measure up to the standard and level of debate hon. James Mwandha put up as a representative of the disabled persons in this Parliament. I want to say that we appreciate his work and we acknowledge his contribution when he represented us in the UN when enacting the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Mr Speaker, this law is already in place and we are happy that Uganda has already ratified this convention.

Secondly, he was very instrumental in the enacting of The Disability Act, 2006 and he was a champion for fighting Polio in Uganda. As a young activist, I used to have a lot of energy while going to him for consultation. Most of the time, he would say in his humble voice, “Safia, you must learn to work with people”, and many times he used the English adage that, “If you cannot fight him, then you join him”. I think that helped to shape my life and the way I do my work. I learnt the importance of making allies to be able to achieve what I want. We should all remember him and may his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.12
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Central): Thank you. First, I support the motion and I thank you, Mr Speaker, for nurturing the culture of giving credit where it is due. I want to thank you for allowing Parliament to move this motion to recognise and honour our fallen colleague, hon. James Mwandha. 

Mr Speaker, hon. James Mwandha was a great son of this country; he did a lot not only for us persons with disabilities, but for the entire country. The Hansard and other parliamentary records can tell you how much hon. James Mwandha did for this country, not only for persons with disabilities. Therefore, it is a very big loss for the whole country. 

The people of this country have lost a very brilliant, intelligent and articulate advocate. On behalf of my constituents and on my own behalf, I want to extend my most sincere sympathies to the bereaved family, the nation and friends of hon. James Mwandha. I also wish to extend my sympathies to the disability community in this country for losing a great advocate of our rights.

Mr Speaker, hon. James Mwandha, despite his disability, worked very hard and was very exemplary; he is an inspiring role model, not only for us in the disability movement, but for the entire country. While we recognise that he was a survivor of Polio, it is also important to note that his Polio syndrome could have led to the shortening of his life. 

On that note, I wish to appeal to the government to ensure that the crusade against Polio in this country should not stop. And that for us in this modern era, should not continue to lose our people on account of Polio. Please, Government make every effort to eradicate Polio in this country.

Lastly, we have already noted that hon. Mwandha worked very hard, especially in terms of enacting regulations for the protection and promotion of rights of persons with disabilities. But I want to say that for the vision of hon. James Mwandha to be carried forward, these laws must be implemented. If these laws are not implemented, we will never be able to realise the vision of hon. James Mwandha.

I, therefore, call upon the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister and relevant ministers, to ensure that laws enacted by Parliament, and especially those relating to the protection and promotion of persons with disabilities, are well understood and implemented. May the Almighty God sustain the bereaved family and rest the soul of hon. James Mwandha in eternal peace. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Kawanga, you are coming next, but before you do, in the gallery we have teachers and pupils of Mugema Primary School, the area represented by hon. Nansubuga. You are well come. 

3.17
MR KAWANGA JOHN BAPTIST (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is with sadness that I rise to support this motion, but perhaps the mover will permit me to make some corrections, especially in the second paragraph. Where you say, “Member of National Resistance Movement, you wanted to say Member of the National Resistance Council (NRC)” he was a Member of the National Resistance Council and Member of the Constituent Assembly. I think those should be added. 

I had the honour of meeting hon. James Mwandha as a Member of the National Resistance Council. What struck me about hon. James Mwandha was the fact that he was a man, not just with a disability, but really serious disability. But in spite of that he was a complete person; no regrets; extremely well-educated, somebody who could stand anywhere. He did not express any feelings of sadness or anything; a complete person. He lived a full life. He is somebody whom I always looked at and said, “Look, God can be great. He can give disability to other people and then enable them to do other things.” 

He performed perfectly well as a Member of the National Resistance Council. He did a wonderful job in the Constituent Assembly and in subsequent parliaments. He is somebody who always knew what he was talking about whenever he stood up. He was very well-read, very well-educated and a decent gentleman.

I always remember him complaining about the steps of Parliament. Since then, things have improved a little bit for persons with disabilities; but Mwandha came here when no provision had been made for persons with disabilities. Mwandha would move and be wherever he was supposed to be to do his work without complaining. Once in a while, he would say, “You people should do something about these things,” but that did not prevent him from doing his job.”

I did not know his family, except Martha Kaganzi, whom we have worked with very closely for a long time. All I want to say to the family is that I think you, together with this country, have lost a very great son of this country. He made a wonderful contribution to the development of constitutionalism and the economy because he was extremely well-versed with it, and education generally, but particularly to the cause of persons with disabilities.  May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.20
MR DAUDI MIGEREKO (NRM, Butembe County, Jinja): Thank you very much, Rt hon. Speaker. I, too, stand here to support the motion moved by hon. William Nokrach and seconded by hon. Beatrice Magoola, that this House pays tribute to the late James Mwandha, and also to take note of his illustrious life and contribution to the life of many Ugandans, Africans and humanity in general, but more so, to the persons with disabilities.

I would also like to go on record as registering condolences to Mrs Mwandha who is seated here, the children and in particular Martha Kaganzi with whom we work, over this big and most untimely loss of our brother, the late James Mwandha.

At the age of 73, he was still very active in the service of the country and humanity. You have all heard that up to this day, he was chairing several bodies both locally and internationally, and he was able to push for the cause of the Disability Movement, the cause of education, and for the general improvement in the lives of many people he knew and interacted with, and those he thought he had to serve. 

Hon. Mwandha served as a legislator and handled many issues passionately. He pushed for the cause of the Disability Movement as you have already heard. By the time he left Parliament and left this world, he had made a lasting contribution to the cause of the Disability Movement, which will stand for many years to come. We must commend him. 

Hon. Mwandha was an outstanding legislator. He took off time to try and understand whatever issues were to be handled by this House. He took off time to study as widely as possible issues that he was to contribute on the Floor of this House. He took a lot of interest in issues of disability as you have already heard. He also took a lot of interest in issues to do with the economy. He also took a lot of interest in issues to do with accountability.

He made an outstanding contribution to the formulation of our Budget Act. Hon. Mwandha and hon. Musumba took a lot of interest in the budget process. They travelled fairly widely, consulted fairly widely all over the world, and tried to understand the budget process in different parts of this world. In the process, they were able to come up with the Budget Bill, which was passed as the Budget Act. He was also privileged to serve as the vice-chairman of that committee and he did an incredibly good job as one of the leaders of the Budget Committee.

Hon. Mwandha took a lot of interest in accountability issues. I remember whenever he stood up to challenge anyone on the frontbench over a number of issues to do with their ministries, one had to be really prepared in order to respond.

On our side as the National Resistance Movement, such people help us prepare better to serve this country. We shall, therefore, greatly miss the interactions we have been having with him; the contribution he has been making that helped us prepare ourselves to be in a position to respond to critical issues with the level of preparedness one would always want to see us put up.

Hon. Mwandha was also a great educationist. He was a great educationist by way of training, and also did a lot of practice as an educationist. He headed the Management Training and Advisory Centre at Nakawa. He also headed the Business School at Nakawa and managed to attend to the education needs of many people who went through his hands. I am sure many of them will greatly miss him.

On my part as a Member of Parliament for Butembe, I was always very proud of his contribution as an old boy of Busoga College Mwiri. He always took issues to do with Busoga College Mwiri close to his heart. He took off time to interact with students at Mwiri; he took off time to interact with teachers at Mwiri, particularly when there were sessions about career guidance. The students, teachers and everybody associated with Busoga College Mwiri will greatly miss the input; the interactions that hon. James Mwandha had always been able to provide to all of us.  It is normally difficult to have enough words to coin, in recognition of the outstanding contribution of a person like hon. James Mwandha. The best we can say is that we shall try to take on the good things that he made contribution to. May his soul rest in eternal peace and we shall greatly miss hon. James Mwandha. I thank you.

3.28
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion as moved, and specifically to take this moment to pay tribute to a fallen colleague, the hon. James Mwandha, whom I was privileged to meet in the Seventh Parliament. 

It has been said here that James Mwandha was a distinguished and very experienced legislator. I also want to say that I have been privileged over time to meet James Mwandha and his family, and I can put it here confidently that James Mwandha was a distinguished father and his family was proud to have him as its father. I enjoyed the warmth of the Mwandha family, especially the days when he was sick and we had to catch up with him and the family in hospital. 

I think James Mwandha will also be remembered as a very patient man. He was not quick, not fast, not erratic, and not anything; very patient with an issue, but he always pushed it to its logical conclusion. 

In the Seventh Parliament, James Mwandha was among those Members of this House who were the architects of the Parliamentary Advocacy Forum; a group in this House that decided to set itself up and pursue matters in regard to constitutionalism. 

And I recall, Mr Speaker, that at that time we engaged in very serious debate in regard to constitutional amendments that were up in the House. We moved this country from the far east to the far west, taking the message to the people of this country that our Constitution at the time needed not to have been amended to lift term limits. James Mwandha was a very resilient member of the Parliamentary Advocacy Forum.

But he was also a role model to some of us who really did not know much about legislation. We learnt a lot from him. 

We will miss James Mwandha also from the perspective of the Forum for Democratic Change. James Mwandha was a member of the National Executive Committee of the Forum for Democratic Change. He was also in our league for persons with disabilities. He sat in the party management committee and the national delegates’ conference of the party.   

About two weeks ago, I remember I had a final chat with him - now I know it was final. James Mwandha came up and was very concerned with the electoral processes in the country. He had always wanted a country where democracy flourished; where justice and fairness were available to all of us.

And I recall in that last meeting he was very concerned about the electoral processes in the country; about the voter register; about whether the election that we are going into would be free and fair and would not have the characteristic violence and intimidation. And we tried to discuss all these matters with a lot of hope. Unfortunately, he has had to rest; he has died without seeing what will become of this election. 

But I hope that the onus is on all of us to ensure that these ideals for which the likes of James Mwandha devoted their lives - the pursuit for democracy; the pursuit for transparency - will be ideals that we will champion. Otherwise, they would have died in vain, reminding this country that corruption eats up the very fibre of our society and that if we are corrupt, there will be no drugs in the hospitals. I think we owe it to them to live lives of integrity.

In 2006, James Mwandha would have been back in this House, but for a key issue which he kept telling us about and hoping that it would be reformed some day. And I hope that this House will consider the issue of the mode of elections for representatives of persons with disabilities. 

James Mwandha was very concerned about, one, the way the Electoral College for persons with disabilities is constituted. 

Two, he also thought that the composition of the college itself on its own, had the capacity to disenfranchise other people who had disabilities and who would have wanted to be elected. 

Three, it had not been, and it is not aligned yet with the ideals of the multiparty dispensation. Those were his concerns and he kept hoping and praying that some day we would refocus on these matters so that the mode of elections for representatives for persons with disabilities would become an all embracing process and bring in the most. 

We regret, however, that unfortunately, we did not have James Mwandha coming back to this House owing to the challenges of this electoral process.

Lastly, I would like to pray, and aware that currently there is a resurgence of Polio. I have read reports and I think the ministers have been in this House to tell us that there are cases again spotted even in our own country.

I would like to take this moment to pray that as Ugandans, we will refocus our energies on the fight against Polio and other treatable and immunisable conditions among our children and our people.  

There is no reason, for instance, why we should have a condition like Pneumonia clearly affecting our children and yet I understand there is a vaccine against Pneumonia and we cannot raise money in this country to immunise Uganda’s children, but we can raise money to do any other thing but save the children of this country.  The resurgence of Polio must be combated, but also implement the very policies that we make in this House.

We passed the Disability Act, but you need to go to the buildings that are springing up in the city. When it comes to the issue of access, people are still putting up buildings which persons with disabilities cannot access, and I think it is a shame. Why would we have the laws and policies in place when we cannot implement them? Why would we have a policy in place saying we recognise that disability is not inability? And indeed, people like James Mwandha had no apologies to make. He was a brilliant and very distinguished fellow. He needed no sympathy. He was just, like hon. Kawanga said, a man in totality and very brilliant. Why is it that as a country we relegate the issue of children with disability to NGOs? We cannot afford braille equipment for our children yet we know if one is blind, they only need that equipment. I hope that as we mourn hon. James Mwandha, our hearts will have a renewed commitment to issues of disability in this country.

I want to convey our deepest condolences to Mrs Mwandha, the children and to the entire family and persons with disability over this very painful loss.

THE SPEAKER: The late hon. James Mwandha was one of the designers of the Parliamentary Pensions Bill, which became an Act.

3.39
MRS SARAH NYOMBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): The very consoling factor about death is that every one of us has to die. Today it is James’ day, tomorrow it will be someone else. I am privileged to have worked with James in Parliament and we were serving on the same Committee of Finance. We also share the same profession. He has been a chartered secretary and administrator (fellow). He told me that he did not know the framers of the name “Chartered Secretaries”; the accounting we do in this course is not suitable for a name chartered secretaries. The entire body of chartered secretaries and administrators in Uganda has lost a great man. I promise that those who are here will keep his work up. 

I convey my condolences to the family and especially Martha, whom we have closely worked with. May his soul rest in eternal peace!

3.42
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): I stand here to support the motion. I want to thank my sister, hon. Nansubuga, for the comment she made about hon. James Mwandha. He was a member of the Institute of Chartered Secretaries and Administrators. He was a fellow and I am also a fellow of Certified Accountants. He was among those in the ICSA in Uganda who were allowed to become accountants under the Institute of Certified Public Accountants (ICPA) Uganda. This shows how valuable he was in the ICSA group. 

When I heard hon. Migereko talking good about hon. James, I recalled the days of PAFO. When we were in Jinja, he sent people to beat James Mwandha and here he comes to say that this man was very good. These are dangerous people on earth!

James Mwandha is my old boy and a teacher, while I am also a teacher. He was my mentor because when I came here I saw a man. I have seen people in this Parliament, but I can say that we do not treasure intelligence. If we had really intended to have people of good calibre, James Mwandha would be seated here as a Member of Parliament. 

He contributed to this country’s economy; people are coming from all over the world to study about our Budget Act which was made by a man who was disabled in the legs, but whose brain was more than able and none of you can see that. I have my colleague hon. David Guma; he one time moved and joined PAFO and had retired as captain. When he went back to Government, he was promoted to major.

When we are applying laws, we should do it equitably. I want to ask everybody here to go and read our reports in the Hansard on these topics: The sale of UCB; and investigations into Uganda Railways; you will see who James Mwandha was and know that this frontbench of ours has nothing. I am bringing up these to show you what contribution James has done. He was in NRC, CA, 6th and 7th Parliaments, but after he has died, we cannot bring him to access the precincts of Parliament, yet when hon. Mayombo died as permanent secretary we brought him here. These double standards must stop.
 
Polio must be cast out of Uganda, but we must try to nurture brains. James Mwandha is lucky because he went to Busoga College Mwiri, where I went and which is a good school. During our time in that school, we did not fail; but the standard has now gone down; it no longer performs to the standards of our time. And this is also applicable to some other disadvantaged children in those villages. There are many disabled kids whose parents cannot take them to school. We need affirmative action to help the disabled access a good education because they are very intelligent people. They can make a lot of contribution to this country just like hon. James Mwandha has done. He has died; and we shall miss him because we loved him. FDC will miss a very big supporter and the entire country, especially the sensible people, will miss an asset. May his soul rest in eternal peace!

3.49
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mrs Maria Mutagamba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to support the Motion and to pay tribute to our fallen brother, hon. James Mwandha, with whom I worked for over five years as a member of the Board of Directors of Bank of Baroda. That was the time when Government was still nominating people to represent its interests in parastatals that Government had interest in. At that time, the government had 49 percent shares in Bank of Baroda. 

During that time, we worked together as directors of that bank. I remember vividly the support that the late extended, first to me, because I was very new in Government circles, although I was a banker. He had the experience and was a polished accountant and administrator. He was a persuasive person, who made friends easily. In such a situation, we were able, as a board and as an institution, to survive during the time when other parastatals were making losses. Bank of Baroda was the only institution that was paying dividends to Government.

I wish, therefore, to put it on record that hon. Mwandha contributed greatly to the success of Bank of Baroda. During our time, we were able to establish new branches like those in Iganga, Mbale, Masaka and Mbarara. Hon. Mwandha was very instrumental in making sure that those branches were opened.

He also contributed in ensuring that Ugandans accessed loans and facilities in Bank of Baroda. At that time, it was mainly the Asian community that used to get loans. But because we were there and felt that Ugandans should be encouraged, we persuaded the bank to allow Ugandans to access funds. By the time we left when Government sold its shares, many Ugandans, especially big business people had started accessing funds and facilities from Bank of Baroda.

During those five or so years, I travelled a lot with the late Mwandha to India because after very two years we would have our board meetings in India, either in New Delhi, Bombay or any other city. But in spite of the disability, I noticed his commitment and strength because he never exhibited fatigue; he would sit and deliberate effectively all day long. At the same time, in spite of the tussles of travelling, he was cheerful. I commend him for that.

That was the time he invited me to meet his family. I admired the family and the way he took care of the children. He loved his children and had a supportive wife. I really want to thank hon. Mwandha for the fruitful life he lived with his family. 

During that time, as it has been pointed out by the Prime Minister, we had the NRC. I remember the struggle that hon. Mwandha put up to get people with disabilities brought into Parliament. I, therefore, want to celebrate his achievement. I think all Ugandans will remember him for having worked very hard to empower PWDs and to have them effectively represented in the politics of Uganda.

I want to take this opportunity to thank the family, especially Mrs Mwandha, for having looked after our brother and for standing by him up to the last hour. We want to encourage you to remain together and we pray for you. May the Almighty God give the late Mwandha eternal peace! I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, at the beginning of this business, we agreed to commit an hour to this debate and it is over. But I had already identified hon. Arumadri. I think let him wind up because we agreed on an hour, which has exactly lapsed since we started.

3.54
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Shakespeare had a saying, which is almost a dictum now, that: “The evil that men do lives after them; the good is oft interred with their bones.” But this is not how we are going to remember our late colleague, hon. Mwandha. We will remember James more by the good side of life which he exhibited, and not by the shortcomings or human failings. You cannot talk about the Seventh Parliament without mentioning hon. Mwandha. Sitting in the third row on this side, James would always insist on saying his beat; he would say it calmly and very firmly.

But our system is not kind to those who want to do well. Everything else being equal, James should have been a Member of this Parliament. But his rights were hijacked; I think more because of his political persuasion. And so we mourn him today after not affording him an opportunity to serve the country in the capacity he knew best, legislating in the House. 

With a very heavy heart, as my personal friend who introduced me to a scheme called the Parliamentary Trust Fund, which has saved some of us from the financial woes which many of my colleagues are facing - had he been here, I can assure you that you would not have fallen into that pit from which you are trying to get out with difficulty. I want to remember hon. Mwandha also in that regard. May the Almighty God comfort the family and rest his soul in eternal peace! I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, we have been dealing with the Motion to pay tribute to our fallen friend, the late James Mwandha, moved by hon. Nokrach and supported by hon. Magoola. Now it is my duty to put the question on the Motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion carried.)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I am sorry I came in late, but I am just wondering whether Members were given the programme, in case they would like to join in the burial arrangements. Has it been communicated? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not have the programme, do you have it?

MS ALASO: I stand to be corrected but tentatively, tomorrow at 9.00 O’clock, the body will be at All Saints Church. There will be a funeral service and then burial will be on Sunday.

THE SPEAKER: Where will it be?

MS ALASO: Those are the details I do not have - but they say in Busembatya. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay.  

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT AUTHORISING GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SDR 85.7 MILLION (EQUIVALENT TO US$130 MILLION (UGX 286 BILLION) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK, FOR FINANCING OF THE HEALTH SYSTEMS STRENGTHENING PROJECT

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the status of this Motion is that we fully debated it, but I think reservations were expressed about cutting the pieces we are giving to the various sectors. I think that was the only issue which, in my view, is purely administrative. I don’t think we can sit here and cut, but I don’t know whether the ministers have agreed to give us information on what they have done in order to address the reservations expressed. 

4.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The funding components of the loan is that the maternal and newborn would take US$ 30 million as discussed, out of the total of US$ 130 million; and the human resource development would take US$ 5 million; the health infrastructure would be US$ 85 million; leadership and management would be US$ 10 million; and the total amount would be US$ 130 million of the total loan. 

One thing I can add for purposes of clarity - in fact, I have two sector ministers here; they can provide supplementary information on the composition of how this fund is allocated.  

The only component which I think will be of interest to Members of Parliament, which the Members repeatedly raised, is the issue of borrowing and debt sustainability. I want to confirm to the House that the borrowing of this amount and the terms and conditions are very concessional and they are in line with the government debt strategy where sustainability for the country to continue to meet its repayment obligations without compromising the future is maintained. 

We have ratios: We have solvency ratio, liquidity ratio and we have caps on them measured on domestic resource base as well as foreign exchange earnings and the performance – the growth of the economy - and when you look at the caps of all of these, whether it is solvency ratio or liquidity ratio, the borrowings that we have done are within the caps. I thank you for the opportunity, Mr Speaker.   

4.03
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have no objection as far as the total borrowed is concerned because it is going to the health sector.  But the issue is how it has been divided. You are talking of maternal, what are these ingredients? That was the issue. You could be using the word “maternal” and yet you are going to do things which are of less value. 

I will give an example of human resource. Mr Speaker, if you read what it says, it says that we are going to hire consultants when we have trained Ugandan nurses. We do not want this loan here to be like the nutrition loan. That is the reason why we objected to how the money has been divided in detail and what it really means. 

Mr Speaker, the minister has changed nothing; he is coming here to mention the same figures, which he mentioned the other time. They assume we are asleep, and we shall forget. The reason why you went back was for you to return with real tangible things for Ugandans and not these consultancies; not these things of yours for the sake of wanting money. (Applause) For us we need it –

MR SPEAKER: Then, what do we do because we are dealing with the administration part of the fund? Do you want us to suspend a decision on this so that we get people and you sit? Let us hear the minister.
4.04
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Mr Speaker, we had a meeting - the hon. Member from Bugungu is not here; he is the one who chaired the meeting. We agreed that the portion on reproductive health is going to be used in the whole country to support reproductive health, especially family planning. 

When we talk about hiring additional people, this was because during the discussions with the World Bank, we agreed that we didn’t have enough personnel in the Ministry of Health to operationalise this loan. So, we are going to hire additional consultants within the country. Nobody is going to come from outside; this is for the purpose of absorbing the loan. We are not going to hire expatriates for this purpose. Everybody is going to be from within Uganda and we have already identified and interviewed the people; nobody is coming from outside. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Member. Instead of wasting time on this, I suggest that this matter be brought back to the House on Tuesday. Meanwhile, you said you had a meeting, but I suggest that hon. Alaso gets three people from this side and hon. Migereko, gets six people from this side to sit with the ministers concerned, and thrush out the differences so that this matter will come again on Tuesday. You go back; we shall accord space for this matter on the Order Paper on Tuesday. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I do very seriously agree with you. I do not want to suggest people from the other side, but this loan is very dear to us, the maternal health chapter of this Parliament and the women parliamentarians. So, it is at least my additional prayer that from the other side - because they both sit on the other side - you bring us some people from UWOPA and NAWOMU and then we sit down together. We cannot compromise on this maternal health loan. It is very dear to us. 

4.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Mr James Kakooza): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is very unfortunate that the group that did this exercise sat last week with the Committee on Social Services and the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The problem was readjusting the figures within the committee and we agreed that since the project is going to be implemented by the Ministry of Health, we shall sit down with the Finance Committee and the Committee on Social Services so that the expiry date of this loan, which is tomorrow, does not –

THE SPEAKER: I will give you another rap -(Laughter)- you will bring this matter on Tuesday. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING

(Debate continued.)

THE SPEAKER: Let us continue with the debate. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am the chairperson of that committee. Yesterday but one, two ministers made presentations; the Attorney-General and the Minister of Tourism. They are bringing in more information and it is better for us as a committee, who know what is in the report, to make reactions on the ministers’ statements before we can move because the moment they present and go, we are going to miss a point. We have issues which the honourable Attorney-General raised in the context that he raised them, and we respect that office. The issues we raised were not against the office; it is about an individual and we need to make it clear here. Hon. Serapio, we were not against the Ministry of Tourism, but against you, as an individual and that is what we want to make good. 

Mr Speaker, we plead with you that we react as we move so that Members can have an informed point of view. 

THE SPEAKER: The problem is the schedule of His Excellency, the Vice-President; he travels a lot and this time, I want to hear from him. Even if he is not here again, we shall have received his response. After him, we can move as we want. 

4.11
THE VICE-PRESIDENT (Prof. Gilbert Bukenya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to respond to the report of the Public Accounts Committee and I think they should be issuing you with my response now. 

Mr Speaker, in accordance with the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, Rule 148(2) the Public Accounts Committee is assigned the examination of audited accounts and showing the appropriateness of the sums granted by Parliament to meet public expenditure of the Central Government and the Judiciary. However, you have read the report submitted by the PAC and I think there are a lot of discrepancies between the PAC report and the Auditor-General’s report. 

Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the spirit of collective responsibility, the Cabinet Committee on CHOGM 2007 submitted a comprehensive reply, but because I found it important to answer some of the allegations that are against me, I am giving this abridged report on myself.

Mr Speaker, I have been accused of having done two things: 

One, ordering direct procurement of BMWs and causing a loss of Shs 6.0 billion. 

Two, hijacking the procurement process by stopping international bidding on the 11 July 2006. 

Three, arising from those two, I have also been accused of abuse of office. 

From the onset, I wish to point out that in carrying out this very onerous task of organising CHOGM, the Cabinet Committee was guided by two principles. First of all, the principle of collective responsibility. Hence, all the decisions of the Cabinet Committee were done in consultation and through developing consensus rather than voting, and sometimes the meetings were chaired by the President of this country. 

The second principle was the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting Blue Book, which provided details on the logistical requirements for organising CHOGM. 

The specific allegations being made against me were grounded in three things:

a)	Why did we lease and not do outright purchase?
b)	Why was the procurement process delayed and, therefore,
c)	Why was BMW picked?

I would like to emphatically state that I did not participate in negotiating with any company for the supply of any particular make of vehicles, as this was outside my mandate. The institutional framework put in place for organising CHOGM was such that the Cabinet Committee – and by the way, this was a Cabinet Committee and not a sub-committee – would consider matters that were raised by the National Task Force, which was composed of permanent secretaries, and we gave broader policy decisions and guidelines which the technocrats had to implement within the existing regulations, procurement inclusive. The Cabinet Committee was certainly not involved in policy implementation; thus, it would be far-fetched to place any omissions by the technical committee on the door-step of the Cabinet Committee as is in the short version of the PAC report on page 19. 

Following the above, therefore, it is my contention that the observations made by the PAC on that page that I went ahead with the unsolicited bid of 144 cars, that the vehicles that were ordered for had wrong specifications and year of manufacture, are misplaced as I could not and did not participate in the receipt and evaluation of bids. Thus, any recommendations based on these two nebulous observations, including the allegation that I caused the loss of Shs 6.0 billion are misplaced. 

Mr Speaker, the decision to lease as opposed to outright purchase was neither a personal decision nor singularly made by me, but a decision of the Cabinet Committee, which was chaired by His Excellency the President. 

I would like to explicitly provide a chronology leading to the procurement of these vehicles and I want to use the example of a vehicle, Mr Speaker, so that you can know the decisions that were made by the committee rather than an individual.

From the very beginning, Mercedes Benz, BMW and Toyota vehicles were mentioned as makes that were being preferred. This was for purposes of specificity thus avoiding dealing with many agents and the attendant delays.

On 11 July 2006, the Cabinet Committee directed that the initial international bidding which had commenced in May 2006 be halted. The decision was based on many premises, but mainly we wanted to review the number and types of makes of vehicles in line with the budgetary ceilings. The ceiling of the transport sub-committee was low compared to the financial implications of the international bidding process that I began in May 2006.

It is in this regard that the number of vehicles finally to be procured were reduced from the initial 240 to 204 and finally to 144. It is, therefore, not true, as stated in the PAC report, that the number, types and makes to be procured remained the same.

I would like to emphasize that the decision to halt the international bidding process was neither unlawful nor that of Gilbert Bukenya alone, but of the entire committee of Cabinet.

Remarkably, the meeting that halted the process of 11 July 2006 was not even chaired by me because I was outside the country, though I take collective responsibility over the decisions.

On 28 of October 2006, a decision was made to reduce the number of executive cars from 240 to 204 owing to the lack of funds. On 20 November 2006, the Ministry of Works and Transport warned the committee that the purchase of the new cars would require a minimum of eight months from the time the order is placed for their delivery to Uganda. And by that time we had been left with about 10 months to order for these vehicles.

On 12 February 2007, the committee of Cabinet chaired by His Excellency the President and attended by the respective permanent secretaries made the final decision to buy 30 executive vehicles and lease the rest of the executive vehicles. This was a very fundamental policy change and, therefore, it was at that time that I would like to ask you to look at the timeframe we had and the decisions we made. This change was made by the committee, but it is very surprising for PAC on page 18 of the summary report, to state that I halted the outright purchase. I did not halt the outright purchase singularly; it was by the committee whose chair was the President.

On the 7 May 2007, a committee meeting under the chair of hon. Kutesa requested that the transport sub-committee expedites the process of procurement for lease on purchase basis. However, the advertisement for that case never took place. Since, therefore, we had only four months left, the committee, in an emergency meeting held on the 28 May 2007, decided that the emergency procurement of vehicles be undertaken.

I communicated this decision to the Executive Director of the CHOGM Secretariat to start negotiations with BMW using the PPDA emergency procurement regulations. It should be noted that at this time the decision was reached – we had been left with only four months to procure new cars manufactured to our specifications, and in this meeting, I asked whether we could buy cars from garages in Kampala and they said, according to the Blue Book, each vehicle of a head of state must look exactly like the vehicle of another head of state. Therefore, all the specifications had to be the same.

As the chair of the committee, I was extremely concerned that if we did not make a quick decision, we would be embarrassed as a country and probably spend more money because of the time factor.

Mr Speaker, my letter of 28th May to the Executive Director of the CHOGM Secretariat on emergency procurement was supported by the permanent secretary and the secretary to the treasury in whose area PPDA falls. Noteworthy, the issue in my letter was not about single sourcing, but the fact that one bidder had fulfilled the conditions of the lease purchase of vehicles. This is further evidenced by a letter written by the President to the deputy head of Public Service. In that letter, which was written on the 17 April, one month before mine, the President said: “It is clear that the complainants Benz … initially did not offer the lease rent option, which BMW did.” It was, therefore, in order for us to proceed with BMW and I have attached that letter.

Whereas I signed the letter to the Executive Director of the CHOGM Secretariat, the decisions reflected therein were arrived at in a committee meeting that was attended by the accounting officers who did not advise otherwise. His Excellency the President, was informed and initially I had been accused of not informing the President, Mr Speaker, and which is the basis of these accusations, but that letter was copied to His Excellency the President. He also copied to me the letter he wrote to the deputy head of Public Service; it is copied to me and you have got it as attachment I. I would like the Members of Parliament to read that letter of His Excellency the President. I will read it verbatim:

“I have read your letter of 5 April 2007 - he is responding to Ms Hilda Musubira, Deputy Head of Public Service - concerning the above subject. It is clear that the complainants, Benz etc. initially did not offer the lease/rent option which BMW did. It was, therefore, in order to proceed with BMW…” The language we used, for which I have been accused, is the name of the brand of a car. Here is a name of the brand of a car even before I wrote my own letter. 

The next question is very important – “The question then is: Why didn’t the concerned officials involve PPDA?” I think this must be the accounting officers. “There would have been no problem especially if the leasing cost was comparable to similar leases in the world. Leasing, buying cars is not like going to Mars. There are plentiful incidents of these occurrences; therefore, the prices are known. Why was PPDA not involved from the start?”

When I read this letter, it implies to me that the President is asking the accounting officers. If he had wanted to ask me, he would have written a letter directly to me.

Mr Speaker, we informed the President in the committee on the decision of outright purchase. This time, again, I want to emphasise one important point - we again changed the decision that we had made in February and this time it was in May. The decision was that because of lack of funds, we should buy 30 saloon cars, lease 52 saloon cars and buy 62 station wagons. I was told that with this mix, we would even save more money. This decision was presented to a committee chaired by the President and once that decision was made, we now had to expeditiously move towards this.

There were a lot of discussions on the 62 station wagons. We were told initially that saloon cars are preferred, but we argued that our President here uses station wagons and so do other presidents elsewhere. So, if we had to buy a few, that would help us tremendously. The decision, therefore, to lease as opposed to outright purchase was based on budgetary constraints. In a Cabinet meeting held in February, this was the preferred method of purchase that we all went for. It meant that we should not be wasteful of the money. In this meeting, the proposal to lease/purchase was accepted, hence the decision to lease/purchase vehicles was not personally made by the Vice President. I really insist that that decision of PAC to accuse me of having made the decision personally is misplaced.

Additionally, the figures used for comparison, and apparently the basis for recommendation that I should be held responsible for the loss of Shs 6 billion, are erroneous. All implementation activities were carried out by the line ministry - pricing, negotiations, evaluation and contract management. I never participated in this. The loss, if any, should, therefore, be explained by the accounting officer of the line ministry. 

Let me point out that with the adaptation of the lease/purchase option, the Cabinet committee was informed by the transport sub-committee that only one company had put in a bid for lease/purchase, whereas another company had only offered outright purchase after which it would assist Government to sell off the vehicles. I think it is very important to realise that only one company put in a bid for lease/purchase. The other company said, “I sell you the cars but after you have finished CHOGM, I can help you sell off those vehicles”. This is evidenced by the letter written on 17 April 2007 to the deputy head of Public Service. In this letter, it was clearly spelt out that Benz had not offered a lease/rent option as BMW had done. I think this answers the queries that were in the short version of PAC.

In conclusion, I would like first of all to say that it is not in the paper, but this was a very difficult task. We did many things; we made many decisions; and sometimes we did not even sleep in our houses. We made decisions as a committee, for example, to deal with the landing at Munyonyo; we directed the security committee to continue because that was meant to help the heads of state to move quickly.

I also want the House to know that by the time we reached May, there were only 310 rooms available in the city of Kampala for accommodation. The Commonwealth needed at least 3000 rooms and every hotelier you asked said, “I have only 20 rooms” or “I have only 10” and these rooms were not the same. According to the blue book of CHOGM, each room for any one head of state must be similar to the room of another; the bed sheets must be similar; the chairs must be similar; everything. This made our work very difficult.

I am very happy to have been associated with CHOGM as chairperson of the Cabinet committee. I think CHOGM was a very great success. Its direct impact on the improvement of hotel accommodation, telecommunication and other infrastructure has led to Uganda being a destination of choice for major international conferences. This has generated growth, employment and also tax revenue for this country. Whereas these great achievements of the summit and others are collectively shared by Uganda as a country, the criticisms are solely directed to the persons, including me whose role was to preside over the meetings of the committee of Cabinet, that provided political and policy guidelines that ended up in this tremendous success.

I have included some annexes of documents to show that ours was collective responsibility. I want to emphasise that unless this country agrees to collective responsibility for the many issues we do, you will have problems making decisions. I cannot, for example, accuse the chairman of PAC of writing the PAC report, but the committee members have taken collective responsibility for whatever they wrote. 

Finally, there might have been some issues that were done at the level of implementation; I totally agree that at the implementation level we should have explanations. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament; but treat mine as collective responsibility. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much your Excellency the Vice President. 

4.39
THE CHAIRMAN, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you have said, His Excellency the Vice President is ever on the move and we believe at a later date, we shall make a response to this. However, these things he has mentioned are already in our report. 

I would like to remind His Excellency of a few things so that when he goes back to think about this, he will remember that he has been aware of this procurement from day one. The Vice President said in bullet No.11 that they told him that the procurement would take eight months. If the Vice President had allowed the procurement to go on as it was in July 2006, within eight months we would have received the cars; why did he flout the process? 

There was a meeting on 4 December 2006 where the Vice President was the chairman. In that meeting, the Vice President said that the decision to go with BMW is final. Even the head of the Civil Service wrote a letter to His Excellency the President dated 5 April 2007, which is attached in our book. Bullet No.9 reads: “In the Cabinet sub-committee meeting of 4 December 2006, His Excellency the Vice President informed the meeting that he had heard of some companies which were claiming to have been denied the opportunity to supply vehicles. He reiterated the decision taken in the meeting of 20 November 2006 for the Ministry of Works and Transport to proceed with Motorcare BMW and warned against any further procrastination in the procurement of vehicles as time was running out.” 

Mr Speaker, that was what the Vice President told people and it is in the minutes. Even in the minutes dated 16 January 2007, minute No.3, he goes ahead to say, “The decision that I made in the Cabinet sub-committee meeting is binding to all members”. He made specific reference to the decision that was made on 4 December 2006 on limited purchase of some vehicles and the leasing of other vehicles by the transport sub-committee from the company that submitted the proposal. He said that the decision should be upheld. “The other companies that are coming up to offer the same services should be ignored because they had initially indicated that they are to lease vehicles.” 

Mr Speaker, if you go through, you will see an attachment where the Vice President directed, “Go with BMW”. So, for him to come here and say it was collective yet he was the leader, I think he just wants to bring in people like hon. Kutesa and hon. Nasasira who do not know about that direction; but he directed.

Now, let me tell you the people who attended the meeting of 4th December: His Excellency the Vice President, Prof. Gilbert Bukenya; hon. John Nasasira; hon. Namuyangu; hon. Isaac Musumba; and hon. Michael Werikhe Kafabusa. Instead of the Vice President coming to say, “I erred”, he is saying that he never did it alone and that it is the whole group which made a mistake. 

How did we come up with the Shs 6 billion? In our report, we are very clear. We said that we are going to make a response, but we said in that report that if the cars were purchased and eventually sold, each car would be sold at Shs 12 million. Who cannot buy a brand new car at Shs 12 million? Anybody could have bought them, but they could not. They said that it would take eight months to manufacture cars. If ours took four months, then the ones we got were not new cars because the statement says that it takes eight months to have new cars manufactured and delivered. So, is he saying that the ones which were delivered were second-hand cars?

Mr Speaker, on this we shall make a full response, but he has ignored some sectors in the report.

PROF. GILBERT BUKENYA: Mr Speaker, I would like to respond. The issue of the decision on the cars was not a one-day decision. He is referring to our earlier decision on purchase and procurement of 20th November and 4th December. I think the gist of the matter is that even if by that time we were making decisions, the most important decision was in the meeting of 12 February 2007 where we finally made a decision to lease instead of outright purchase. I do not know why you are omitting that! A decision was made on 12 February 2007. Although in November the Ministry of Works told us that it requires eight months for you to order and have the cars come into the country, there was a delay and we made this decision on the 12th of February. 

I also want to point out to you - Mr Speaker, let the chairperson of PAC listen to me like I listened to him. I also want to point out to you that even the decision of February 12th 2007 required purchasing only 30 executive salon vehicles; the rest were also supposed to be salon vehicles on lease. Now, look at my predicament; when in May that decision was further changed, and we proceeded with procurement of 30 executive salon vehicles, 52 salon vehicles and 62 station wagons. Why was all this delay taking place? It was because of the money factor.

In fact, in May I was so exhausted about vehicles that I panicked and thought that in the four months left we would never produce something; but they did and we had the Summit and the heads of state used the vehicles. However, we made a loss because of that late decision because they had to airlift the vehicles from Europe. That explains the period factor.

My most important appeal to the Members is that although I was chairing some of these committees, what I chaired is explained in a letter by the President of the country. I do not know why the chairperson of PAC does not want to read the reply by the deputy head of Public Service. That letter you read was by the deputy head of Public Service and this is the reply from the President of Uganda. He is replying on 17 April 2007 to Hilda Musubira, Deputy Head of Public Service/Secretary for Administrative Reform and Executive Director, CHOGM 2007. Let me read it slowly:

“CHOGM PROCUREMENTS

I have read your letter of 5 April 2007 - which I think you are referring to - concerning the above subject. It is clear that the complainants, Benz etc. initially did not offer the lease/rent option which BMW did. It was, therefore, in order to proceed with BMW…” This is the letter from the head of state. This is a letter he wrote long before my own letter. Therefore, I do not see any reason why you refer back to our times of debating in November. 

The gist of the matter in this particular -(Interjections)- I convinced the President? Yes, maybe I did. You can accuse me of convincing the President; I have no problem with that. My problem is for you to answer after reading only one letter and not the other. I think under normal circumstances, that letter which you read was addressed to the President and this letter which I am reading is a reply to that letter.

MS AMONGI: Thank you. I am seeking clarification on the order in which the hon. Vice-President is reading the letter because he stops on the first paragraph. The second paragraph has a question where His Excellency asked, “The question then is: Why didn’t the concerned officials involve PPDA?” 

PROF. BUKENYA: I read it.

MS AMONGI: No, no; now you finished saying that the justification for you was the issue of proceeding -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think it is up to you. I think the Vice-President presented his case in answer to the adverse comments made about him. At the beginning, the chairman of PAC suggested that what we do now is at least clear the cases against the four who have given evidence before we move to the others, namely, hon. Hope Mwesigye, hon. Attorney-General Khiddu Makubuya, hon. Rukundo and now, the Vice-President. 

What you have to do is to look at the responses made plus the report of the committee because they are not improving the committee report. The committee is not writing its report; it has already written the report. It is now for you to consider the written report by the committee, the responses given and decide whether the comments by the committee stand, need to be adjusted or need to be expunged. That is what you asked for.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, what you are saying is right. Yes, the minister should do it, but they have made allegations against the committee; it would be better for us to reply.

THE SPEAKER: They are not making allegations against the committee; they are making their defences based on a report submitted to us. You are not writing; we are only using what you have already presented against theirs. So, it is not against you. They are just watering down the report. They are not against you. The material we use is the report and not further explanations.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, they have done it; they said that the committee did this and this. We should be able to make it so that when Members are debating basing on what they have heard - for example, the Vice-President has dodged a lot of issues inside - we need to come up with –

THE SPEAKER: Are you going to write a report?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, no, we have to respond. You gave them time to prepare. We have already prepared for the earlier ministers; we are ready. That is how we want to do it. Even for the Vice-President, we have the documents here. We should be able to deal with his case now because he is a very busy man –(Interjections)- Yes, we finish the Vice-President and he goes.

THE SPEAKER: No, I thought you have already written the report. You heard evidence, you looked at the documents, you sat down and you wrote the report and signed it. Now it is a question of us understanding what you said in the report against the explanations made. You are not going to change your report. You stand by your report. This is very clear. Maybe when you say you may not understand, you need a simpler language then you will be rewriting the report.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, you rightfully guided that as a way of proceeding, once the report was presented the ministers whom we have mentioned who are here and wish to make a response be given an opportunity, and they are making those responses. You also rightly guided that having made their responses, the committee and members of the committee would seek more clarification on the report based on the issues they have raised. 

As of the other day of the debate, we had said that we have these ministers respond and then we respond to them one by one until we finish. However, as of now, since His Excellency the Vice-President has presented, my request is that instead of accumulating unconcluded cases, we finish with His Excellency -

THE SPEAKER: This is exactly what I have said. You see, you came a bit late.

MR ODUMAN: No, I was here.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe you did not hear. As we were going to start, before the Vice-President came to make his case, the chairman said, “Why don’t we finish what has been?” I then said, “No, let us also hear the Vice President because of his schedules, so that we consider his and those others that we have received.” This is what I am saying. This is what he asked. (Mr Ssekikubo rose_) You also came late, hon. Ssekikubo. You have just entered. (Laughter) Okay, maybe let us give the opportunity to hon. Sebunya and then you, but you came late. [HON MEMBERS: “He was following from outside.”] Outside? (Laughter)

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. May I also seek guidance because from the way the debate is going, we are also at a loss. His Excellency, maybe because of his time, would respond to his queries face to face with PAC. Also, we would allow other ministers to present because they are now saying they have gone back and they have seen the defects of the responses. Let us finish with the presentations and then you look at it altogether. It is in the Hansard; you can easily pick it. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, my concern is really procedural in nature. One is a smaller one. The smaller one is about the records of this House. His Excellency the Vice President read a letter and it was claimed that he had read it quarter way; and then another half of it was read by hon. Betty Amongi. So, for the records of this House, we would like that letter to be laid on the Table. (Interjections)

Two, Mr Speaker, the procedural concern is - why are Members so impatient? The real procedural concern I have, which came up again when we were considering the presentations to be made in the House, was the admissibility of new evidence - issues that were not introduced to the committee. If the matters were not taken to PAC and they are brought in here, wouldn’t we benefit from a cross-examination by PAC on those new issues? That is what we are looking for. If we now say the report is not going to be altered, really, we will be denying ourselves the benefit of using this new evidence that has been introduced in the House. That is my concern.  

THE SPEAKER: No; you see, when the report was presented there was no statement to the effect that, “We were handicapped by absence of this explanation.” If that statement was there, then you get to know that if they had got the other side they would have changed the conclusions. 

I think the committee was satisfied and it wrote the report and presented its case. Now, somebody is coming up to say, “No, but this conclusion which you made, don’t you think it is not justified because of this and the other?” It is now up to us as the House to compare the final report as submitted plus what we have heard. We then stand with the report or we reject it or we adjust it. It is us; it is not you now, the committee. [MS ALASO: “But they have the minutes.”] If they have the minutes, weren’t the minutes part of the report submitted? Were the minutes not part of the report submitted? Yes. Then we shall have -

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, you will agree with me that when minutes are laid here, this House does not really run around and look up the minutes and peruse through them. However, to the committees that had the benefit of working through these minutes for nine months, really we would be able to draw from them when they say, “But there are these minutes available to us.” It kind of gives us the opportunity to verify the new submission. I think we should give PAC -

THE SPEAKER: No, the committee is not in the dock. [MR NANDALA-MAFABI: “We are.”] No. Maybe you are because you think when your comments are criticised you are in the dock; but you finished your work. As far as you are concerned, you finished and presented the report. Now it is for us, the Members here, to consider your report and what has been presented.

5.03
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I am much obliged by your guidance to this House. However, honourable colleagues, the ministers whom you have offered the opportunity to explain themselves had earlier opportunities before the committee to do so, but when we came to present the report, you gave them an additional opportunity. Normally, they would have heard the report and debated without a special opportunity being accorded them. Now that you have gone an extra mile to do that, we are procedurally at a loss. 

You want us to debate on the same wavelength yet there is a committee which had time and they probed and I think even requested for information and the Cabinet ministers said, “This is what we have.” Now they have had the window opened for them to present it; they have had another opportunity and we, as Parliament, may not be in a better position to know the wide spectrum. 

I, therefore, thought that as the ministers were presenting, the chairman of the committee was busy noting the new information, the contradictions, and at this point in time he should be availed the opportunity to concede, to rebut, to guide this House really -(Interjections)- so that you do not tie our hands and you lead us in a specific direction. In that way, we shall be broad enough to appreciate the ministers’ statements and their explanations. 

Short of that, Mr Speaker, we shall be opening a window of escape -(Laughter)- and I do not think this would be the best for this House. Once they have made their case, the chairman is there to respond, or rebut or concede and then we move in an informed manner. I think that is the best. 

THE SPEAKER: Now, let me ask you one question. I think one of the ministers said that the material for the Public Accounts Committee is provided by the Auditor-General’s report. Do you agree with that statement? Do you agree? Yes or no.

MR SSEKIKUBO: There is a rejoinder to that - 

THE SPEAKER: The material.

MR SSEKIKUBO: The working document is by -

THE SPEAKER: The material the Public Accounts Committee uses is that of the Auditor-General.

MR SSEKIKUBO: The answer is yes and indeed -

THE SPEAKER: Next question is - I am asking him; not you. The next question is: In the material the Auditor-General presented, there was no audit query on X. How did you involve X when there was no audit query against him? Answer.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I am answering. 

THE SPEAKER: He is very competent.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I am very able.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo is very competent. He can answer without being aided.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, it is also true that the Auditor-General categorically stated that he could not be availed the required information in time in the course of compiling the report. Indeed, he was lamenting at the reluctance of certain officials to give him the required information. 

THE SPEAKER: You have given us the report; let us read the report with the contributions being made here. Otherwise, you cannot rewrite the report.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am a qualified accountant. When the Auditor-General is writing a report, he will say, “I was able to see this” or “I was not able to see this.” If in your wisdom you are saying that when the report of the Auditor-General comes here we should adopt it, it should not go to any committee - 

THE SPEAKER: No.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The Auditor-General will bring a report and say that this expenditure was done in this way. When we go for an investigation, we find that there was a hand behind and you do not want us to mention that there was a hand behind. In my opinion, if this is the way that we are proceeding, I feel that this report has died because there is no way we can continue like this.

THE SPEAKER: Do you want to go on a retreat and consider the defences that have been given?

5.09
MR STEVEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): The question at hand is whether the chairman should add something to the report as far as the new submissions are concerned. My point is that we should debate basing on the report and the additional facts brought in by hon. Hope Mwesigye and his Excellency the Vice President. I also want us to continue allowing the chairperson of the committee and the concerned people to consult the report but not to keep interjecting, for us to be able to move on.

THE SPEAKER: I think a report was written and a rejoinder has been given. It is for us now to compare and see what we will do with the report. If we are going to bring in this thing, when are we going to finish?

5.11
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): I notice some undesirable rigidity in as far as this debate is concerned. I say that this is undesirable because what has been happening in this House is that ministers were given a second opportunity as the Vice President had this afternoon. The PAC has written a huge document; I do not know how many Members of this House have read this report, internalised it and claim to understand it from cover to cover. What the ministers and the Vice President have presented are summaries of their thoughts and feelings about what is contained in the report. I think the best way forward for us is to give ourselves the opportunities that are available for us to understand what PAC intends us to know and what the respondents intend us to understand; that way, we shall engage in a meaningful debate.

I think we are bound to lose a lot of information that would enrich this report. I think PAC should give a second response to what the ministers and the Vice President have presented to this House. Parliament would then be able to debate from an informed point of view. I think this debate will go in the wrong direction and we may end up hurting people we should not have hurt. We might end up exonerating people who should not be exonerated and I think justice will not have been done.

THE SPEAKER: Do you suggest that having received information from the three ministers, we give time to the committee to go and write a supplementary response?

MR AMURIAT: From what I understand, the committee chairman and his members are prepared.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, when your colleague is addressing us, you listen to him. You are talking when he is addressing us.

MR AMURIAT: I understand that they are ready to proceed. We need to put this report behind us because we are definitely going into a period that requires our attention; so we need to dispose of this report. The chairman and the committee are ready to proceed.

THE SPEAKER: I am suggesting that they sit as a committee and write a response.

MR ELIJAH OKUPA: I think the way you are trying to guide us would be the right way, but I just want to make some amendments. As the ministers were presenting here, the committee members have been noting those areas where there were variances. So, we do not need them to go back to sit again; they can respond from here. 

THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Sam Kutesa): We had set out a procedure where we all present our responses. The committee had nine months to carry out investigations. I appeared before them and I gave information and that information is not in that report. Conclusions that have been reached ignore the information I gave them. The opportunity to present it to the whole House has been afforded us. My proposal is that we all present and then they can react to all of us; but to do it piecemeal – or, if today you gave them the opportunity to go for a retreat and write a report on the four, then it means after the rest of us have presented, they will go for another retreat to write a report on that group.

I think we need a holistic approach. (Interjections) Mr Speaker, if you can protect me from my neighbour in Sembabule. (Laughter) [The Speaker: “There is a buffer state.”] This is Parliament, it is not Sembabule. (Laughter) [The Speaker: “Hon. Ssekikubo, order, please.”]

So, I would beg that it would be useful for us to get an opportunity for all of us to make presentations because they are making notes. After that they could reply and we go section by section. I do not know how we are going to dispose of this report. (Interjections) 

What I am proposing is that we should all make our presentations, then we look at the report in its totality and we move logically. (Interjections) Whoever feels that he cannot be present when the replies are being made, then maybe he is satisfied with the presentation. 

I think it is a bit disjointed to have - if we had gone case by case, it would be simple. But now, what is the categorisation of the presenters? How do you deal with - 

THE SPEAKER:  No. You see, when the committee chairman was talking, he said we should first clear the cases which were presented earlier. We only added the Vice President’s response. Now, we are going to consider the four cases we have heard, so that we clear and then we move on. Already, the House had heard your report; it has his report and they have heard the responses from the four ministers, including the Vice President. Now they will compare what is in the report and what has been said and then make their own decision. That is what I think. (Interjections) Have we agreed that that is how we should move? [Hon. Members: “Yes”]

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, we are dealing with a report that has captured the attention of not only Ugandans, but the whole world. We hosted CHOGM and it was not only Uganda because it captured the attention of the whole world. PAC was delegated the responsibility by this House to do further investigation. They have presented a report to this House and it is our report. I want us to stop using emotions while debating this very important report. It is not a matter of PAC; it is our report. We should guard against ping pong because the business of saying “This PAC report,” - no, it is our report. And, so, since the Vice President is around and he has a very busy schedule, we can have him up to 8.00 p.m. or 9.00 p.m, and we deal with him and later continue with the rest. Let us give this report the importance it deserves, because it is for the good of the whole country.

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I have been in this House for a long time and I have seen reports come from committees. The procedure has always been thus; the report is presented to the House; whoever is interested, from the committee, makes notes. And at the end, it opens for the House to debate. So, everybody who was implicated should be heard. It is the committee’s responsibility to make notes and at the end, the House debates the report. I think it is unreasonable at this stage for the committee to expect to carry out a hearing here; that is what they are saying. They had all the time outside and they could have asked anybody what they wanted. (Ms Alaso rose_)

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. At the beginning, we had wanted each minister to have a chance to defend himself. But hon. Wacha advised this House and we all said, “What is the point of each minister presenting his defence; you debate it and then another one?” It will take a lot of time and yet we are aware we do not have a lot of time.

These ministers who are carrying that burden cannot do it for very long. It is better that we listen because there is nothing special about this report. My colleagues, the moment you refuse, it means you have a hidden agenda. Let these ministers present one after another and we all listen, debate and finish. Mr Speaker, you have been here just like I have, but in reports, we normally give a chance to the implicated people to defend themselves and they are doing it one by one. I beg this House that let us be free to listen to these ministers and then we respond. The committee is more knowledgeable about the facts they have but please, give us also a chance to listen to them so we could all debate at par.

MR JAMES AKENA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had an opportunity, as a vice chairman of the select Committee on CHOGM, to interact with all the sub-committees of CHOGM in the preparation and performance of CHOGM at that material time. As a select committee, we did not get an opportunity to look at the forensic audit. And even when we tried to inquire, it was said that the Auditor-General was looking into the matter.

The fact that we today have the Vice President with us, and he has raised some matters, I feel it is important to seek some clarification while he is here with us, even if we shall debate the matter at a later stage.

On the issue of the BMW vehicles and motorcycles -[The Speaker: “Okay, now you are debating.”]- No, there is a clarification I wish to seek.

THE SPEAKER: You see, hon. Akena, the problem we have is on how to handle this situation. Do we allow the committee time to go and make a written response on all the four or we continue debating case by case?

MR AKENA: Mr Speaker, may I please beg the indulgence of the House? There are some matters that have come out and I appreciate that the Vice President is extremely busy. If we are going to continue with the debate, at least let us clarify matters which have been raised in the statement before Parliament. I wish to seek a small clarification here: When we dealt with the matter of the CHOGM vehicles, when it was the saloon cars, it made sense for the bidding, but when it zeroed down to BMW, I asked the Committee on Transport what was the logic of not contacting BMW themselves because we talk about market economics but at the same time, we are not practicing the essence of it. In market economics, you get the best product at the least possible cost. I could not see the logic of not contacting BMW themselves - the manufacturers. 

In interaction with the transport committee, I was able to check on the Internet and found out that the retail price for a BMW saloon vehicle according to specifications was around US$ 52,000 at retail price. But we ended up paying almost three quarters of that price. 

But what was more shocking was that when the Police specified the motorcycles that they wanted as BMW motorcycles, we failed to contact BMW and ended up paying close to three times the amount. The fortunate aspect of it when we were interacting with the transport committee is that the members from PPDA were present, but nobody could explain that aspect of trying to see how to save the country some money. So, I was hoping to know from His Excellency the Vice President why we did not look at that option. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, if we do not solve the issue of procedure – I think we should agree on the issue of procedure before we go into these details; let us agree on what we have to do. So, if you are not making a contribution on the procedure, please wait until we resolve on this. 

PROF. BUKENYA:  On a procedural matter, Mr Speaker, my wish would be that you hear everybody. There is a linkage – because I can see you are linking the negotiator - the one who opens bids with a policy maker. Because for me, I would say, “Let there be motorcycles.” And then somebody moves around to get motorcycles. So, my view is let everybody be heard. (Applause) And then when we are heard –(Interjections)- This cannot be a clarification, no. Let everybody be heard. There are linkages and after these linkages - we are here - and I am not going to go away. This is going to be my priority. Thank you. (Mr Akena rose_)

THE SPEAKER: No, because you are debating, but we are trying to resolve the issue of procedure. Anybody who wants to talk about procedure? Let us hear hon. Odit, because you are debating; you are not concerned with the procedure. But let us resolve this issue of procedure. 

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, we are looking at a situation where there are a lot of variations from what was approved by Parliament and what was finally spent. And all along we have been giving audience to every political leader who has been implicated in the report. It would be fair for us to allow an opportunity for responses in as far as what has so far been covered. 

This is for one reason; when the investigations were going on, PAC rejected the idea of a collective response from the Cabinet. They chose to sermon each one of them in their own right to appear before the committee. So, can we hear from the Public Accounts Committee that they are ready to respond to cases one by one as they appear? 

If they are not ready, then we could adjust and allow for submission or defences from all the ministers implicated in the report and then we shall find a later convenient date probably next week to handle them. Otherwise, the way it is moving now, it seems the debate is becoming a dialogue between members of PAC  and the ministers who have been implicated, while the whole House is turning into an observer House, which is not good at all.   So, let us hear from them, whether they are equipped to respond to issues which require further clarification. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the people we represent in this country have been watching and waiting to see what comes out of this value-for-money audit. The Auditor-General’s report and the committee did their part to point out areas where they think some individuals have erred. And the honourable ministers implicated have every right to be heard in the plenary, which I think we are so far doing well as far as those responses are concerned. 

However, I would like us as we proceed to also bring out the aspect of collective measures. CHOGM was held three years ago, the audit report is over a year ago. PAC was working on the Auditor-General’s report. Since there is an element of collectiveness in the answers coming from the Vice President and the chairman of Cabinet committee, there seems to be a lot to do with collective responsibility and a Cabinet position. Can we as Parliament also benefit from what collective measures have been done? 

For example, the report talks of the taxes not collected. Has something been done to the effect that some collective measure has been taken to the effect that some of the challenges or obligations the implicated ministers had to answer at that time, have since been corrected by either the permanent secretaries, the responsible suppliers - those who did not deliver in time? That would help us to understand what the honourable ministers would have to - I thought it is very important, apart from focussing mostly on who is wrong and who is not wrong. 

It would be very important procedurally to know whether we have recovered some money, collected taxes - or have contractors completed?

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been listening and when we gave an opportunity to ministers to respond, and look at the document given by the Public Accounts Committee and all documents concerning CHOGM, there are three huge reports; the one of the Auditor-General; the one of Foreign Affairs, also coming from the Auditor-General; and one from the Public Accounts Committee. 

If we have heard the response from the ministers and also have the reports from the Public Accounts Committee with another report of Foreign Affairs, which the Auditor-General gave as his opinion, why don’t we have a committee to internalise all these reports – we give a timeframe so that within a specified period of time, we can have all these reports internalised and get the real matter, debate it and dispose of CHOGM.  

This is because in the first Auditor-General’s report - I can read it verbatim – he didn’t form an opinion in his first report; I have it. He said, “The Ministry of Foreign Affairs should now come up with a final strategy for closure of the CHOGM project. The strategy should be to address all these matters of a financial nature which are currently hanging.” Then in his concluding remarks he said –(Interjections)- this is an opinion of the Auditor-General - 

THE SPEAKER: But he is reading a document. 

MR KAKOOZA: I am reading the document; he said in his last observation, as his recommendation which was the basis of the PAC committee report, “The report of the National Task Force on CHOGM needs to be studied to address future challenges that may arise if Uganda is presented with another opportunity to organise an event of such magnitude.” This was the basis of the PAC report which they used. There is also the Auditor-General’s forensic audit of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Why don’t we have all the three reports considered together and brought on the Floor of Parliament and we debate them and dispose of CHOGM? (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give hon. Kakooza, from the little finance I know, is that you do not form an opinion on a special audit. The Auditor-General forms an opinion on a finance audit and this House and hon. Kakooza should know that. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: In fact, we want to talk from a professional point of view. Mr Speaker, there are three opinions; the unqualified opinion, the qualified opinion and the no opinion. Even the “no opinion” is an opinion, if you have never known. What it means is that he can write a report and not express an opinion; he will have finished his work. We want to advise you to study auditing. 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, this PAC document that we are discussing is a very serious document and the integrity of this Parliament is at stake. The integrity of individuals is at stake. We should not be seen to be blocking anything. Let us allow all these ministers to present because the issues are interrelated. If we discuss vehicles now and yet hon. Nasasira has not presented - let us listen to all of them and then for purposes of making sure that people do not think that we are hiding anything, the Chairman of PAC could come and clarify on the issues presented by these ministers, and we shall then debate from that point of view and get a solution to this. We should not take this lightly. 

I read in the papers that so and so is cutting money because of the PAC report as if we have pronounced ourselves on it. Let us debate this thoroughly and let the ministers present and the chairperson of PAC will come and give a brief reply on some of the things they have talked about, and then we will go point by point and get a good response to this. I thank you. 

MR OYET: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek your guidance. I agree with the Shadow Minister of Health that we need not be emotional when addressing these issues. Yesterday, His Excellency the Vice-President asked the Minister for the Vice-Presidency to present his response. I would like to know whether the same thing will continue. If not, then why don’t we give special attention to each particular case? Now that he is here, we should seek clarification from him and then we can give the rest of the ministers time to make presentations and give the opportunity to PAC to seek clarifications and – 

THE SPEAKER: I think the Vice-President has finished making his statement. Hon. Members, originally when we started, the chairperson of the committee wanted us to finalise with the four cases that we have so far received. He actually wanted to exclude the Vice-President but I said “No, let us have him, then we can debate and clear his case.”

MR OYET: Mr Speaker, the reason I say that we should have time to seek clarification from the Vice-President while he is here with us is that we know that he is extremely busy. He may not have the time to be available to give clarification to Members and to the PAC. Why don’t we – 

THE SPEAKER: But what I really think is happening is that people have come with fixed positions in that one says the report must be defended while another says the defence given must be debated. I think that is what is causing us problems. 

One would be hurt to see that his position is watered down. This is what is happening, but we have to be fair to all concerned, to the report and also to the people affected. That is why we are giving them the opportunity to be heard and eventually, the responsibility of this matter is not with the committee or an individual, it is our responsibility as the House to take the position. The committee may lose on this and may succeed on the other, but the responsibility is not that of the committee or an individual, but ours as Parliament to decide and make a conclusion. But really, how do we proceed?

DR EPETAIT: Immediately after we paid tribute to the late hon. James Mwandha, you guided that because of the Vice-President’s busy schedule, Parliament should accord him the time. So, we thought that we would then go by that guidance and finish up with His Excellency the Vice-President and then we shall consider the others. In any case, the Committee on PAC is more than ready to respond to each of them as they present. I think that way, we would not have gaps because if we accumulate big volumes of work, it might be difficult to follow.

THE SPEAKER: So, is it the position that we consider the four cases we have so far heard and dispose of them? [Hon. Members: “Yes”] Okay, we shall dispose of the case of Hope - 

HON. MEMBERS: Let us start with the Vice-President’s case.

THE SPEAKER: I know, but for purposes of the record, we have hon. Hope Mwesigye’s response, we had the Attorney-General’s response, we had hon. Rukundo and we have heard from the Vice-President. So, do you want us to pronounce ourselves on the final conclusion?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, on Thursday, hon. Wacha – 

THE SPEAKER: Don’t tell us about hon. Wacha. I said let us hear him, but people wanted us to hear the four responses before – hon. Wacha gave his opinion and we heard it. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I want to appeal to my colleagues, especially the chairperson of PAC -[Ms Alaso: “But the man is quiet.”]- that let us cool our heads. We are here representing the people; here we are mentioned in this report and I think, give the opportunity to all of us to present and the Parliament shall debate issue by issue rather than separating us -(Laughter)– putting one in the dock here and another one the other side. Let us all present here then we can start considering issue by issue. That is how justice will be done.

THE SPEAKER: What you want is that we should swim and sing together?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, the way you see the chairman behave here is exactly how he treated us in that committee. And that is why we felt so hurt that we needed the justice of the whole House and not of only three Members of Parliament who were seated there and deciding to do whatever they wanted to do. We deserve and we need to protect our rights – the Constitution protects us - we need to be heard, thereafter, we can consider issue by issue.

MR ODUMAN: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am proceeding on the basis that now we have to deal with His Excellency the Vice President’s presentation so that we can discharge him. After that we will move to the Attorney-General’s and after him we will deal with that of hon. Rukundo. And if you wish we can again revisit the presentation of hon. Hope Mwesigye because those are the ones who have made presentations.

There is no question as to whether the committee is ready or not. Whoever makes a presentation here, we assure you, we will be able to make an immediate response to such. We do not need time to make another report because there will be no another report whether in form of an addendum or anything; we are dealing with the same facts in the report and the same facts in the transcripts with evidence that were laid here by us. And whoever says that all facts they are laying here were not considered – we are going to show what that particular person said verbatim in the report. We have all these. 

If you allow us, we can now proceed with the presentation of the Vice President, ask him a few questions, then Members can debate on that before we move to the next. I think we should be able to dispose of this. So, now –(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, initially we were of the view that each honourable person would present, we dispose of that matter first, but now there is this other view that we let all the ministers present before we debate. I suggest that the ministers present and we debate. Why? For example, now the Attorney-General is not here, hon. Hope Mwesigye is not here – so, let us use this approach because there are many ways of skinning a cat. You cannot use only one. 

To me, I initially wanted that one where you debate a matter while it is still hot; but now there is another agreement. Let us use that one whereby Members present before we debate because it will take us to the same thing. One by one is similar to doing it the way I am suggesting, and I want to propose that hon. Fred Omach and hon. Byabagambi present before we get to see how to proceed. I suggest that we move that way.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, the principle of every minister presenting and giving them a chance to be heard was agreed upon by the House. But now I notice that we have taken about an hour in this ping-pong on issues of procedure, yet, you rightly said, in your opening remarks, that we have a lot of business waiting on the Order Paper. 

I, therefore, and I am not pre-empting your decision or challenging your powers to rule wisely, Mr Speaker, I would like to request that you postpone this debate and consult further as we handle other business on the Order Paper. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we come to the end of today’s business. We shall reconvene on Tuesday morning to allow all those ministers who have responses, to make them before we see a way out. House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 5.55 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 17 November 2010.)
