Wednesday, 10 November 2010 

Parliament met at 2.51 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting, but midday today, I received the sad news of the demise of our former colleague, hon. James Mwandha. He has passed away today at Mulago Hospital. James Mwandha was a senior parliamentarian who served during the NRC days and also in Parliament after the inauguration of the Constitution. He was a prominent advocate for the rights of the disadvantaged people; he represented persons with disabilities and made great contribution to the formulation of the conventions on persons with disabilities. Before that, he was a senior public officer who served in many Government corporations. Definitely, he has been a prominent Ugandan. We shall greatly miss him. The late Mwandha is also a father of one of our senior parliamentary staff, namely, Mrs Martha Kaganzi. So, we really sympathise with her and we shall express our condolences and pray for the soul of the late James Mwandha to rest in eternal peace. I think it is proper that we observe a minute of silence. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

Hon. Members, in the Gallery today we have Mr Aaron Sampson, Head of the Political and Economic Section at the United States Embassy in Uganda. He is here to follow up the consideration and adoption of the report of the Public Accounts Committee. Join me in welcoming him. Also in the gallery, we have a group of people from Kigere Igu Tours and Travel from Kamuli Town. Also, join me in welcoming them here. (Applause)

You must have received communication from the Sergeant-at-Arms on notification of closure of the main gate to the parliamentary building which provides as follows: “Messrs Seyani Brothers Company (U) Ltd have been contracted by the Parliamentary Commission to construct a multi-level parking for 500 hundred motor vehicles in the South Wing of the Parliament building. The construction work will take a period of 30 months. The contractor will take possession of the site on 15th November 2010. 

This is to notify you of the construction works and the closure of the main gate to the Parliament building during the construction period. Inconveniences caused as a result of the construction works and the closure of the main gate to the Parliament building are highly regretted.” 

This is an announcement from the Sergeant-at-Arms. We need to construct that parking to be able to use the other place to construct the main plenary. So, the inconvenience is really appreciated. 

MR BRUNO PAJOBO (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to raise a matter of national interest that concerns a group of workers –(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I think many people are abusing the rules of the House. Hon. Pajobo is rare in this House. He comes in when he wants to raise an issue and yet we have very important issues to deal with. Is it procedurally right for him to take our time?  

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think in a way, hon. Nandala-Mafabi is right in that if he wanted to make that statement after the communication, he should have seen me in advance. You just do not stand up and make a statement; you must see me and I get satisfied that it is an important matter. I am not allowing you to make it until you have complied with the established procedure. 

Hon. members, with regard to the Order Paper, I want to make an adjustment to allow the Minister of Public Service to present business to us. 

3.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca B. Mbaguta Sezi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Members, I want to make a statement on utilisation of Government facilities attached to His Excellency the President during the presidential campaigns.

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 27(3) of the Presidential Elections Act, No.16 of 2005, I hereby lay before Parliament, the underlisted Government facilities that are ordinarily attached to the Office of His Excellency the President, which he may continue to use during the campaigns.

1.	A fully facilitated State House and state lodges;
2.	The usual transport facilities provided to the President;
3.	The usual facilities provided to the President;
4.	The usual personal staff attached to the President and their facilities; and
5.	The usual information and communication facilities attached to the President. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay this statement.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.02
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, but I would like to say that I find the statement by the Minister of Public Service very inadequate; it is not in conformity with the law and does not satisfy the philosophy and thinking behind the Presidential Elections Act, 2005.

The wisdom of this Parliament to decide that the Minister of Public Service presents a list of facilities that are attached to the President – if that minister comes to the Floor of this House and talks about a fully-facilitated State House and State Lodges – it is prudent that the minister tells us which State House and State Lodges, and where they are located –(Interjections)– yes, because the law talks about a list of facilities and not a statement. And when you talk of the usual transport facility – 

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member, I do not know why we are wasting energy on this issue. First of all, when we hold presidential elections, the President continues to be in the office. Therefore, he carries on with his facilities. Definitely, one will say there is no level ground, but definitely, there will be no level ground because Article 106 of the Constitution provides as follows: “Terms and conditions of service of the President: The President shall be paid a salary and allowances and afforded such other benefits as Parliament shall, by law provide. Parliament shall, by law, make provisions for the grant of benefits for the President who ceases to hold office. Salary, allowances and other benefits granted to the President under this Article shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund. The President is exempted …. The President shall not hold … The salary, allowances and other benefits granted to the President under this Article shall not be varied to the disadvantage of the President while he/she holds the office…”

This means that the President, as long as he is the President, carries all his facilities. So, you cannot talk of any other law when the Constitution is so clear that these benefits are not varied. The President will use the helicopter; the President will use the vehicles; the President will use everything. That is the problem. Actually, we have a problem because even as Members of Parliament, as we hold elections, Parliament is not dissolved. You continue being Members of Parliament as well as candidates. This is also causing a problem, but I think we are getting worried for nothing. The President is entitled to carry all his benefits as long as he is still the President irrespective of the fact that he is also a candidate.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I do not dispute what you have said, but you have stated that the Constitution states that Parliament shall make a law. But we are now talking about the facilities that are attached to candidate Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. That is why the same Constitution says that a sitting President cannot be sued, but someone can sue candidate Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, who is also the President of Uganda. 

I know the veil is very thin, but when we went ahead to prescribe in the laws like the Constitution that Parliament shall make a law and that the minister shall lay a list of facilities and the minister fails to present the list of facilities, I think that is abrogation of the Constitution and a violation of the same Act.

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that you want to know, for example, the number of bodyguards for the President? No. (Dr Khiddu Makubuya rose_) Yes, learned Attorney-General; but I think we are spending a lot of energy for nothing.

3.08
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the Minister of Public Service is acting according to Section 27 of the Presidential Elections Act, 2005. This section reads as follows: 

“Marginal note: Use of Government resources – 

(1) Except as authorised under this Act or otherwise authorised by law, no candidate shall use Government resources for the purpose of campaigning for elections. 

2) Notwithstanding sub-section (1), a candidate who holds the Office of President may continue to use Government facilities during the campaigns, but shall only use those Government facilities which are ordinarily attached to and utilised by the holder of that office. 
3) For the purposes of sub-section (2), the Minister responsible for Public Service shall lay before Parliament, a statement of those Government facilities, which are attached and utilised by the President.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, it is clear in the statement and we know that the President is entitled to access to State House both here and in Entebbe. We have no problem with that. But on transport, there must be specific transport attached – how many vehicles are attached –(Interjections) – excuse me, how can a President travel to Arua on a campaign trail in a helicopter? If he is in Arua on official work, that is different; but not to go there in a helicopter on a campaign trail. That is the spirit – we want to play this thing on a level ground.

On security -(Interruption)

MR ANGIRO: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the House that while the case put forward is questionable, may I know – because last Friday one vehicle which was escorting President Museveni was labelled “Mayor” and it was crashed. Is that one of the facilities to escort President Museveni? Can it be clarified please? - because if the list is not clear, then the UCs in the district will all get crash. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I think it is up to our colleagues to understand what is attached to the President. We know those facilities which are for the President. Security is important for him, that is for sure and we cannot deny it, but a President to leave here and go in a helicopter -(Interjections)- please listen; to go and campaign, come back and you think that is usual transportation; it is not right, unless you are saying the transport of a helicopter should be availed to all candidates so that -(Interjections)- yes, it is not one of the items which - I think you must be fair about that. It must be there. The planes we are talking about - going out of this country is allowed. If he went to Kenya, he is not campaigning; if he went to Sudan, he is not campaigning. He is free to use the jet to go anywhere.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Mr Speaker, this issue has been raised by hon. Ekanya. Rightly, you gave a ruling on what is supposed to be done after the minister had a given a statement. (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I am entitled to give you guidance and in giving you guidance, I must talk in the House. This should be clear to you.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Mr Speaker, after making a ruling, the respectable Attorney-General came and added on what is supposed to be done. Is hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order to continue arguing and wasting your time and that of this House as if he is the only learned person in this House because he has many books he is carrying? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. Members, I have told you the Constitutional provision. The Constitution is the supreme law and the President continues to be a President. You see, it is the dilemma in that maybe, in the Constitution, we have to change it in that when we are going to hold elections, Members of Parliament should cease to be Members of Parliament and the President should cease to be a President. That we can do, but todate, this is not the provision. A president can be a candidate and continue to do those two jobs; that of the President and that of a candidate, but we can change the Constitution.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I would like you to help me appreciate the guidance you are giving this House. You know when we made the Presidential Elections Act, the argument was that we wanted to curtail the use of Government resources to the extent that you do not give an incumbent undue advantage over the rest of those who are contesting. So, we passed this law and we made those provisions. Is it the thinking of this House now that this law is inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution? Is that the guidance you are giving this House?

THE SPEAKER: What I can say is that these facilities according to the Constitution are charged on the Consolidated Fund and attached to him, and the provision says that you do not vary the facilities given to the President under this provision to his disadvantage. Therefore, you do not lessen the comfort of the President. You cannot make a law that will contradict this particular provision. I am speaking as a lawyer.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. I get to understand that the spirit of this is that we are also able to carry out an audit. Is it your view that the statement of the minister gives this House an opportunity to audit those facilities? If you read a statement like the usual security and personal staff, is it possible for me to audit the usual personal staff according to this statement? What is usual, because we made the law?

THE SPEAKER: You see, the question of you auditing does not arise because they have already been attached to the President and the Constitution. So, you cannot say, you give him two vehicles instead of ten. You cannot.

MS ALASO: But how do I know?

THE SPEAKER: I quite appreciate that this is not level to other candidates. The President has an advantage over the other. I agree with you. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, my problem is not that the President should not have the facilities. My problem is that I want this statement to enable me to know which facilities and if those facilities are exceeded, I should be able to make an appropriate complaint. When the minister says the usual information and communication facilities, what is usual about the usual in this statement? How does it address the concerns of giving an incumbent undue advantage? That is what this statement should answer and it is not doing that.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Odit.

3.18
MR JOHN ODIT(UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Mr Speaker, having listened to the statement made by the Minister of Public Service and the Attorney-General, it appears that President Museveni is not a presidential candidate. He is a President who is touring the country and making some statements and those other citizens who have registered as presidential candidates are doing the campaigns, but what is worrying is that, sometimes, he forgets that he is doing campaigns and makes certain presidential statements. In Lango, recently, he moved around warning members of the Opposition to stop talking about the land policies otherwise they would be arrested.

Is that a statement made by a presidential candidate? Surely, I think the Attorney-General should help us draw a line between what a presidential candidate is and the President of this country. [Mr Okot Ogong: “Information”] No information can be accepted. Never.

3.19
MR MICHAEL OCULA (FDC, Kilak County, Gulu): Mr Speaker, what was provided for in the law is actually very clear, that there should be continuity in the functioning of the President as President. That one is not debatable. What I find wanting is, what is so difficult with the minister coming with a list showing that according to the Office of the President, so many vehicles are attached, not just the usual. Why this law was made like this was to enable the Electoral Commission to monitor the activities of the incumbent President; to monitor the use of facilities of Government by the incumbent President; and now you are saying the usual. How is the Electoral Commission going to monitor the usual?

Even if the other side is saying that it should pass like this, let it go on record that the minister has not yet laid on Table the list of facilities ordinarily attached to the Office of the President. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.21
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Lira): Mr Speaker, here is the disease – I wonder why Members from the Opposition fear President Museveni. There is no difference between the President and the candidate. Right now –(Interjections)– please, listen to me. The Constitution is clear that the President continues as a president until May next year. Even after elections, he will continue doing his duties. 

Recently, the President was in Lango sub-region and he was informing members about UPE, Government policies, and later on said, “I also ask for your votes”. So, he was doing both responsibilities; as a President and as a candidate. So, hon. Members, it is clear that President Museveni is going to win the next election in this country –(Interjections)– but I would like to urge you to increase your speed and do not fear. Fear is not good –(Interruption)

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, Uganda is investing a lot of resources in this election and already we have many people committed to this election. Is it in order for hon. Okot Ogong to get up and express himself by saying that President Museveni has already won – why then do we have to vote? Is he the Chairman of the Electoral Commission?

THE SPEAKER: I think what you are asking is as good as saying, “Is it in order for somebody to express hope?” I can say, yes; one is free to do so. It can be false hope or right hope. 

But, hon. Members, I appreciate that there is a difference between the facilities of the President and the other candidates, simply because he is playing a double role. But I think we can amend the Constitution and say, “When the President becomes a Presidential Candidate, his facilities will be this and that”. If we do not do that, then there is nothing else we can do. 

3.26
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker -(Interjections)- I do not know why hon. Aggrey Awori is on my case. He came to Parliament without shoes and was allowed to sit –(Interjections)– he is barefooted. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Make your contribution, hon. Member. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, that thing is in that law and it is clear that it should come with a statement. We should not gloss over this matter. What is hard with the minister making a list of the items which are attached? If the President is in Mbale and after that he flies to Bukwo and from there he flies to Arua using the presidential jet to campaign, he is at an advantage over his colleagues; he is using public fuel and other facilities. This means that the ground is unlevelled. 

Let the public know what is due to him; we are not denying him the facilities, but let them be named. We must deal with this matter once and for all; let the President’s facilities be declared once and for all.

3.27
MS MARGRET KIBOIJANA (District Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am reading this statement made by the Minister of Public Service and, for me, the catch word here is “ordinarily” used by His Excellency the President; and among the ordinary things is his usual transport and I believe part of the usual transport is the presidential helicopter. So, where is your problem? 

Mr Speaker, even us as Members of Parliament, including the Opposition Members, when we contest with our opponents, we also use the transport which we acquired in this Parliament and we use it as an advantage over our opponents who may at times have motorcycles. In addition to that, we have CDF which is at our disposal; it is also at the disadvantage of our opponents. So, I think that the Office of His Excellency goes with the facilities which are attached to that Office. 

3.30
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. That debate on the Floor of this Parliament has an element of fairness and justice, which attributes we do not have as Africans. We cannot conclude this debate; but the question should be, “What do we do for the future?” This can be laid down in our Constitution; but right now, we seem to be wasting our time because we cannot draw a line between the candidature of President Museveni and the President who is the fountain of honour. It takes people with the highest degree of fairness, justice, morality and integrity to know the difference. So, why should we waste our time?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think I have nothing useful to add. The whole problem springs from the Constitution which we have to change. If we do not change it – let us leave things as they are. One candidate is a President and a presidential candidate; others are not. Definitely, there is no level ground as far as facilities are concerned because of that, but in future, we could change. We could look at these provisions, amend and make a provision that, “During elections, the President shall use two vehicles.” We shall - you know that we can do; but before we do that -

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, we also need to go a little beyond that. I do not have a copy of the Act with me, but I know that we provided for an agent of a presidential candidate also not using Government resources. I know that we made that provision. In light of this - our failure now to obtain a list - how do we check the agents of the presidential candidates who are not necessarily the President of this country, because they too, must not use Government resources? (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I advise that we continue thinking of a solution for the future; but now, I have even told you that since we have not dissolved Parliament, there is a problem; there is an imbalance between you, Members of Parliament, and an ordinary candidate. I have said, these are the things we have to look into and see the kind of adjustments to make. I entirely agree with you that there is a difference. I think we can move to another subject. So, the statement is noted.

MOTION MOVED UNDER ARTICLE 78(2) OF THE CONSTITUTION SEEKING TO REVIEW THE REPRESENTATION IN PARLIAMENT UNDER CLAUSE (1)(b) AND (c) OF ARTICLE 78 OF THE CONSTITUTION FOR PURPOSES OF RETAINING SUCH REPRESENTATION

3.34
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE & CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr Edward Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker, I beg to move for a resolution under Section 8(3) of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005 (Act No.17 of 2005) for a review of the representation under Article 78(1)(b) and (c) of the Constitution.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, this motion refers us to the - 

“WHEREAS during the Constitution-making process where the people of Uganda emphasise that one of the main principles that should govern the composition and functioning of Parliament was participatory democracy; 

And WHEREAS the legislature should be composed mainly of representatives directly-elected by the people, due regard should be made for the representation of the special interest groups that had been marginalised by society; 

WHEREAS Article 78(1)(b) and (c) of the Constitution provided that –

(1)Parliament shall consist of: 
(b) One woman representative for every district;
(c) Such number of representatives of the Army, youth, workers and persons with disabilities and other groups as Parliament may determine;

AND WHEREAS Parliament in 1996 determined through Section 37 the Parliamentary Elections (Interim Provisions) Statute of 1996, which is now repealed that the numbers for the special interest groups would be as follows:
(i)	UPDF - 10 representatives
(ii)	the youth – five representatives
(iii)	workers – three representatives
(iv)	Persons with Disabilities  - five representatives
 
AND WHEREAS subsequently, Parliament through Section 11 of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2001 (Act No.8 of 2001) made provisions for the District Women Representatives and for representation of Uganda Peoples Defence Forces, youth, workers and persons with disabilities as follows:
(a)	One woman representative for every district
(b) 	10 representatives of the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces
(c) 	Five representatives for the youth, at least one of whom shall be a woman
(d)	Five representatives of the workers 
(e) 	Five representatives of persons with disabilities, at least one of whom shall be a woman;

AND WHEREAS the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005 in Section 8 provides for the following representation in respect of Article 78(1) (b) and (c) of the Constitution.
(1) one woman representative in Parliament for every district or city
(2)Special interest groups
(a)	For the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces, 10 representatives, at least two of whom shall be women; 
(b)	Five representatives for workers, at least one of whom shall be a woman;
(c)	Five representatives of the youth, at least one of whom shall be a woman; and
(d)	Five representatives for Persons with Disabilities, at least one of whom shall be a woman;

AND WHEREAS in the past, women, youth, workers and persons with disabilities were denied participation in the governance of Uganda through customs and practices that marginalised their status in society; they could not participate on an equal footing with others yet they have special interests that need articulation and representation;

AND WHEREAS their inclusion in the composition of Parliament is a guarantee by the Constitution of minimum participation by these groups in the democratic process of Government and their representation is one form of affirmative action which the state is required to take under Article 32 of the Constitution in favour of groups marginalised on the basis of gender, age, disability or any other reason created by history, tradition or custom;

AND WHEREAS the representation of the Army has been part of the process of sensitising the Army to appreciate how the problems of Uganda are solved;

AND WHEREAS Article 72 of the Constitution provides -
(2) Upon the expiration of a period of 10 years after the commencement of this Constitution and thereafter, every five years, Parliament shall review the representation under paragraph (b) and (c) of clause 1 of this Article for the purposes of retaining, increasing or abolishing any such representation and any other matter incidental to it.

AND WHEREAS the period of ten years after the commencement of the Constitution expired on the seventh day of October 2005 and Parliament, in December 2005, reviewed the representation under Article 78(1)(b) and (c) in accordance with Article 78(2) and resolved to retain the representation;

AND WHEREAS Parliament is required under Article 72(2) to review the representation every five years after the first review;

AND WHEREAS the review is due since the Article was last reviewed by Parliament in December 2005;

AND WHEREAS it is imperative that the review is done by Parliament in light of the forthcoming general elections;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:

That in accordance with Section 8(3) of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005 as amended by Act No.1 of 2006 and Article 78(2) of the Constitution, the representation in Parliament under Article 78(1)(a), (b) and (c) is reviewed for the purposes of retaining the representation as follows:

1) District or city women representatives: One woman representative in Parliament for every district or city;

2) Special interest groups: 
a) For the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces, 10 representatives, at least two of whom shall be women;
b) Five representatives for workers, at least one of whom shall be a woman;
c) Five representatives for the youth, at least one of whom shall be a woman; and
d) Five representatives for persons with disabilities at least one of whom shall be a woman.”

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Seconded. 

DR KIDDU MAKUBUYA: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I need to refer to the history of Uganda and the roles played by the predecessors of the UPDF, and the UPDF, in bringing about the appropriate conditions in which we can sit here and debate powerfully left, right and centre. (Applause) Yes, we can sit here and debate powerfully left, right and centre without hate or hindrance. 

The predecessors of the UPDF - the NRA and others, as well as the UPDF itself - have been instrumental in bringing about this political stability; this political dispensation in which we can stand here and make a contribution to the development of our country, and provide leadership and guidance for our country. We need to retain their representation here so that they are continuously sensitised on the difficulties and the pressures of running a state in our circumstances.

If we need a reminder, let me remind us that there has been this historical social imbalance against women. You can refer to the record on the women who have tried to come from constituencies and the difficulties they have had. Therefore, it is only fair that this special representation continues. We have made tremendous progress in this area, but the obstacles are still there - the customs. They are of course unconstitutional, but they are still there. We need this affirmative action to avoid and to correct the historical imbalance against women, and thus, women to represent the district or city here in Parliament. 

It is our historic duty to maintain it so that we build on the foundation that we have laid and the role modelling which these honourable women Members of Parliament have provided for our young people. This is in the hope - Mr Speaker, if I may borrow from you - that in the future they can participate on equal footing in the governance of their country.

We keep saying, popularly, that the future is in the hands of the youth and they are the future leaders and so on, but if you just left it there without giving them an opportunity to come and contribute in Parliament, or you left it for them to contest against you, powerful members with advantages of incumbency and so on and so forth, the youth will never make it. So, we make this special dispensation for them also to come and articulate their vision so that it is incorporated in the current governance and so that their ideas can be part of the national heritage at the leadership level.

The workers are specially represented in honouring the dignity of labour. I do not want to sound terribly religious because I am not, but St Paul actually said that those who do not work should not eat. Yes, the workers are specially represented here in honour of dignity of labour. 

Mr Speaker, Uganda is a very unique country where we recognise not just in theory, but in practice that disability is not inability. We began with the sad news that our former honourable colleague, James Mwandha, has passed away. Those of us who had known him know that he was a role model in proving that physical disability is not inability. He had this incisive mind and he contributed to the positive governance of this country. So, when we make this practical provision that persons with disabilities should be represented, we have these living examples.

I can make a long speech on this matter. It is my firm conviction that we need these special interest groups in representation. These include the women, UPDF, workers, youth and persons with disabilities. I beg to move.

3.53
MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA (NRM, Rushenyi County, Ntungamo): I thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. I rise to support the motion and to say that these interest groups are not mere interest groups, but real stakeholders in the management of this country. 

Look at the military, women, youth and the disabled; these are the people who move this country around. Their contribution cannot be underrated. They have already registered their revolutionary gains under the stable leadership put in place by the Movement Government. For anybody to say that we should do away with them would be to wish for disaster. 

It is true, as clearly shown by the Attorney-General, that in the past, these groups were marginalised and we “reaped” from their marginalisation. When we included them, for over 25 years now the country has been peaceful and it has developed. We are saying that we are not yet where we want to be; we still need their contribution lest we slide backwards.

I beg honourable members to support the motion as moved by the learned Attorney-General.

THE SPEAKER: Today we have hon. Muntanga, a member of the Zambian Parliament and treasurer of CPA Africa region.

3.56
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): I am glad to participate in the process of reviewing the representation of interest groups in this Parliament. It is important that we all reflect on what we want as has been articulated by the Attorney-General.

My view is that the continued presence of interest groups in Parliament should be hinged on the increased transformation of the vulnerable categories that they represent. The continued participation of interest groups should be aligned to the multi-party dispensation. As a parliament we should take stock of what we have achieved with affirmative action for the last 10 years that we have practiced it. 

I want to note that even with affirmative action, the women of this country have continued to be marginalised, even within the interest groups themselves. The Army, for example, has 10 representatives with only two women among them. You know that women are not given high ranks in the Army. We should keep in mind that the female youth in this country have been marginalised for a long time to an extent that we have only one female representative among them now.

We also need to align it to a multiparty dispensation. How do we factor the recruitment, the election of the interest group into a multiparty arrangement?

While I support the continued presence of the interest groups in this Parliament, I want to express the fact that I do not support the continued representation of the Army because of the following reasons: 

Article 208 of our Constitution states:
“(1) There shall be armed forces to be known as the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces; 
(2) The Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces shall be non-partisan, national in character, patriotic, professional, disciplined, productive and subordinate to the civilian authority as established under this Constitution…” 

Article 69 of the Constitution talks about the political system under which this country will be governed. Article 69(2)(a) talks about the Movement political system and 69(2)(b) talks about the multiparty political system. In 2005, we all passed a law here providing for the Political Parties and Organisations Act effectively detailing how we will run under a multiparty political dispensation. 

Following on that, I would like to read for you the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament. Rule 8 is about the sitting arrangement in the House, and sub-section (ii) says “The seats to the right hand of the Speaker shall be reserved for the Leader of Government Business and the members of the party in government. Seats to the left shall be reserved for the Leader of the Opposition and the opposition party or parties in the House.” 

The reason I do not support the continued presence of the Army in Parliament is that by having the Army sit in this Parliament, we are dragging our Army - the professional UPDF - into a partisan situation.  Article 208 of our Constitution says that our Army should not be partisan. Even if you go by the sitting arrangement as provided for by the Rules of Procedure of this House, you can see that all the Army representatives are looking at me, smiling from the NRM side. What are they doing there? They are actually participating in a very partisan sitting arrangement. That is not what the Constitution framers envisaged for our Army. So, for that reason, I want to argue –(Interruption)

GEN. ELLY TUMWINE: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the honourable member for giving way. I would like to inform the House that yesterday I was smiling with her here on her side. How can she say it is always from the opposite side? (Laughter)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I appreciate the smile. Actually, what he has not said is that we also sat down and had lunch together and I assured him that I would not support the continued presence of the Army in this Parliament. He knows my position. 

I think that the UPDF has a lot to do for this country. We have an Army that the country had been seeking to professionalise for a long time and I think they are better off doing the professional work rather than taking part in a partisan situation. My understanding was that initially, it was possible to have the Army in Parliament when we were under the Movement political system. The Army as it were cannot now take part in this partisan Parliament and this partisan debate. For that matter, at an appropriate time we will be moving an amendment for the deletion of the Army among the interest groups that are provided for to continue being represented in Parliament. We will also be moving an amendment to increase the number of women in the remaining interest groups. I thank you.

4.06
MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I support the motion that the following interest groups be retained - the workers, women, youth, PWDs but not the Army. The continued stay of UPDF in this Parliament, under the cover of NRM, is unconstitutional. Our Army is not supposed to be partisan; why don’t they come and sit this side? (Laughter) If the UPDF wants to continue to stay in this House, let them be in this House as ex-officio Members of Parliament. Even if they stay as ex-officios, there is no justification for them to stay in this House as ex-officio members. Therefore, the Army should not sit in this House. (Laughter)

About women, since pre-colonial times, it is on record that women have contributed a lot to the political struggle. Just like the honourable member told us here, the Army has been instrumental in the liberation struggle; yes we agree, but also women have been instrumental in ensuring that there is peace, development and freedom in this country. So, I think we need more women in this Parliament. We should also recognise and appreciate their achievement and contribution by retaining their representation in this Parliament. I have no problem with women having their number increased in this Parliament. In fact we need 50 percent because for many years, this has been a male-dominated Parliament. We have a right to equal representation because we are also citizens.

It is also on record that women can make a very big difference in the lives of fellow women out there. Our experience in political life cannot be underrated; that is why we need more women representatives in this House. If you give a woman power, she will make decisions that will benefit her fellow women in society. 

With the PWDs, I support that they should be retained in this Parliament but there is no clear formula on how they are selected. My concern goes back to the increase in the number of districts; it is too much. We are splitting very many districts without a clear formula –(Interjection)– Yes, I support the increase in the number of women, but again we should look at the issue of splitting districts without a clear formula. Mr Speaker, I am going to contest with a man this time, so I do not need a district. (Laughter)

Finally, much as we need to retain these interest groups, except the Army, we need to ensure that there are known lines of accountability and responsibility on the part of the represented interests and those that are representing them. Much as we are here to endorse our MPs and support them, they should ensure that there is accountability to the represented interests; they should be accountable to the people that they represent.

A total of about 400 MPs is expected in the Ninth Parliament, which is already a big burden on the tax payers. So, we should be very careful when we are doing this. It is really unfair to the people who are engaged in agriculture and yet the agricultural sector is underfunded. Women die every year and yet a lot goes to this big Parliament. As Members of Parliament, we should be fair. Otherwise, I support the interest groups except the UPDF.   

4.13
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Youth Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion by the Attorney-General.  

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, you may realise that globally young people are the majority and even when we come back home, you will find that 69 percent of Uganda’s population is constituted by young people. To the politicians, you know that in 2011, 54 percent of the voters are going to be the youth. Therefore, it is very fundamental that that generation, that corporation that is a big stakeholder in the country’s development and management, should be given opportunity and a big platform to express, to participate, to learn, to share, acquire and be responsible in the management of the country. This fundamental right which is accorded to the people who were marginalised is a right that everybody should really promote. 

For the women, Article 33 expresses it - it is a fundamental human right for the women to participate and to be given a platform. However, for the youth, given the data of the young people in this country - we are five members in this Parliament and hon. Alaso has told you that there is only one female youth representative for the whole country. The female youth in this country constitute 36 percent of the young people and they are represented by only me in this Parliament. Therefore, she suggests that in future this be considered. It might not be here today when we are reviewing it, but we need to increase the representation of the female youth who are very many; the representation of the disabled women who also have one; and the workers who also have one woman representative. 

Mr Speaker, I do not even see any harm if we pronounce ourselves on this increment because Article 78 already empowers this Parliament to do so. Globally, other states have pronounced themselves on promoting the participation of young people. In the recent Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting which was held in Kampala, in the communiqué the heads of Government committed themselves to empower more young people in decision-making levels and one of them was Parliament. Actually, they looked at Uganda’s population and the number of youth MPs and realised that the number is still very small. 

We have signed, domesticated and ratified many protocols on youth empowerment - the Commonwealth Platform of Action; the African Youth Charter which still emphasises that young people, because they are the majority and are the leaders of today, tomorrow and for the future, should be brought on board in management and administration of the country and their states.   

Mr Speaker since I think that everybody understands that this is very important, I would like to propose and move that as we revive this process, we increase the number of youth from five to seven, where either two are female and five are male or three are female and four are male. That also applies to the disabled and workers.  

For the Army, I will not oppose it because I know the fundamental change in this country was brought about by the Army. They must, therefore, continue to participate in the management of the affairs of the nation. Of course the number is already good - 10 members are already a good representation of the Army. I would like to propose that we retain the Army’s 10 representatives; we increase the number of PWDs, workers and the youth to seven; and we divide accordingly - a third of which should be females. I know that this motion is being supported by many people and I would not want anybody from the Opposition to deny the stakeholders of this nation to participate. 

4.18
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will support this motion but with reservations and I will express more about my reservations. 

First, on the point of women representatives, I think that there has been a general misconception that actually this is about women’s representatives. The Constitution is quite clear; it is about a district woman representative. The intention of the Constitution makers at that time was to build capacity for women; it is an affirmative action. However, the situation today is that when a woman competes for this position, it seems like she has “arrived.” 

We think that what should be done is after a woman has competed for two terms, she has capacity to compete for any other position. (Applause) However, if we have a woman competing for a district seat in perpetuity, we shall be doing a disservice to the women. We will not be building capacity for other women to come up. That is the biggest problem. (Applause) That is why –(Interjections)- well if I may be protected from hecklers, Mr Speaker. 

Even when we look at people with disabilities, just look at our own hon. Baba Diri; she did start as a representative for persons with disabilities, but today she has another seat. She has got capacity. (Applause) 

Let us look at the youth; in fact, the youth are even better because in most cases after maybe two terms, they are no longer youth. So, they move on. Hon. Ekanya is here, hon. Nusura Tiperu - I think she is in the East African Legislative Assembly. That is the sort of affirmative action, which was intended by the Constitution. It was not intended for people to get jobs, people to arrive and imagine there is no way for them; they are now going to be MPs representing -(Interruption)

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order because hon. Katuntu is misleading the House. I was a member of the Constituent Assembly and I, therefore, made the Constitution. He is trying to imagine the intention that we had, and I am going to tell him the intention that we had when we were making that provision. 

The intention of affirmative action is capacity building of the people representing that particular group. The intention is to articulate the issues of that specific group because that person is more knowledgeable as he is affected by those issues. Therefore, to have a woman representative or a workers’ representative has no other intention but capacity building. 

If that was the case, then the likes of hon. Katuntu, who has also served two terms, would be subjected to term limits. Is it, therefore, in order for hon. Katuntu to mislead this House when the epistemology of gender and affirmative action is precisely to empower those people who are affected most by their issues to articulate them, and that it has nothing to do with capacity building?

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, she did not raise a point of order anyway.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think the intention of bringing this group of women is that they are not representing women. Actually, we referred to them as district women. I think the first idea was how you expose the woman in the eyes of men because there must have been prejudices both by the women against themselves and by men. So, the intention was to let each district present, to the eyes of men, a woman so that it could be appreciated that a woman can do what men can do and so that the women can also say, we thought this was for men, but I think we can also do it. I think that was the intention. 

So, the affirmative action was just to bring them because they were being left behind. People never appreciated the potential the women had. People with disabilities were also despised because they had disabilities and people thought they had no ideas. By bringing them and debating with them, you start knowing that disability is not inability and that they have ideas. 

It is the same idea, to bring the women to be seen by men; to work with the men; so that the men can appreciate them and also women can appreciate their potential. I think that was the idea. That is why we are not referring to them as representing women; we said district woman. The district can say, “See our woman here; she is as capable as the other.” That is my view. It could be different but having been in the Constituent Assembly and on the drafting committee, I think that was the idea.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I could not have put it any better. Actually, the Constitution is very clear. It says there shall be one women representative for every district. 

To emphasise the point the Speaker has been making, which I was trying to articulate, let us not be the enemies of the women’s cause. What we want is more women in the Public Service; more women exposed to Parliament; more women -(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you very much, hon. Katuntu, and I also want to appreciate the contribution of the Speaker. I think let us remember that with all the affirmative action since Beijing, women had failed to get into positions of decision-making. So, a deliberate effort was made through the Constitution to create structures that would enable women to get into positions where they could actually articulate issues affecting the specific interest groups for policy.

In Parliament, the women representation, youth representation, and UPDF representation, is to inform the legislators about those issues that may not have synthesised through policy and legislation. I also want to remind you that individually, Members of Parliament who have served three terms are not the same people who started in 1996. Each time the learning curve improves by being here and learning. It is only those people who have not learnt anything, who have nothing to add on themselves or to add value who were left behind. Legislation is a new area and new territory. So, you do not expect a youth or a woman to learn so fast so that within two terms one would have learnt.

Secondly, if you want to introduce term limits, then do so for everybody but not for any reason.

MR KATUNTU: I do appreciate the clarification which the honourable minister was making. However, even naturally, the youth, for example, will not be youth in perpetuity. At one point they will be cut off. So, it is not that once you are here, you need to be here as a woman representative forever, in my view. 
Let me make my point because I do not have all the time. So, my own view is that –(Interruption)

MS MUGERWA: Mr Speaker, I am Sauda Mugerwa representing Masaka District as a woman Member of Parliament. I am wondering whether hon. Katuntu, a lawyer, is in order to mislead this House and the nation at large.

As hon. Janat Mukwaya said, the Constitution and the institution itself are intending to suppress the women. Let me give you the example of CDF. I have been representing 23 sub-counties and I have been getting Shs 10 million the same as hon. Katuntu. Can he believe that I can do the same job as he has been doing using that money?

The Electoral Commission is giving us one date to be nominated. I think it is on the 24th or 25th of this month for women representatives for the district and the ordinary MPs. Is hon. Katuntu in order to say that I have the same capacity to run around my district to campaign as much as he would in his constituency? As a lawyer and one of the people who actually participated in making our Rules of Procedure, is he in order to mislead this country that the ground is levelled so that we could maybe sit here for two terms?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we can leave the administration part of these categories and deal with the gist of the Motion. The gist of the Motion is whether we agree to continue with these categories of representation. The administration bit should come later so that we concentrate on whether we want to retain them or not and I think the trend is clear in what we want, save for the UPDF. That is what I have gathered from the debate here. Should we – 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My point is that much as I support the Motion, I think that when it comes to resolution 2(i), I will move an amendment to it with regard to the representation of a woman representative, to be conditioned to the argument I have raised. So, that is the point I was trying to make. 

Having said that, I will talk about the UPDF; the point about them being partisan has already been emphasised enough. All of us yearn for a professional Army; an Army that knows no tribe, that knows no political party. For example, all of us seated this side said, “Look here, can you be our Army?” and you said “No, we are the Army of this party”; where you are seated now. You are alienating part of this House and yet the Constitution commands you to really be neutral and non-partisan? Once you agree to show your partisanship openly just even by sitting – you could perhaps have had a cosmetic way –(Interruption)

MAJ. KYOMUGISHA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way and I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to give you information that right at the beginning of the Eighth Parliament, the side where the Members of Parliament representing the Army should sit was one of the contentious issues and where we are sitting this time round was determined by this honourable House.

I remember vividly that the Speaker ruled that the Members of Parliament representing the Army should sit on the right hand side of the Speaker because practically, they cannot be seen to be against the sitting government, and the Speaker challenged you to work very hard to cross this bridge so that when you win the election, then we can sit with you. So, we are not here because we want to be here, but we are here because it was the ruling of the Speaker and the ruling of this House. I thank you. 

MR KATUNTU: Well, Mr Speaker, to summarise, I think that is where the problem is; when Army officers do not differentiate between the state and the government; and it is a big tragedy. You are servants of this state and you should be loyal to the state. It is not about being loyal to a government, but to a state.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, why don’t we decide ourselves on that category? Maybe you should bring an amendment and we decide. 

MR KATUNTU: Okay, Mr Speaker. I will move the amendment as I conclude. It is not about ping-pong; it is about allowing each other to make a point. 

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Every word we say here and everything we do here has deep implications. Is it in order for hon. Katuntu to repeatedly say, “You should be loyal to your government; you should be subordinate to the state”, as if it is in question? Is there a point anywhere in the history of the UPDF where it has not been loyal to the state?

THE SPEAKER: I think he is repeating it to emphasise his point. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, let me conclude. Really, colleagues have been touched by my arguments and I see everybody rising up and they are not according me the fullest opportunity to develop my point. But lastly, let us look at the performance of this particular group in this House. I sit on the Parliamentary Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, where I have sat since I joined this House in 2001, except for one and half years when I was on forced leave. There are Members whom I have never seen even for a single day. There are Members as we see today, who we would not recognise if they had not, for example, come in their Army uniform because we have never seen them. 

So, if this House is inclined to make a decision that the Army should continue to be represented, I urge the Army representatives to attend parliamentary business. I can now see their commander in the House; at least talk to your officers, who are Members of Parliament, to attend parliamentary business. We only see hon. Mpabwa there, the lady here and once in a while that one raising a point of order –(Laughter)– but the rest are no where to be seen. If you want to do a job, please come and do the job, but you cannot be an MP when you are not – 

THE SPEAKER: I think let us solve this matter. If you want to knock out that category, why don’t you bring a Motion so that we dispose of that and move on? Who is bringing the Motion? 

4.40
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, first, let us remind ourselves. I am in possession of the report of the Commission of Inquiry on the Constitutional Review and these are their findings and recommendations dated 10 December 2003. I will just talk about two issues and then move the substantive Motion. 

That commission of inquiry which was headed by Prof. Frederick Sempebwa among other things came up with the findings; they moved around the country and gathered people’s views.

On the issue of the Army, the commission had this to say: “The people who proposed that the Army continues to be represented had in mind a non-partisan Parliament elected in accordance to the principle of individual merit. The Army must be non-partisan and subordinate to civilian authority. The Army should not participate in partisan debates and, therefore, it should not be represented in a partisan Parliament….” That is on page 69 of Chapter Six, which deals with representation of special interest groups in Parliament. 

There is another matter that we have just been debating, which is to do with the representation of women. Let me just read a small bit which says thus: “One of the objectives of the special representation of this group is to expose many women to positions of leadership. In order to give effect to this objective and the views of the people, the terms of representation of special groups should be limited. We recommend that a women representative should serve for only two terms in Parliament.” (Laughter) Mr Speaker, I am just quoting this verbatim.

Mr Speaker, we are aware that today we are in partisan politics, otherwise called, multiparty political dispensation. Given that our sitting arrangement as per the Rules of Procedure under Rule 8, already quoted, we have two sides of the House.

So, recognizing that the UPDF is a national Army that should be seen to be non-partisan and professional in discharging its duties;

Cognisant that the national Army ought not to be dragged into partisan politics;

Now, therefore, be it moved that the Motion on the Floor be amended by deleting prayer No.2(a), which talks about special interest groups for the UPDF’s ten representatives two of whom shall be women. I beg to move that paragraph 2 (a) of this prayer be deleted from the Motion. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: We do not raise our arms. You have stood and I have recognized you.

DR EPETAIT: First, I would like to put it on record that Members of UPDF in this House who have been with us for the last five years have been very friendly colleagues. I do not have any individual vendetta with any of them. However, the crux of the matter is that the UPDF Act also states that the UPDF shall serve the state. It is an Army for the state. This means that even if a government changed or if another leader came to power, our UPDF is supposed to take charge of the state and serve the people because they are not serving an individual. So, putting the UPDF in that difficult situation of always having to yield to the commands or the prayer of the sitting Government - in the Seventh Parliament, I remember we had a contentious issue in the Constitution that we had to amend in regard to the presidential term limits; the deletion of Article 105(2) became a very serious issue. I remember one of the UPDF Members who decided to abstain from voting when asked how he would vote. And a lot of pressure was mounted on that Member. He was put on katebe; up to now we do not know what is happening to him. So, the UPDF in the House is actually under command to do one thing whether they want it or not. Even against their –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: I just want to give my brother additional information. I heard on news yesterday - though I do not remember which radio station it was – that the Army council resolved that all ministers accused of corruption in the CHOGM should be removed. But because these Members of the UPDF are conditioned not to speak in the House – and the President one time said they are listening posts – they cannot come here to clarify such information yet such information would be very good. So, some of us find difficulties in serving the people.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, honourable colleague, for that information. I was saying that even against their own conscience, Members of the UPDF who are seated in the House will always be ordered to toe one line – order nimoja.

Mr Speaker, my colleagues have even alluded to the very effect of the representation of that constituency called the UPDF. We talked about special interest groups and UPDF being one of those being mentioned, but nobody is talking about the Police who would also be happy to be represented. Nobody is also talking about the prisons who are also a big number. How far are we going to go with this kind of representation of special interest groups?

The Members of the UPDF who are here - first of all their participation notwithstanding, we are not sure about how they report back to the constituents. I am saying this because many times the ordinary Members of Parliament who are not UPDF are the ones who keep pushing matters to do with the welfare of the those very good friends, brothers and sisters serving in that institution.

I think let us save our professional Army from being dragged into partisan politics, and this is in national interests, because we would not like to see a Member of the UPDF in the House being penalized by his commander when he decides to toe a different line from that expected of him or her by that commander. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

MR OKOT-OGONG: Mr Speaker, I stand on a matter of procedure – 

THE SPEAKER: Please, you either debate on the Motion on the Floor or you do not. Let us proceed with the Motion.

MR OKOT-OGONG: Okay, let me debate it –

THE SPEAKER: If you have a contribution to the Motion, then make it.

4.49
MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Yeah! In 1994, Ugandans elected delegates to represent them in crafting the Constitution that reflects the aspiration of this country and the people herein. In 1995, with a lot of celebrations, we promulgated the Constitution that reflected the interests of the people. In the Constitution, interest groups were put in place, one of them being the UPDF. The interests of the people were to create a people’s Army; the Army that reflects the interests of the people; the Army that defends the people; the Army that works for the people; and the Army that is not feared by the people. That is why ten members of UPDF were allowed to come and represent the Army in this Parliament.

First of all, for civilians like us to interact with the Army - and I am proud that in this Parliament, I freely discuss, debate matters of this nation with the Army and that is very important for the stability of the country. 

Reflecting on the history of our country, all the delegates agreed unanimously that the Army must be represented in Parliament; one, to create stability in this country, and I want to inform Members that the stability we have now is not by accident. That is why I want to appeal to Members - it is because we have integrated different interests in this Parliament by bringing the Army on board. 

Recently, I discussed matters of this nation with Members of the Opposition and many of them in our discussion agreed by the way that the representation of the Army is very important, but I find it very disturbing –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been following hon. Okot-Ogong very attentively until he said he had a discussion with the Opposition and that the Opposition Members support the continued presence of the Army. I am an Opposition Member; we are Opposition Members in this House. Is he in order to make this blanket statement without substantiating by clearly telling us who he discussed with and in which forum? Is he in order to insinuate that an Opposition Member like me can support him and this position outside the House and then come back here and oppose it? Is the Member in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think his contribution on this point cannot attract a point of order because I will have to verify the facts and that will take me sometime because this is a factual situation, which I have to check on the facts, and I cannot do that.

MR OKOT-OGONG: Mr Speaker, again we were in consultation with my people of Dokolo and I made extensive consultations, and to them, they feel that the Army that they love, the Army that has protected them and the Army that has worked for this country, must be represented in this Parliament. (Applause)

I only want to make an amendment that we need Members of the UPDF to stay in Parliament and for them really to represent their interests and to be with us in this Parliament. I want to propose that once you are a Member of Parliament representing UPDF, you should not be delegated other duties; you should just represent UPDF in this Parliament. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Tinyefuza.

4.55
GEN. DAVID TINYEFUZA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure and in this procedure, I would also seek guidance from you. In debating this Motion here, is it procedurally right for the Member of the interest group who has a conflict of interest to debate on this matter? Isn’t there a conflict of interest? Let us debate and when it comes to vote, we vote.

THE SPEAKER: He is entitled. I cannot curb his right to participate in the proceedings of the House. He is free to contribute.

GEN. TINYEFUZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. I will make two substantive submissions, but before that, I would want to clarify on two issues: 

Some honourable members from the Opposition side have insinuated to the effect that by being loyal to the sitting government or the government in power; it makes the Army partisan. The Executive is one of the institutions of the state -(Interjection)- sorry, Mr Speaker. That is the particular nature of our deployment; that is the issue actually. (Laughter) While I am here, I am keeping my ears outside so that we are safe here. So, I am sorry, Mr Speaker.

The state is not a monster out there which is not known. It is made up of specific institutions which are known: The Executive, Parliament and the Judiciary. We are loyal to all those and by so being, it does not make us partisan. We are loyal and we are supposed to protect the current Government as by law established. If we do not, then we are not fit to be the Army of the state; so, we are doing our constitutional duty. Even when the Opposition comes into power, we shall sit on their side. (Applause)

Secondly, people are concerned about these arrangements. These arrangements at times are new. They are a bit unconventional, but so is our political situation in Uganda. It has been unconventional; it has been absolutely out of the ordinary and, therefore, we tend to improvise on methods which have worked for us through history and we should not undermine those arrangements. (Applause)

History is very important; I do not know why we Africans do not treasure our own history. Maybe it is because in the past we have been defeated by the colonialists and whipped so we are scared about standing tall about what we have achieved. I would want to appeal to the other side, which we do appreciate and agree with some of their ideas because these are new issues, that let us not abandon tested mechanisms which have worked well and which have saved this country. Let us not go in unchartered waters. It is unnecessary to put our country at the crossroads when it is consolidating itself.

GEN. TUMWINE: Mr Speaker, he is talking about moving with what has worked. I would like all of you to look at yourselves and look at God’s design. God’s design is that he made every human being with ears, eyes, the nose, the mouth, the breasts, the organs, the feet and the arms all pointing forward. What he put behind is the exhaust –(Laughter)- and the important information I want to give is that even God’s design did not twist one ear to look behind or one eye to look behind. For things which have worked for Uganda should be the ones that move us forward. (Laughter)

GEN. TINYEFUZA: Thank you, hon. Tumwine. Mr Speaker, that was just a component of history, but I would want now to touch on the nature of representation of the UPDF. I do appreciate that our lack of consistency in attendance and debate on the Floor of Parliament at times is misunderstood. And there is no literature to explain in an ample way to the Members of Parliament, for them to know that special nature of our representation.

Our representation is a special kind of constituency; our representation in Parliament is not intended to cause disharmony and conflict within the armed forces. It is supposed to serve the strategic value of safeguarding the state and at the same time safeguarding the healthy situation within the armed forces. Therefore, while a Member of Parliament can come here and talk contrary to what your constituents sent you to say and nothing happens, for us that would constitute a service offence. We are a special category; we cannot defend this Parliament, defend the territorial integrity of the state, defend your property and person while we do not keep the rules of the institution intact. Therefore, there is a very thin line which we must walk. 

Let me give you an example of what the Army council defines as our role; they said, “You are a Listening Post (LP) and you are an Observation Post (OP)” –(Interjections)– when you have a unit and you expect the enemy to attack, you send people away from the encampment to look and observe. Our job is to watch and observe. And when you are an OP and LP and you observe, you do not open fire on the enemy; you stealthily go back and report to the command. 

While we are doing our OP and LP, do not expect us to talk here; when we observe that you people have a problem, we return to the command and say, “This is the problem, Sir”, and then new measures are put in place. That is basically our job. 

Mr Speaker, another issue that I want to touch is that in this constituency of ours, the Members are on duty all the time. For us, we are never absent; when we are not in Parliament, we are in our constituencies, we are in Somalia, we are in Darfur, we are in the North, we are in the trenches. So, when we are not here, know that we are in the trenches. If we were not in the trenches, know we would be counted AWOL (Away Without Official Leave) and we would be arrested. So, when you see me not arrested, you know I am in the trenches. And that is the special way of our representation; you should be proud of this Army. 

Mr Speaker, when Amin came in 1971 to take over Government and to cause so much suffering, there were no soldiers in Parliament; the soldiers were locked up in barracks. Therefore, part of the reason why the Army should be here is also affirmative action. Not to build capacity, but affirmative action to expose the Army to political happenings of the state. Do not lock the Army in the barracks; it is very dangerous because they become suspicious. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Gen. Tinyefuza. You talked about the character; I had expected you to talk about the issue of representation. I want you to help me on the issue of Army representation because it is supposed to be of national character. I have looked at your representation here, the whole Eastern Region has no representative in the Army; in the Central Region they are two; in the North they are two, and in the Western Region they are seven. So, can I be helped to know why the Eastern Region is not represented in the UPDF as a special interest group, and why the other region is heavily represented?

GEN. TINYEFUZA: Thank you, hon. Member. That is a legitimate question; I do not think it is wrong to ask that question because our history is full of ethnic anxiety. The issue of regionalism has eaten up our fabrics that capacity to deliver had assumed the back seat. 

So, Mr Speaker, let me answer the honourable member on the way we choose the representatives of the Army – (Interruption) 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, is hon. David Tinyefuza, in order to insinuate that the capacity of the Easterners in the Army is lacking and that if we bring Easterners to represent the Army in this House we would be putting issues of competence in the back seat? Is he in order to make such a serious insinuation about Army men and women from the East?

THE SPEAKER: Insinuation is a terrible exercise - how do I read the insinuation? How do you measure it? I think we better leave that alone. 

GEN. TINYEFUZA: Mr Speaker, I would also like to touch on our talking about - I saw what the committee of Pulkol was talking about. They were painting a picture that for us in the armed forces, when we do not contribute here, we are not working. Of late, the Members of UPDF - for the last five months - have been touring UPDF units up to Central Africa, Sudan and so on. We have been engaging with our constituents. We feel we cannot keep Uganda safe merely by sitting in this House. We must be permitted to go and serve our constituents. 

However, we must be mindful that Uganda is not yet out of the woods. Everybody must be mindful that we still have a lot of problems in this country. We have problems of disunity; problems of nurturing a new democracy; problems of insecurity; you still need your Army to be in the reserve. Your Army is like – how many honourable members know how a BM28 looks like? Nobody. Most of you know SMG; for us we are B28 -(Interjections)- and B21 so that the people of Uganda, when we are here and you see us laughing, it should be a sort of reassurance; it should not be a sort of intimidation.

Mr Speaker, I will give you an example of a special interest group. Suppose the PWDs elect a person who does not speak to represent people who are dumb in Parliament. It would be wrong when you are assessing his performance that he does not speak on the Floor of Parliament because basically, he is not supposed to speak. He was brought to Parliament because he was not speaking. 

Therefore, the Army was brought to Parliament not to speak. It is a special interest group which safeguards the security of this country. It is not a talking club. It is a safeguarding institution. Therefore, do not judge us according to the debate on the Floor of Parliament. Judge us on whether we have survived the al-Shabaab terrorists; this is the issue. Your Members of Parliament are working to defeat al-Shabaab, to defeat ADF, to defeat LRA. 

Seventeen insurgencies have been defeated since 1986. Many other governments have not done that. You should be proud of this Army, which you can come here and talk to and criticise and we all go back home and fill a cup of coffee. It is a wonderful thing for Uganda. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KATUNTU: Order, Mr Speaker. This is a very important point to us. Is the hon. General Tinyefuza in order to intimidate us and insinuate that once we criticise, we can go home just because of his favours? Is he in order?

We are not here because of the favours of General Tinyefuza or the Army. We are Ugandans! We are entitled to be here to criticise whoever we think is wrong and walk back to our houses with or without General Tinyefuza; with or without UPDF. UPDF’s constitutional duty is to protect Ugandans. That is your constitutional duty. You are not doing us a favour to insinuate that we might as well be killed because you want so.

THE SPEAKER: I thought you had finished. Then wind up, please.

GEN. TINYEFUZA: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, your Army does not intimidate anybody. On the contrary, your Army reassures everybody. We have no reason. The only point I was making is that the honourable member and the entire country should know that there was a time when people would not go back to their houses -(Applause)- and that time can come back. I want Members to know and I want to state it here categorically that if we mishandle the issues of the state, those times can come back. There can be bloodshed on the streets of Kampala; people can go back to exile. It has happened before, it can happen again!

Therefore, hon. Members, when I am talking about this, I am not talking as a Member of one group against the other; I am talking as a citizen of Uganda. I have seen it and it can happen again.

So, Mr Speaker, to wind up, I would like to oppose the Motion as presented to exclude the military from Parliament for three reasons:

One, it would be a wrong signal to send to the people of Uganda that look, “This is a Parliament which does not value their contribution,” because this Army is an Army of the population; it is not our Army.

The second reason is that it would be very dangerous to close out the Army from the political process. I think it would be naive and dangerous. You should allow your Members of Parliament from the Army; use them as a barometer; use us to gauge how we feel. When we come here, look at us. When we disappear say, “Where have they disappeared to?” Use the way you look at us; do not suspect us. I think it would be a mistake.

Third and lastly, I want to assure the people of Uganda and the honourable members, through you, Mr Speaker, that the Members of the armed forces, your Army, when they are not here, they are not malingering. They are working. They are doing the duty where you sent them - what you sent them to do. I do not think that you want Members who have nothing to do to come here and represent the Army. I suppose you want to see CDF come here to represent the Army so that when he talks here, you know that his views are representative. Why don’t you want us to come here? We are part of you, we love you and we shall serve you.

Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

5.18
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama North, Tororo): Mr Speaker, we have had a very long debate on this particular Motion. This is the third time this Parliament deliberates on this issue and we have had several amendments since the Constitution promulgated this. I move that the question be put so that we are in a position to pronounce ourselves on this particular issue.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, the Motion is that I put the question on the Motion moved by you. Let me do this. Let me get two contributions from this side and two from the other. Your contribution will be for five minutes. 

5.20
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am very grateful for speaking after a General. We know the significance of the Army to a state. We know that issues of peace and security are issues of everybody. We also know that people on the side of the Opposition need to be protected by the Army. By saying that the Army should be removed from Parliament, we are not saying that we do not need the Army. We are not saying that the history of this country is not known to us. We are simply saying that as politicians, belonging to a political party in a multi-party political era, we see that with the Army aligned to one party in a political contest between political parties, the side to which the Army is aligned will gain the advantage from the Army in the contest and, therefore, the one where the Army is not aligned will lose out. That is why we feel that in a multiparty era like ours, if there is a political contest, let the political contest be between politicians. The military should never be associated with any side. 

If we take the proposal given by Gen. Tinyefuza that the Army should be here, I would like to make this proposal, Mr Speaker. Yes, the Army should be in Parliament, but the Opposition should be given its share of the Army -(Laughter)- Yes. The Opposition should also appoint members of the military to sit on this side. That will be the only way you will see the nature of the problem we are talking about -(Interjections)- that is the only way you will see the disadvantage of the Army being associated with the political side -(Interjections)- I tell you the way I feel, Mr Speaker. (Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Thank you, hon. Fungaroo and thank you, Mr Speaker. The additional information I want to pass to you is that currently we are busy moving towards the East African Community and with the East African Community, there are uniform structures that are required for any political federation and, therefore, we must be uniform as we move to establish the East African Community. If we establish different structures which are not compliant with the structures of the East African Community, we will be moving in the opposite direction against the interest of the cooperation.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much my brother for that information. Mr Speaker, to enable people see the problem we are talking about, every political party in the Opposition must have its own army with its own Generals -(Interjections)– so that when I debate like this, I put on uniform like Gen. Tinyefuza and I see the way he will feel while I speak here as a General. 

Otherwise, I support the Army. I have been a member of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, working to ensure that our Army is professional, non-partisan and non tribalistic. The old problems which are associated with the history of this party and this Army are not being solved. 

When you build a bus - when you look at physics -[Hon. Byandala: “Which Physics?”]- Physics; Science. You are an Engineer; I thought you knew what Physics was. (Laughter) The bus is built in proportionality - height and the base. If you increase the height of the bus, you must widen the base -[Honourable Members: “Which bus?”]- Yes, the yellow bus. (Laughter) If you increase or you change anything in the bus, you must also change otherwise. 

The bus you came with from the bush has been changed. It was one; it was the Movement. Now you have brought in multipartism. The Movement worked very well with the Army because the Army was part of the revolutionary council when you were in the bush. A revolutionary system is different from this kind of system of multipartism -

THE SPEAKER: Please wind up. 

MR FUNGAROO: Now we have changed. As I wind up, Mr Speaker, we have changed by introducing multipartism - different parties - but you have not changed the base and that is why there is instability in the House. You have increased the height by adding another party, but you have not increased the base. That is why your bus is going to collapse. It is going to get an accident.

I would like to wind up by saying that members of the Opposition and members of the public, the ball is in your court. It is not a matter of debating here. The ball is in your court -(Interjections)- if the Army is to be here, you must form your own Army -(Interjections)- if no Army should be here, no Army should be there. I thank you. 

5.26
MRS FLORENCE SSEKABIRA (NRM, District Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to contribute - 

THE SPEAKER: But please, five minutes.

MRS SSEKABIRA: To this very important motion, yes, Sir, I will abide. Mr Speaker, we want to have a society for all in this country and I want to appreciate the fact that since interest groups came to this Parliament, many things have changed. 

I earlier on served as a Woman Member of Parliament for People with Disabilities, and during that term of office I also served as a Minister of State in charge of Disability and Elderly People’s Affairs. Right now I am the Woman Member of Parliament, Kayunga District. All these are changes. I mean achievements. 

But what I want to emphasise is that when we are here as interest groups in this Parliament, we participate and contribute and this does not only affect the laws or the Acts that are passed by Parliament because at the end of the day they are all engendered; they take care of everybody. But out there, we also use the oversight function of Parliament to ensure that people of different categories in this country are served properly.

I have been sitting on the Agriculture Sessional Committee of Parliament. Whenever I go out, I have to find out how many farmers with disabilities are benefiting from NAADS and I also look at how these Government programmes are being implemented. It is because of the interest groups in this Parliament that the Government policies like UPE have something to say about the girl child. Otherwise, it would be general: “All children should go to school,” but we ensure it works out for all of us. 

Mr Speaker, when interest groups are here, people recognise our potential and ability. We become the positive role models. This helps to change the negative attitudes of the public in the communities. This is when a parent puts in resources to educate his or her girl child. This is when a parent comes out to educate and to look after his or her disabled child and says, “This child can become,” -[Dr Epetait: “Point of Procedure.”]- this child can become - can you give me - (Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: No, the Speaker has allowed me. Mr Speaker, we are discussing a motion to do with the UPDF representation -[The Speaker: “Yes.”]- but it looks like –(Interjections)- the Member is discussing the general motion. Can we be guided? 

THE SPEAKER: Please wind up. 

MRS SSEKABIRA: They have talked about UPDF; I am talking about disability, and he does not want me to talk, and yet disability comes any time in life; you cannot be surprised. So, when I am talking about these issues - disability was here before Jesus. Jesus healed some of the disabled people -(Interjections)- and we are still here and there are others to be born. So, you should be able to listen, Sir.

Mr Speaker, the time I was Minister for Disabilities, in the districts, chairpersons of districts picked on people with disabilities and they were on their executives. They were looking at my performance and they believed that people with disabilities could be secretaries; they could serve on the executives of the districts. I was a positive role model and I left as a positive role model. So, we need interest groups in this Parliament.

Mr Speaker, when it comes to employment and even to the Cabinet, whatever Government comes up with, it should remember to work out policies to do with employment of Persons With Disability. Mr Speaker, despite the Persons with Disabilities Act, we need to use this function of oversight to work and ensure that people with disabilities and others are employed.

THE SPEAKER: Please wind up. 

MRS SSEKABIRA: I thank you, Mr Speaker for this opportunity, and I support the motion. Thank you. 

5.30
MAJOR GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Hon. Nandala-Mafabi do not be biased, I retired long ago. I ask for indulgence of our colleagues from the Opposition not to forget our history too soon too fast. Twenty five years in a life of a society is really nothing. The Army is a chief component of state power wherever you go all over the world. To underrate it is a big mistake, more particularly in fragile democracies like in Africa and specifically Uganda.

It does no harm at all to have a dozen of Army officers being here in Parliament so that the rest of the institution’s officers and men can have a mirror through their representatives in the House.

The ruling side and the Opposition, please, this is an area that we must have total unanimity; do not look at small things. I know what makes you get incensed when it is voting time; the 10 votes with the government side. These are small issues; let us look at the bigger picture and that is this symbiosis. I request for your indulgence colleagues to support the inclusion of the Army.

5.33
GENERAL ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA (UPDF Representative): Thank you Mr Speaker and hon. Members. One wise man said, “I do not care about the colour of the cat as long as it can catch mice.” If this country owes its prosperity by modelling itself to have such a parliament composed of these special interest groups we are debating, why would anyone want to change horse in the middle of the race? What is the point?

Members, history has cases where the Army has been in the legislative role. In the 17th or 16th Century in England, Oliver Cromwell together with Gen. Hudson, had to take on the Parliament, ordered in the musketeers and flushed out the members of - this is not the matter that we talking about. 

In China and Turkey, the Army have a representation. Ugandans chose to have only 10. The proposition to remove us from this Parliament is disheartening to the members of the institution who have paid the ultimate price of liberating this country and continued to defend it.

Our presence here is about where our country has come from, where we are and where we are going. We in the UPDF even know how we are going to get there. When it comes to matters of professionalism, we know that we are not partisan, but political. Our legislative role does not in any way take away or dilute our professionalism. If it did, we would not be standing for the third year in Somalia where others have dared to step.

I see all people around Uganda as our people and I defend all of them; so there is no Opposition. As for the sitting, this House in its wisdom debated this and here we are. Hon. Katuntu make sure you come back in the next Parliament and debate it again. 

I want to assure the Members of Parliament that there is one UPDF; in terms of recruitment, everybody is represented in this Army. Your UPDF is well trained and it will secure the peace and stability.

We have had a role to play in the social-economic transformation taking place in this country. This role has been hugely enriched by our legislative role. Why do you want to take us way and undermine our capacity to keep defending this country.

As of now, we have played quite a significant role in shaping regional security. It is not because we wanted, but it is because we happened to have built capacity, that we have been able to come up and help friends in the region. As we debate the East African Community, there is stability and economies are developing owing to our contribution.

5.39
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Crispus Kiyonga): It is my expectation that after listening to each other carefully, when it comes to voting, the partisan nature of the debate will disappear because we want a common destiny for our country.

I want to underscore the point about our history in comparison to histories of other countries, and how each country has structured itself in order to move forward. I will also report on three situations that I have met of recent, which I think will help to make my point even stronger.

Hon. Members, you have heard about checks and balances as a principal in democracy; people come to us from the UK and underscore this principal. I believe that many of us who are here are aware that in the UK, for a very long time - and if this system has changed, it must only be recent. You have, for example, the Lord Chancellor in the UK; this is the equivalent of the Chief Justice in their system. He is the Speaker of the Upper House, the House of Lords. He is the Chief Justice, but he is also the Speaker. He or she also sits in their cabinet. 

This is a fact despite that UK claims to be a democracy and have really had democracy for a long time. But recalling their own history, they thought that this construct was good for their development and they have run with it for a very long time. When I last visited UK as the National Political Commissar, I questioned this and they said they were reviewing the system. But if you think back, how long the UK has had democracy, you will appreciate that they must have had a good reason why they made that construct.

In the case of Uganda, we cannot forget that the military had had a substantial impact on our history and development. And the construct that the Army should come along and even when we have made the Constitution, and have gone multiparty, they should nominally be in Parliament, in my judgement and in the judgement of some of us, we think this is good for our history and development.

And if we go to the issue of substance, because here we vote on issues and one side or the other wins; sometimes the motions are bipartisan. We cannot quote a single incident when we voted here and the balance was tilted by the mere fact that the Army is here. So, in terms of our voting, apart from taking the Floor and contributing, we cannot show that here, if the Army was not present, the motion would have been lost or would be the other side.

Therefore, it is taking the debate too far to argue that because the Army sits on the government side, it tilts our operations here. Indeed, only yesterday, I met a mission from the European Union, which some of you have met or will soon meet, and they asked me that very question. They asked, “In the history of this Parliament, has there been a situation where the voting of the Army tilts the balance?” 

I told them that in the House, we mainly vote using two procedures, namely, by voice, where the Speaker reads which side has won. And if there is a challenge, people stand up. When we have to divide, the standards are very high; either we are saying it should be more than half or two-thirds. And in either case, 10 members of the Army cannot tilt the balance.

Lastly, I am unhappy that hon. Obua-Ogwal is not here. On one occasion we were at a party with him and other colleagues in the House and he was given an opportunity to speak. He gave a testimony that being in Parliament with members of the Army had made him to see that the Army is humane, reasonable and informed. This is an opportunity hon. Obua-Ogwal would have been denied if we did not have the Army rubbing shoulders with us.

So, I want to appeal to my friends and colleagues on the Opposition, having heard this reasoning, to vote together with the government this time. Thank you.

5.46
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the manner in which this debate has been conducted emphasises the fact that the issue is controversial and it ought to be examined carefully. This is not the first time for the Army to be in Parliament. 

Between 1981 and 1985, the Army was in this Parliament and the Army officers used to sit on both sides of the House. The late Oyite Ojok for some reason used to sit with us in the Opposition. And the fact of the matter is that in spite of the Army’s presence in Parliament, the government was overthrown. And shortly afterwards, the very people who had been Members of Parliament here, joined the new Lutwa government. But the point I want to raise here is that if the Army wants to continue being in Parliament, it should make sure that there is no feeling that it is partisan.

The Chief of Defence Forces has said that the Army is political; that is true. But it is a challenge to them not to appear to be partisan. I am happy to be speaking after him because I have the honour of having been a Member of Parliament of two distinguished Army officers; that is, Col Kizza Besigye and Gen. Aronda Nyakairima. Because they are very senior members, I have got a very big barracks in my constituency. I want to say they are very good constituents, but the challenge of not appearing to be partisan continues to dog that situation.

The Army has 10 representatives in the House, but on top of that, the soldiers who are in the countryside also go voting. And you have a barracks in the area consisting of soldiers who do not come from that area but they vote. You do not know how they come and operate, and you do not normally interact with them. (Interjection) I am speaking from experience. 

During the campaign period, it is very difficult to get to them in order to speak to them with a view to convincing them to vote in one way or the other, but they vote. And in the case of some candidates, you will notice that they have had access to them and have been able to talk to them. But some of us are not allowed to do the same. Consequently, whenever we go for elections, some of us have to know how many people are voting in the barracks and you struggle to beat the number of votes they are going to cast because you are sure you will not get those votes. That brings in the question of how neutral the Army is in this Parliament. 

Perhaps the Army having 10 members of Parliament should not be voting during elections in areas especially where the LC III or local councillor are being elected. If the whole barracks chooses to vote one way it badly tilts the balance and the feeling is that it has voted on a partisan basis. That is the challenge you must handle. 

The other question is how are people voted for in the barracks? We do not know who conducts the elections and how they are held. That should be public information. 

And, therefore, on this question of being political, there is no problem, but on the question of being partisan, the Army has a challenge which should be handled at every stage of review. Otherwise, technically, there is no problem. The way the officers have been conducting themselves in Parliament, one would say, “Why not; we could continue having them there.” (Applause) But they should make sure that they don’t look like they are being partisan. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.52
MR CHARLES ANGIRO GUTOMOI (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Members of Parliament, the issues before us are very clear and I am not going to repeat myself over what has been discussed because it is obvious. 

I, however, have only one question to discuss. But before that, I want to quote Hitler’s Military Advisor’s statement that: “Once you allow a military man in, it is not easy to get him out.” And that is exactly what is happening in Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, what is the unfinished agenda of the NRM Liberation War because there are complaints out there?  Even among the UPDF there are complaints that, one, the representation of the UPDF in Parliament is almost from one region. And that has been a very serious matter that should not be ignored. 

Two, today they are appearing very smart in their uniform probably for the last time when we are debating this, but beginning tomorrow you will not see them in this House anymore. Therefore, since their presence here is very important to the UPDF, why can’t they be represented by name since their presence is not there and they are paid? They should, instead of being called “Representatives of UPDF,” be called, “UPDF Members of Parliament,” because they would like to be Members of Parliament so much.   

When you go to the parliamentary records, how do you feel, Mr Speaker? I am very uncomfortable waking up every day to come and perform my duties in Parliament, in the committees, and my colleagues are not there and yet they are paid? 

When they tell us here that they are always out representing the Army in Somalia and Congo, does it mean that they are the only competent military officers in Uganda that we have robbed the UPDF of? Don’t we have any other officers who could do that? So, for that reason, the UPDF themselves are complaining, according to my research. They say that they are being cheated in that the same people are claiming to be doing the same work they are not doing and they are paid. They are, therefore, requesting that this should be scrapped. 

When you come to the public, it is complaining more seriously than ever before because we have consulted them and you have just been presented with a report, which should not be ignored by this House. We have been directed after consultations and there is no reason why we should go against that consultative report.  That means that we have some other reasons which should be explained here. But if the reason is what has been explained, Mr Speaker, the politics of Uganda is still very “sick.”

When I was welcoming His Excellency the President during his campaign in my constituency -(Interruption)  

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, hon. Charles Angiro Gutomoi for giving me a slot. Hon. Gutomoi, you are the Shadow Minister of Defence. I would like you to clarify to us or to inform the House, in your research, have you been able to find out why the Police is headed by Maj. Gen. Kayihura who is a military personnel? Can you tell us whether the Prison Chief, Byabasaija is a professional prisons officer or a military officer? Can you also tell me whether Gen. Aronda -(Interruption)  

MR GUTOMOI: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal very much for being well informed about the directives which she knows very well. Those are directives and she knows it very well that they come from the same area to safeguard the same system. So, there is no surprise. And that is why we have this challenge in the House.   

AS we are debating this, I would like to ask the House whether we have a similar thing in the Tanzania and Kenya parliaments. If not, why is it only in Uganda?  It is just because the system is such that there is nowhere in thinking that the Army is not the owner of the political system. Because we are aware that there were founder members of the UPDF, which was called NRA, and then the Army has become the owners; and then some people who are their relatives and friends have become shareholders –(Member timed out_)

5.59
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank all the Members who have contributed to this motion. I moved this motion in good faith and I would like to put it on record that we recognise and commend the performance of our gallant UPDF in making sure that there is stability in our country. They have done quite a good job.

Gen. David Tinyenfunza in his submission said, “The representation of UPDF here is rather unique.” That it is a command representation; they are a “listening post,” an “observation post.” 

We have since the promulgation of the Constitution had the UPDF in Parliament. But in 2006, when we went into a multi-party political dispensation, aware of our turbulent country’s history, we again reconsidered having the UPDF in the House. I think that as of now, we have seen that the UPDF has gone professional; it is really professional and more so, for the last five years when we had the partisan politics with the UPDF in the House. I think we should also be proud of the representation of the other various institutions in the Executive. 

The Minister of Defence and that of State for Defence could take on the role of being the listening and observation posts, because really, they are the direct persons responsible for the institution of defence -(Applause)- Just like we have the Minister of Internal Affairs being a mouthpiece for the Uganda Police Force and the Uganda Prisons Services.

This motion is not an attempt, to use hon. Guma’s words, to underrate the competence of the UPDF. We are not even moving a vote of no confidence in our UPDF, and I believe that the UPDF know their constitutional obligations to protect the sovereignty of our state. Therefore, I don’t think that by having them out, they would go out angry and say if that be the case, let us make life difficult for those Members who have recommended us to get out of Parliament. 

I think we need to show that our UPDF has become very robust and even more professional. They can keep the sovereignty of our state even when they are outside the House. In any case, the debates in the House are not closed to the public. You can still be listening and observing wherever you are. 

I would like - you all saw what happened here to confirm that it is a command representation. Gen. David Tinyenfuza could only allow a point of information from a fellow general. My brother Col. Katirima, my condolences, because this is a command representation; he could not stomach a point of information from a junior colleague because you can’t command him. This is the situation and I would like to implore the House to accept this objective motion moved in good faith that we delete 2(a) from the prayers. I beg to move and implore the Members to support the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the original motion by the minister and learned Attorney-General was to retain all the special representation we have in the House, including UPDF. The only motion on this motion by the Attorney- General is the motion moved by hon. Epetait who is suggesting that we delete one category, namely, UPDF represented by 10 people. That is the only motion we have.

According to the law as it is, when you are dealing with Article 78, the motion is carried by a simple majority. So, I put the question on the first amendment motion by hon. Epetait. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE SPEAKER: Now I put the question on the motion by the Attorney-General retaining all the four categories. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I thank you very much for your contribution. I know all the points that have been raised in this debate will be noted. Those areas that require improvement will be improved so that we move harmoniously. 

I think this is the proper time to adjourn as we cannot embark on the other business. Since we agreed yesterday that we can sit in the morning, can’t we sit tomorrow in the morning to consider this CHOGM report? What is your view; Mama Alaso? Do you have any comment?

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I am of the view that we sit at 2.00 p.m. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. to continue with business. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.05 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 11 November 2010 at 2.00 p.m.) 


