Wednesday, 18 November 2009

Parliament met at 2.19 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you and I thank you for keeping time because yesterday we agreed that we should start at 2.15 p.m. and we were here at that time. I must recognise that by saying thank you very much for keeping time.

2.20
MRS MARY OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of national and urgent importance.  Hon. Members will recall that this morning we were treated to a front page headline of a girl from my constituency who has been arraigned at the Police station for clobbering a would-be defiler to death. This is a 14-year old girl and the man she clobbered to death apparently had been a serial defiler. He had been in police cells and released before he went to start hounding this poor girl who is an orphan. The girl has been living with a nine-year old brother. Sometimes, I appreciate the Red Pepper for the language they use when they talk about matters of rape and defilement; their language really graphically describes what takes place, although it is a rude awakening to us to take action.

I am raising this matter because rape and defilement are not getting the due justice that should be accorded to them. I remember I raised this matter about six months ago, after which the minister promised to make a report, but he did not – because in the 2008 Annual Crime Report, for instance, defilement was the leading sex-related crime with 8,635 case registered, but with less than half the number of suspects being arrested and taken to court. And only 333 of that, less than half, were convicted. Again in 2008, 1,536 suspects were arrested and of those, only a few were actually charged. 

With these high numbers, I wonder where we are going. Actually I would be tempted to take this girl as a heroine; she did it in self-defence, against a man who had been to prison for a similar or same offence. He was going to defile her too. We cannot tell what would have happened during the course of defilement; he could infect her with HIV/AIDS or even at worst, kill her to destroy evidence.

I would like to implore the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the police in general, to wake up; let them stand up and be counted because we are going to be known as a country where defilers get away with such cases; where defilers are put into prison, but end up getting away. I would like to call upon them to get up and show cause why people are arraigned in courts of law and sent to prison, but they get out –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, I recognise the concerns of the honourable member but I also wonder why she continues to labour developing her point over a person who has died. Do you want the dead body to be taken before court or what?

MRS OKURUT: Hon. Member, I do not think you got me correctly. I could not have laboured on a point of somebody who has died. I only said that somehow, it served him right because he had got out of prison and now had come to defile this girl - this girl just acted in self defence. I know the man is dead - may his soul rest in eternal peace – but we do not want people to take the law in their hands. But if shove comes to push, this is what is going to happen in this country. I thank you. 

MR KAWANGA: I want to thank the hon. Member for having raised this matter and the concern she has shown in respect of justice. However, I would like to point out one thing that something has to be done about how the police investigate crimes in this country, particularly serious crimes. The competence, the speed and accuracy are lacking. Also, the machinery of justice is so slow that in the process this justice is lost.

You talked about this man having been a serial rapist and that he had just been released. I wonder why he had been released or why was, for example, his case not taken to court? Was he tried? Was evidence collected? Because if that was not done, one understands why the man got out to continue doing this kind of thing? I hope government will continue assisting police to ensure it does its work effectively and expeditiously.

2.28
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise on a matter of importance, but it is a paradox of the subject I found on the Floor because on the 29th of last month I raised, on the Floor of this House, a matter of people who have been arrested allegedly on the crime of idleness and disorderliness. I particularly raised the concern of a one Peter Katongole who died from Nsangi after being tortured, plus many other people.

The Government Chief Whip promised that the minister concerned would bring a statement to this House on 5th November this year. However, as we speak today, this matter has not been brought to its conclusion in this House, yet people who are on remand on charges of idleness and disorderliness, continue to be taken to Kassanda for hard labour. It is a matter of serious concern that somebody can do hard labour when he/she is just on remand and not convicted.

I would like to call upon government to quickly come up with an explanation on this matter as promised. This matter includes arbitrary arrests, torture and detention of youths, holding prisoners outside the courts of jurisdiction and hard labour for people who are not yet convicted. 

As I explained, it seems only able-bodied youths are being convicted of idleness and disorderliness; there are no old women; there are no young girls; there are no old men; only able-bodied young men seem to be getting convicted, which leads them to Nsangi and finally to Kassanda for hard labour. We need an explanation from government.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you are demanding a statement as promised. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this is the position; I also saw the letter from the Government Chief Whip to the Minister of Internal Affairs asking him to make a statement, which has not been made. So, maybe you have to prompt the minister to come with it.

Hon. Members, as I appealed to you yesterday, you need time to scrutinise the Land (Amendment) Bill so that you can help in making it a good Bill, by chucking out what you think should not be there. 

However, I would like to advise that when dealing with this Bill, you should also look at other laws, which we have had in the country in respect of land. For example, as I looked through my books, I came across the Busuulu and Envujjo Law - I do not know whether Members have internalised this law because I heard many complaining that this Bill is criminalising acts dealing with land. What I would like to say is that this law, which was enacted in 1928, also has offences and penalties. What I am saying is that even in the Busuulu and Envujjo law, some criminal acts were recognised. 

For instance - and I would like to read Section 18 of this law, which was effective from January 1928 - it says: “The following acts or omissions shall be offences against this law on the part of the tenant if: He refuses or neglects, without good cause, to render the Envujjo; or he sublets his holding or any part thereof for purpose of profit; he misuses the right given under Section 9 to cut timbers, gather firewood for his own use; on vacating his kibanja, he fails to leave the land and building in a good condition; during the time he occupies his kibanja, he fails to keep that kibanja in good condition, or fails to properly look after the land…” 

On the part of the mailo land owner, the law says thus: “… if he demands Busuulu before it is payable, or if he prevents or hinders the tenant from cultivating food or other produce or scheduled crops in accordance with the provisions of Section 4; seeks to evict the tenant without an order of court or during the prosecution of an appeal by a tenant under Section 11 or until the time for the appeal has expired.” 

So you can see that for eviction to be effected even under the Envujjo law, you had to go to court. The quotation continues: “… he disturbs the possession of a tenant succeeding into a kibanja in accordance with native custom.” 

Section 19 of this law says: “For every offence against this law as aforesaid, there may be effected a penalty not exceeding Shs 100 or in default of payment, the court may, in its discretion, order an offender to be punished with imprisonment of the limit of three months.”

What I am trying to say is that this thing has been there and what you have to do is to consider reasonableness of the punishment that may be captured in this Bill. Please make wide consultations of other laws. You could also look at the Land Reform Decree of 1975 – there may be some good things that can help us improve this law. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

The Companies Bill, 2009

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Omara Atubo, we are on Bills first reading and handling the Companies Bill.

2.35
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Omara Atubo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Companies Bill, 2009” be read the first time. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Is the Certificate of Financial Implications secured?

MR ATUBO: Yes, it is here and I would like to lay it on the Table; it is duly signed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to clear this Bill. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LAND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007

(Debate continued.)

THE SPEAKER: I will start with those who were here yesterday the time we adjourned – but hon. Sebaggala, you made a contribution, I remember.

2.36
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for giving me the opportunity to express my views in respect of this Land (Amendment) Bill. 

I would like to start off by making one thing clear. Yesterday hon. Cecilia Ogwal attempted to exonerate hon. Daniel Omara Atubo by comparing him to Pontius Pilate who saw nothing in the crucifixion of Jesus Christ, but 2000 years down the road, not a single Christian has forgiven Pontius Pirate –(Laughter)– when we rise to say our creed, we say: “Jesus was crucified under Pontius Pilate.” That means this governor had an authority to spare the life of Jesus Christ, but he gave it up – 

THE SPEAKER: But is it a virtue for Christians not to forgive? (Laughter)

MR ODIT: I am just trying to improve on the Christian doctrine that was introduced in this House yesterday; it was halfway done by hon. Cecilia Ogwal.

In our case, the author of this Bill is responsible and nobody can erase the record. Similarly, looking at what transpired in the House, I would like to point out that I saw glaring differences in the opinions of Members of Parliament from the various regions of this country. The uniting fact only came on the matter of customary land tenure system. 

Whereas the people from the North and East were fully united that they stand by their local community to defend the customary land tenure system and the control of the land tenure system by their people, the west was quiet. Apparently, all their land issues were sorted out a long time ago. So, they have no problem. 

When we come to Buganda, there is serious katogo. There are Members of Parliament who are saying the position is that the land should go and that the Bill should have come much earlier than today. At the same time, a few Baganda MPs are saying that the Bill is very cruel and that it is even challenging the authority of the Kabaka. These are leaders from the same region coming with different positions. 

Central region, let us plead with you; if you have not yet harmonised your position, the best thing you can do is to go for a retreat and consult yourselves. You have caused sufficient confusion in this country. Even in 1967, the Constitution amendment that you are talking about now – the Bill was tabled by Godfrey Binaisa; at Committee Stage, Dr Luyimbazi Zaake went through the constitutional amendment process and nobody else. Later on, they started complaining that Obote grabbed their land. It was these two individual Baganda who sponsored the whole Bill. As if that were not enough, we are told Besweri Mulondo was responsible in the CA and nobody else. 

Today we are talking about the Land Bill; a very contentious issue. If you listen to the radios, the public, especially in the central region, does not know what exactly is happening. The Members of Parliament from the same region are speaking in different languages and the local community is complaining and making statements to the contrary. With this kind of position, hon. Members, where are we leading our country? This is a big challenge, especially for our colleagues who come from the central region. If this Bill is passed into law in its present form, you should not turn around later on to complain. We have been given sufficient time and we have brought the views of our people, but some of you are talking in the contrary. 

In the case of Lango, the question of land was dealt with in 1956 when there was an attempt by the British to reform the land system, grab the land from Lango and pass it to the colonial government. Nobody accepted that except one individual called Yayiro Apenyo who was an agent of the British at the time. His car was burnt and the district commissioner, who was a Mzungu, stoned. The question of land was fair at the time, but today, there are no land disputes in Lango except for a few people who have complaints about gardens; these could be one or two plots, but the matter is sorted out by clan leaders. 

I do not know why we should introduce customary land in this amendment. We are -(Member timed out.)

2.43
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I stand to oppose this motion for the following reasons: 

One, anyone who carefully read the recommendations of the committee report would have known that these recommendations were sending us for more consultations. 

The people I represent and indeed those that I have been able to consult throughout Buganda oppose this Bill because they think that the Bill confers a lot of powers to the Bibanja owners as opposed to registered owners. 

Secondly, my people argue that land is a commercial item and that if you want to fix Busuulu, either by the minister or the land boards, you should be prepared to indicate the size of that land and also that you should go ahead and fix rent of the houses for all commercial items all over the country. If not, then the activities that are supposed to take place on such pieces of land should be specified. Otherwise, we are looking for war; where one would have paid a very big Busuulu, for example, of Shs 1 million in a year, but he constructs a shade where he sells timber and earns Shs 50 million in that same year. 

My people have asked me to give their views, that indeed, if it was extremely necessary for Busuulu to be fixed, then we must seriously think about reintroducing Envujjo.

Thirdly, my people agree that while there are evictions, there is also rampant forceful occupation of land by favoured or powerful people. The land at Kawanda was forcefully occupied; the land at Wakaliga was forcefully occupied; the land at Makerere Kivulu was forcefully occupied; many wetlands around town have been forcefully occupied; and the Bill says nothing about them.  

There are individuals whose land has been taken by force through ranch restructuring exercises. Mr George Balwogeza of Buruli is one such case; Mr Michael Mulindwa from Masaka is another and Mr Katongole, unfortunately he died three months ago, but he had a similar claim.

Fourthly, some of the people I consulted opposed the donation of land to bona fide occupants by the Constitution of 1995. Erina Nantale lived in exile in Germany since 1978 with her parents. When her parents died, she returned home with her father’s title, but found that the whole land at Makindye, Sabagabo, was occupied. She is helpless and the law is looking in a different direction. 

The people I consulted demand that Parliament defines “occupants” because in Buganda you are either a kibanja holder or a title holder, and the rest are English words. My people oppose the transfer of bona fide interests without the consent of the registered owner. 

The people I consulted also want to know the qualifications for candidates for the Land Fund. Otherwise, the argument is, Kyanjo did not occupy the land of his father; he has five children and they do not have land. So, who is qualified to receive this money?  

Some bibanja owners want to accept compensation, but they find difficulty in compromising with the land owners because there is no figure that is known. Therefore, they say that if you can fix Busuulu, fix the compensation rate so that it can be known. Others do not want compensation; they are not productive and yet they hold on to large chunks of land and even deny registered owners access to unused land. They do not even accept the extended rights of the biological children of the land owners, and this is sad.

The people I consulted were unsatisfied with the Attorney-General’s explanation of the fate of the 9,000 square miles. I want to argue that the recommendations of the committee report simply indicate that people were not sufficiently consulted. It would be erroneous for us to lay a carpet in a room that is dirty and promise to clean it later. Why don’t we clean it now and lay the carpet afterwards. I thank you.

2.49
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I come from Kasese and it is a national park corridor. We have Rwenzori National Park; we have Queen Elizabeth National Park; Kibaale and Semliki national parks. We also have forest and game reserves and there are also game corridors. We also have the former landlords. I call them former landlords because we defeated them. 

Let me thank the Leader of Government Business for having agreed to delete 32(b). That is how a country is led. You lead a country through compromise; it is give and take and I thank you very much for that. 

How do we the people of Kasese understand this Bill? The Bill is regulating our relationship with our landlords. The Bill is regulating how we can be evicted. For us the people of Kasese, our problem is not about evictions. Our problem is how we own land that we shall call our own. Security of tenure is our biggest problem. Do not regulate my eviction or relationship with a landlord who does not even know how he acquired me as his tenant. 

In the spirit of give and take, I pray that section –(Interruption)  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleague, for giving way. I want to make it clear that what I stated is a government position. It is not my personal decision. That must be made clear and all those who are crucifying hon. Omara Atubo are wrong because he is representing a government position. Period! 

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you, Leader of Government Business –(Interruption)

MR ATUBO: Mr Speaker, I am enjoying keeping quiet because I will have plenty of time to speak even if it means speaking for two days. So, those who think they are crucifying me should wait for me. (Interjection) Is it in order -(Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: I am even annoyed. Mr Speaker and honourable members, Section 31, clause 3(d) suggests that the minister will define how much I should pay my land lord. The people of Kasese are not ready to even pay a coin to any land lord under the sun. You can go to heaven and fix these nominal rates, but we shall not pay. So, I request that you simply delete this thing because it cannot work in Kasese. 

When you go to 32(a), it prescribes how I can be evicted and reasons why I can be evicted, and that includes failure to pay. Even before the President assents to this Bill, I declare that we have failed to pay. We are defaulters because we are not going to pay anybody. Before God and man we are tenants of no person except ourselves. 

Section 35 describes our punishment if we defaulted in payment. Go and increase the prisons in Kasese and Bundibugyo because we have already received this punishment. 

I cannot understand that in the 21st Century people like us bring such a Bill on land. Land is a prime factor of production. The question we should be answering right now is how to make land productive for our country. How do we make the labour of our people on land rewarding? If you are protecting peasants on land; if you are protecting landlords, so what if land is not productive? The question today is how we can make land productive; the question today is how we can make the labour of our people on land rewarding -(Interjection)- I am not even quarrelling. I am just annoyed that people cannot think beyond their noses. 

After that submission, I describe this Bill as follows: the spirit of this Bill is confusing and bad, therefore, non progressive. The politics of this Bill is just to look at the next election. It is pitting people against each other. You must stop this confusion. 

Economically, the Bill is retrogressive and bankrupt. It cannot help people to generate wealth out of their land. Socially, the Bill is disruptive. We were mending fences with our neighbours and former landlords, but now when you bring this it is disrupting the process of harmonious living with our friends. 

Constitutionally, it is denying the people of Uganda the right to own their property and enjoy –(Member timed out_)

2.57
MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here as a Member of Parliament for Bukoto South constituency in Masaka District to oppose this Bill. I held consultations in my constituency and my people asked me to reject this Bill. Last year, all the leaders from Buganda in Parliament went to Entebbe and met His Excellency the President. Only you, Mr Speaker, were not present. But the Prime Minister, the Vice-President and all other Members of Parliament from Buganda met with the President in Entebbe. 

During that meeting, His Excellency, the President realised that there were loopholes in this Bill. Indeed, before we left, Hon. John Kawanga and Hon. Peter Nyombi were asked to go and look at all the relevant laws right from 1928 so that they can come up with a synchronised position to be able to have a fair Bill. When we came back, we then heard the President calling NRM Members from Buganda and giving them a different version. 

By the way, I am a member of this committee; but this report was compiled in November last year. So, when these sessional committees were constituted, those of us who were new on this committee asked for this report. We thought that a report that was delayed by His Excellency the President because he saw that it required some amendments needed a second look. 

The chairman said that he had already given the report to you and whatever we had to do would be done on the Floor of this House. However, in that report, the committee received reports from the Uganda Bankers Associations who rejected this Bill. The committee received reports from Uganda Law Reform, who also rejected this Bill. The committee received a report from the Uganda Joint Christian Council, which also rejected this Bill. The committee also received a report from Uganda Human Rights Commission which also rejected this Bill. 

As Members of Parliament, we are supposed to legislate for the whole nation, not for the sake of an individual that we want to please. Those of you who visited Ghana last month with me, you may note that all the political parties in this House were represented there. We were told that when you are in power, you should not legislate, as if you will never be on the Opposition. The law you make can entangle you sometimes. This was because when Rawlings’ party was in power, they had made some laws which were quite hard. So when they came to the opposition side, it became very difficult for them. 

Therefore, as Members of Parliament, we should look beyond our political affiliations and legislate for the whole country. In 1966, when the then government abrogated the 1962 Constitution, there were only four members of parliament on the Opposition; and I can name them. They objected to this. They were the late Jasper Odar from West Nile, the late Martin Okello from Nebbi; the late Jimmy Obonyo; and Mr Boniface Byanyima; they opposed the abrogation of the 1962 Constitution, in this House where we are today. 

Today, we are legislating for the country, and we forget that we are supposed to have certificates of occupancy when we pass this law. Let me give an example. When we were in Entebbe, I asked the President, “Your Excellency, if somebody is a lawful tenant on my land and to be recognised they should have a certificate of occupancy, who is going to pay for that certificate? Before you issue a certificate of occupancy, you have to measure that land?” The President answered that, “I did not know; these people from lands did not even inform me”. That is what he said. So, if we pass this law, what is going to happen? 

In the Bill, we talk about the minister determining Busuulu. Some of you have never gone into exile. Can you imagine a political appointee – do not think about this regime alone. Those of you who were present in the previous regimes know what it means for a political appointee to determine Busuulu. If this had been the case, many of you who were in exile would not have found your bibanja on return. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member that is exactly what I have been telling you. You are not obliged to follow what is in the Bill. If you think the minister should not determine Busuulu, make a proposal. You can propose that we set up a board of valuers. It is up to you to amend this law. Please, proceed. 

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We all know that this is a liberalised economy. Those of you who were present in 1975 when the Amin Decree abolished Mailo land that is when Busuulu and Envujjo laws ceased. My father was “Omwami owa Mailo”. They used to bring Envujjo and Busuulu to him. But after 1975 –(Member timed out_)

3.05
COL (RTD) TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I support this motion. I have looked at the statement from the Minister of Lands which he delivered on 12th November. On page 3, the minister says that the landlord who does not intend to unilaterally evict lawful and/or bona fide occupants will not be affected by the provisions of this Bill. However, landlords interested in illegal evictions, including those driven by economic reasons, will be affected by these amendments. 

He goes on to say that, “In Uganda, the registered owners of land are estimated to be 600,000 and the tenants or customary owners are estimated to be 20 million. Therefore, government cannot afford to turn a blind eye when the majority of the population is suffering”. For me this is a fundamental statement. It is for these 20 million people that a solution must be found, to give them stability and existence on those small pieces of land where they are. They can then also earn the required decent and stable existence on that land. I think this is a fundamental Bill, almost a little superior to the 1998 Land Act. 

Mr Speaker, in the Constitution, the famous Article 237 states that, “Land in Uganda belongs to the citizens of Uganda and shall vest in them in accordance with the land tenure systems provided ….” The systems are stipulated as customary, freehold, Mailo and leasehold. Now, who is this Ugandan who does not fall in this category of ownership that we are trying to cater for? It is the lawful tenant or the bona fide occupant. 

Yesterday, hon. Cecilia Ogwal asked, “Are we trying to create another tenure system?” The Speaker was very quick to explain to her that this particular terminology of bona fide occupants has been interpreted, and she stopped there. However, it is that same question, which lingers in my mind, but that is not the problem. We have to find a solution that will settle the lawful tenants and bona fide occupants. How do you cause these people to have ownership? For the time being, it is to stop them from being evicted and the rest can follow later. 

What bothers me is that there will always be a cold war between the tenant and the land owner. In other words, I feel that this law does not go far enough. There is a need to go beyond this. However, as the minister explained in his statement, this law is not talking about the 9,000 square miles or the Balaalo; it is about evictions, and I agree with him. Later, something beyond this will come.

What is important for me is that every piece of land in Uganda should belong to Ugandan citizens. That is why some time back, hon. Okello-Okello was saying that every Ugandan already owns land; who are we to say, there will be land owners and tenants? I think in future it will be necessary to amend the Constitution to say, “All land in Uganda belongs to the citizens of Uganda, and the state shall enable every Uganda to own land”. South Africa is trying as much as possible to create this kind of situation. It can take us a thousand years, it does not matter, but every citizen of Uganda should own land. It may be one acre or two, but that is the only way we are going to solve this problem. Otherwise, we are going to create a perpetual system of some people owning land and others never owning it. That will be most unfortunate –(Interruption) 

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. I would like to tell my colleague that he is raising a very important argument. However, I thought he should have raised this argument earlier, at the time the President of this Republic went to Gomba and acquired an expansive farm. He found some individuals settled there but instead of giving them some sort of titles, he bought them off and they went away. I do not know where they are right now. So, don’t you think it would be good for the President to start the game instead of coming to this House and appealing to people who are speaking for their constituents?

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Mr Speaker, apparently that is a very different matter. I cannot speak for the estate of a gentleman in Uganda called Museveni; I cannot speak for his estate. That is a different matter and I cannot pursue that. My point is that this Bill should pass for the purpose of stopping of evictions of Ugandans who must also have a settled life. (Member timed out_)

3.13
MR ANTHONY YIGA (NRM, Kalungu County West, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yiga Anthony is my name and I am a Member of Parliament for Kalungu County West, Masaka District. It is unfortunate that the MPs from Buganda have no common position. So, we choose that we shall individually discuss this issue depending on where we come from and the views of the people we represent in our constituencies. 

In my constituency there is a problem of land evictions. Many people are really worried, especially those who do not have money to buy the bibanja where they are. So when we see a law which will assist them to prolong their stay on the pieces of land where they are, the people of Kalungu and I would certainly support this endeavour. For that matter, I support the motion.

Yesterday I heard my brother, hon. Lukwago, making his submission. I come from the same constituency with hon. Lukwago; he hails from Masaka, Kalungu West constituency, and we come from neighbouring villages. He knows that there is a problem of evictions in Masaka. I was surprised when he made his presentation yesterday, but I forgave him –(Laughter)- because the nature of the land problems in Kampala Central are not the same as those in Kalungu, Kabungu and the like. The situation is different there. So, I am talking for these peasants who have to handle their hoe to go and cultivate bananas so that –(Mr Lukwago rose_)- but you had your chance yesterday; let me also present. Our situations are different. 

Yesterday some colleagues were saying that by having this Bill, we are belittling our king, but this is not the case. In my constituency, I have got a sub-county chief of the Buganda government who is evicting people. The sub-county chief of the Buganda Kingdom government is giving eviction notices, trespass notices and the like. Yesterday when I heard my colleagues saying the contrary, I saw a big problem. That is why I had to forgive some of them because most of them are representing Kampala where the situation is not the same like ours in the villages.

I support the idea of a minister or another body fixing the rent in case the district land boards do not fix it. However, the hon. Minister of Lands should facilitate the district land boards to do this work after passing this law. Do not fail them. Give them money, give them transport, computers, offices and everything else that will enable them work. If you do not facilitate them and you usurp their powers, I will not support you. I think you are upright and are going to do that work -(Mr Amuriat rose_)- you are going to get your time to make your presentation. There is no time.

When it comes to the grounds for eviction, of course I support the committee. They say that not only non-payment of rent should be a ground but you should also look at the other laws in the country where somebody can be evicted in case the person has broken the laws. I support that amendment. When it is moved by the committee, I will support it. 

Regarding amending Section 35, I can see that we are stringent when it comes to the land lord proceeding to sell a kibanja without giving the tenant an opportunity to buy. You are saying that once that happens, then that transaction is invalid. However, when it comes to the tenant, the kibanja holder selling the kibanja, then the transaction is valid. We should have an appropriate amendment for that one. Since we want stability, we should also make it invalid when a tenant sells a kibanja without giving the land lord the first option to buy it so that we are fair to the land lords and the tenants.

The people in my constituency are asking the government to empower them to be able to buy those plots of land, which they are occupying. There are very many landlords who are willing to sell, but these bibanja owners do not have the money. Many of them have not sold the land and they want these bibanja owners to buy it. 

I support Members of Parliament who have been calling for a meaningful Land Fund. What we have now in the budget is peanuts. Can you make it meaningful? Maybe we can have Shs 100 billion annually, so that you can address this problem of landlessness and evictions in this country. This is the ultimate solution. If you can do so, then many of our peasants will get empowered. They can get loans from the government, buy this land and pay back gradually as they sell their produce.

The problem we had in my constituency was a lot of misrepresentation of the Bill. It was said that the Bill is about mailo akenda, which is not true. It was said that the Bill is about federo, which is not true. It was said that the Bill is about counties and sub-counties, which is not true. We need to clarify these issues. I have told my constituents that all those issues like mailo akenda and federo are not here. The Bill is very specific. There are specific articles, which are being amended, and I have been able to deliver that message to them. My constituents have been able to understand it and we are moving together. So they have been able to shun the lies.

Lastly, there is this issue of customary land. I know that our colleagues from areas which have customary land are very unhappy. I think we may need to move towards a uniform way of administering land in this country. If I want to go to Terego, what custom shall I adopt to acquire land there? I know hon. Kassiano Wadri has land in Buganda and in Busoga, but he is not a Musoga or a Muganda. We need to review this issue also. (Laughter)

3.22
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. I want to support the motion with a few recommendations or clarifications, which I want to seek from the minister.

Section 31 is saying that if the district land board fails to determine the ground rent, then the minister should do so. We need to first ask ourselves why the previous district land boards failed to determine the ground rent. You will agree with me that government did not fund these district land boards. If that continues, it implies that the minister will be the one setting the ground rent. I want to urge the ministry and government to fund these district land boards to enable them determine the ground rent. 

When determining the ground rent, the district land boards or the minister should not just lump up a district and give it one price because areas within a district have different values, just like sub-counties. Land does not have a fixed price. It depends on the purpose and the economic activity. We would love that all those aspects are captured while determining the ground rent.

I want to thank the committee regarding clause 32 (a). There has been a problem of evictions even in Buvuma. The people who are evicting or who are assisting with the evictions are the land lords. There are few cases where a bona fide occupant can evict. One of the causes of the evictions is poor rent dues. Initially, it was Shs 1,000. Parliament amended it, but the district land boards did not come up to determine the ground rent and so the land lords were at a loss. People were having land and they were getting no revenue at the end of the day. They had to sell their land and the buyers had to use legal means to evict our people. 

I would love that the condition for eviction should not be non-payment of ground rent. We all know that in Buganda, there are cases of child sacrifice and child murder; if one of your bona fide occupants is a witch and is paying the ground rent, this should be cause to evict the person from the area. I thank the committee for putting other conditions.

Regarding clause 35(8)(b), I am not convinced when you say that the commissioner should not make an entry on the certificate of title when the land lord did not consult or did not give the first option to the tenant. This presupposes that all the land lords know the bona fide occupants on their land, which is not the case. It also presupposes that all land lords know the boundaries of their land.

I want to confess that two years ago I was almost a victim of the same clause. I bought a piece of land near Mukono. At the time of buying, the place was a forest and there was no tenant. After opening up the land and demarcating the portion I had bought, a tenant emerged saying that was his land, yet all the LC I officials were present when I was buying and they said it was a forest owned by the land lord. We want to help Ugandans because if we complicate the process, people will be getting fake titles or it will be impossible for somebody to acquire a title.

I want the minister to think about it because most land lords do not know the boundaries of their land. Also, they do not know the squatters and the bona fide occupants. So, let us make the process of acquiring titles simple. The moment we make it simple, all these problems will not arise. Even if this law is passed and the process is complicated, people will be evicted due to certain clauses. If you do not know the land lord, you will not be paying the Busuulu. We should simplify the law.

I want to thank the ministry for the sensitisation. However, yesterday you heard that all the people of Buvuma were advised to come to Lugazi. You know, we represent peasants; you just imagine how many travelled from Buvuma to Lugazi. I want to urge the ministry that now, and even after passing this law, there is need for constant sensitisation about the Land Bill because people are not aware of the status –(Member timed out_)  

3.30
MS MABEL BAKEINE (NRM, Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for giving me this opportunity - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I started with this side and I took four and only three have made contributions. I am trying to balance the contributions. I will get back to you.

MS BAKEINE: I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I stand here to support this motion. Many times I have stood in this august House airing out the concerns of my people. My people have been most affected by the rampant evictions. This appears as a temporary measure but the majority, the vulnerable, the helpless, will be protected and peace can prevail in many parts of the country where the same groups exist.

In my place about three years ago there are some people who acquired land titles of land which had settlers with the intention of carrying out these rampant evictions that we are trying to address now. This situation cuts across my constituency. I do not know about other constituencies, but I propose that land titles that were issued by the Ministry of Lands in the last three years should be recalled. They should be vetted and the good ones left to pass. The bad ones should be retained or cancelled so that sanity can prevail for these majority voiceless people.

Also, among the land lords of Toro and Ankole who are the lawful owners, many of them received these land titles in an unfair way. This is because when Bunyoro - where I come from - was colonised, the chiefs who were brought there to monitor for the Kabaka, by the stroke of a pen, were made land lords and the people who were on that land were left as squatters. Many of these people unfairly became land lords at the expense of the real owners, the indigenous people, who are now tenants of what belonged to them. My request is that the government should try to raise enough money to pay off these absentee land lords so that the land can revert to the rightful owners who for so long have been made tenants.

I also want to support this motion because to me this Bill also favours the landlords since they are able to collect ground rent. In situations where the land lord will feel that he is not comfortable with what he collects, the government can come in and compensate them and let the sitting tenants take the portion where they are, through the Land Fund.

I also want to support this motion because this Bill affects all Ugandans irrespective of who you are or where you are. We are trying to look for peaceful co-existence where individuals can settle and try to do developmental work to enhance their living standards. If we do not take into consideration that millions of Ugandans do not own land, we shall remain in abject poverty that will not help us move a step forward. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.37
MR ABURA PIRIR (NRM, Matheniko County, Karamoja): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the members. I would also like to thank the minister for bringing this Bill forward because it has been a long awaited Bill. We were all worried about the motive for the delay in bringing this Bill. We were really concerned and the rumours were being circulated in various ways. 

However, now the Bill has come out clearly and specifically to address certain sections and is leaving out Article 32(b), which is on communal land. So I am now standing to say that if we are trying to amend the Bill, we should do it in a way that will help us design a policy that is acceptable to all of us unanimously - neither in favour of the government side nor the Opposition but for the common good of all the local people. That is the idea that I am seeing. In Karamoja, there are no landlords. The land is for the community, so –(Laughter)– we do not need to demarcate land.

On the issue of natural resources, if we are to address the issue of those people who unfortunately own cows and they do not have land, I think they should be allowed to cross over and come and graze where there is pasture and water. (Laughter) These are natural resources and those who are squeezing themselves somewhere, come and we go to Karamoja. (Laughter) The population of mankind is growing -(Interruption)  

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank hon. Abura Pirir for yielding the Floor to accept this piece of information. We are very grateful for your generosity in saying that those cattle keepers who are marauding around with guns and large herds of cattle are welcome to Karamoja. I am now here informing you that I know they will not accept your offer because they also know that from what happens in Karamoja, they might also lose their cows. (Laughter) Furthermore, I wish Northern Uganda was as well endowed as Karamoja; we would have also welcomed them there. Thank you.

MR PIRIR: Thank you, colleague, for that. Mr Speaker, Karamoja is now peaceful; we do not have any guns anymore although there might be some few. So do not fear to come -(Laughter)- and do not let our visitors who want to come to Karamoja fear. 

On the issue of land, I do not know whether it is because of the population because I remember in 1948 after the Second World War, the Colonial Government decided to resettle the Jews in Karamoja. This was because the population of Karamoja was 80,000 people. However, it is now one million plus people and the people are now changing their livelihood to agriculture and other issues. What I see as the problem here is that there are people who are selling their land and at the end of the day, they turn around and say their land has been grabbed. When you ask them why they sell their land, they turn around and make noise and they cannot answer. 

I am concerned that you who are densely populated here have our friends from Kenya, Sudan and other places and have allowed them buy land, and you know Kampala being a centre of attraction, everybody intends to settle around Kampala. I would actually like to thank Baganda for being accommodative people although you are the ones selling land and grumbling. We can only access your land by requesting you to sell it to us. Therefore, we should not open another war. Let us talk in a unanimous way and let us design policies that the Opposition and the government are interested in, for the common good of the people. I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker. The land is for all of us so let us plan for it in a peaceful way. Thank you.

3.42
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for finally bringing this Bill to the House and the honourable minister for this wonderful motion mainly geared towards protecting the tenants who are sitting on the land of the rich people. 

I acknowledge that in my constituency, which is in Kibaale District, land is owned by 3,500 people who are absentee land lords and the rest of the people, who are around 600,000, are merely tenants and squatters on this land. We have never seen any of these people -  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, is there anything preventing you from having property in New York or London and having tenants there? 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Well, for us it is very unfair because of the history through which they acquired this land. It is clear that they just got it; they did not buy. They were just given this land and the original people were denied the opportunity to own the titles. So, at this stage, for the honourable minister to come up and with this Bill to at least temporarily protect us, the tenants, I say I will support you and when it comes to voting for the motion, I will vote for it. 

I also want to make my personal comments on some of the provisions in the Bill. Some of them are not really stringent enough. I would have loved to see him saying at least where you are, you get a title for that land and stop being a tenant. That would be very good for us who are tenants on this land. It would give us ownership and total security of tenure. 

I am also disturbed by the clause, which is asking this tenant, when he wants to sign for his occupancy, to go and look for his land lord. I want to give you a scenario of a man in my constituency called Patrick Rwebembera who lives in Canada. He owns almost the whole sub-county of Mpefu, which is sitting on his land title. I have tried to contact this man to sort out this matter and tell him that he practically owns the whole sub-county with over 40,00 people seated on his title but he has never responded, and you are telling us that as we do these small transactions of our bibanja, we should consult him. Where shall we get him? A whole honourable Member of Parliament who can read and access internet here free of charge in Parliament cannot find him. Where is this small kibanja holder in my constituency going to get him? 

I beg that this should be altered. I beg the honourable minister to consider this and provide that an amendment be provided in the event where it is difficult for the kibanja holder to find this land lord, so that he should go ahead and do his transactions –(Interjections)- I also want to say that we have seen some people involved in fraudulent transactions where some people are creating tenants on existing land titles. Hon. Colleague, I beg that in the interest of my time, you keep your information. (Laughter) You are a land lord in my place and I would beg that your information – you are wasting my time. 

Mr Speaker, I think that these people who are creating tenants –(Interruption) 

MR NJUBA: The honourable member holding the Floor has just informed this House that he does not know his land lord. Is it in order for a member to confess in this House that he is actually unlawfully living on somebody’s land –(Laughter)- that he is unlawfully on land that had never been granted to him by the owner? Is it in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Is it a confession that you are a trespasser on somebody’s land? (Laughter)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: What I was stating is a fact in my constituency; many of us do not know these people who own the titles. The truth of the matter is that I am a bona fide occupant because I have lived on this land for the last 12 years –(Interjections)– I was born on this land and that qualifies me to be a bona fide occupant. I am not a trespasser.

THE SPEAKER: If you have been on this land for 12 years as of now, you are not in the bracket of bona fide occupants. (Laughter) According to the definition here, bona fide occupants are people who had lived on land at least 12 years prior to 1995. You ought to have been there 12 years before 1995 and afterwards. So, you do not fall in that bracket.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I think it is an issue of mathematics. I am 39 years old and I was born on this land. I am sure about my age because I was born on 6 December 1970 and I am certain that I am a bona fide occupant. Maybe I did not move within 12 years but I said I have lived there for more than 12 years. 

My last point is that the honourable minister should at least introduce a section to penalise these people who illegally get titles and also illegally create tenants on existing land titles, to stop the confusion. Otherwise, I strongly support and –(Member timed out­_)

MR TRESS BUCHANAYANDI (Independent, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you for the opportunity to say something. I wish to observe that at Independence, we were about five million people in Uganda but we are now over 30 million as we speak now. During this period of over 40 years, there has been a lot of movement of people from areas where land is critically short to areas where there appears to be ample land. The people who moved had to sell what they had and amicably came and found land lords who sold them land freely and willingly. However, because of population pressure and realisation that land is a big asset that can fetch a little more money, over time there has been a tremendous increase in land value to the extent that a land lord would now realise that by selling off the numerous tenants he had, he would make much more money than he would otherwise have done some years ago. 

If I was looking at that scenario and remained in Kisoro, I would not have minded because that kind of relationship between land lord and tenant does not exist. Anybody who owns land there owns it and would let it go freely. However, given the number of our people who have moved out of those areas of scarcity to areas of plenty, in this context they now must be protected because if they were to be dismissed from their small pieces of land which they after all obtained freely and willingly, they would have nowhere to go. This persuades me to support the motion of the Land Bill being discussed at the moment. 

Secondly, I am also persuaded to support this motion because I believe, and truly so, that ownership of land is a prerequisite to development and investment. Therefore, if you had all those many tenants without due regard to their safety and security of ownership, then it would be extremely difficult for them to invest in those pieces of land. Therefore, it becomes necessary that for those two reasons - land pressure and the need to invest - security of tenure must be guaranteed and it can be guaranteed by government, and by this House. 

Finally, I want to persuade the minister that once he sees this through, he should then look at the aspect of land use policy. At the moment, we have much debate on this issue because what should have come before in the form of a land policy has not been done. As much as I support this Bill, I want him to introduce a land policy as soon as possible so that we know which part of the land we are capable of sustaining. I thank you. 

3.55
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Enough political statements have been made about this Bill, but I will try to point out the technical aspect. Looking at the technical aspect, I felt like I had no business making a speech in this House. My feeling is that even if we pass this amendment, nothing is going to happen. We are amending the Uganda Land Act, which has 96 clauses, and we are amending only two or three of them, but very much heat has been generated around this, as if we are dealing with a whole Land Act. We are misleading the whole country on this issue and we are causing a problem, which we may not be able to handle. We are not amending the whole Act; we are amending just about two sections. 

We are dealing with an Act that has been on our book stands since 1998. It has been amended more than once since then. In 2004, we amended more than 30 sections of that same Act and the reason was because it had failed to work. The attempt then was that we amend it so that it works. I keep using this Act on a daily basis and I know what I am talking about. It is not working. That is why the Constitution tells us that we must have district land tribunals. In fact, they are supposed to be sub-county land tribunals. They are not there now because they did not work. Land committees did not work. So, really, unless we have looked at why it has not yet worked, just tampering with the clauses of this Act will not do the trick. For example, Members do not know that we are actually talking about evicting people from registered land and not all land. So, the excitement about this amendment does not concern everybody. 

I want you to look at clause 2 more carefully. The clause reads: “A lawful or bona fide occupant shall not be evicted from registered land.” So, even people in Buganda who are not on registered land are not covered by this amendment and, of course, it does not affect all the other people who are not living on registered land. So, we have generated so much heat around issues which we have not yet clearly explained. 

The Speaker refereed you to old laws – the Busuulu and the Envujjo law which was passed in 1928. The Land Reform Decree abolished it in 1975. It abolished the Busuulu and Envujjo law, the Ankole Landlord and Tenant law and the Toro Landlord and Tenant law. It is only the Busuulu and Envujjo law which disturbed the thing called the Ekibanja. So, in legal terms, there is nobody who owns Ekibanja in this country. The word “Kibanja” has no legal connotation. It is even misleading when you start setting up bibanja holders’ associations because in law, they do not exist. What now exits is somebody called a bona fide occupant or a lawful occupant. 

I want to ask honourable members in this House, especially those from Buganda, to go to their villages and tell me who the lawful occupants are. For example, if they sent you to a village to say, “Please, lawful or bona fide occupants, come over.” -(Laughter)- who will come? It has no meaning in Luganda because it is in a legal statute. I am saying this to help you out. We are trying to protect people to whom we have not explained the content of the law that operates with them. So, you go to the villages and find a land lord or a Mailo land owner who does not know a lawful occupant or a bona fide occupant on his land. 

Not only that, right now, even the boundaries of the occupancies are not known. There is no register where bona fide occupants or lawful occupants are registered. Consequently, you cannot protect these people. I am doing this because I know what happens. Do you know what happens on a daily basis? It is litigation about boundaries, about trespass and so on. Do you know the people who are best protected in this country by law? It is the land owners; the ones with certificates of title and they operate under a completely different law, and that is the Registration of Titles Act, which was passed in 1924, and is still here with us. So, we condemn our people to another law, which does not help them – 

THE SPEAKER: You have raised the question of bibanja holders. You have to look at the situation as it was before 1995, and also look at the law then. For instance, the Law Reform Act provided for lawful occupation of land, although Mailo land was abolished. Then Article 237(8) says, “Upon the coming into force of this Constitution, and until Parliament enacts an appropriate law under clause 9, this Article, the lawful or bona fide occupants of Mailo land or freehold or leasehold land shall enjoy security of occupancy”. So, you have to find out in 1995 when we made this Constitution, who were people lawfully occupying any land. If you do, you will find that the bibanja owners then were lawful and are protected by this provision.

MR KAWANGA: Mr Speaker, I have no quarrel with that and that is why I am saying that in 1998, an original error was made in this Parliament. The intention of that clause was to make a law to handle the situation of bona fide and lawful occupants. That is why they gave it a framework of two years. The idea was to try and resurrect the Busuulu and Envujjo tenants, the protection which had been removed by the Land Reform Decree.

Unfortunately, Parliament went into a lot of wider things and did not deal with this particular aspect in a manner which effectively protects them. Consequently, because for example, between 1985 and 1986, many people have been buying and selling and you find that the definition given here may not protect them. Not only that, their holding is not known anywhere. What I am pleading for is to do first things first. Let us go back to where we ought to be. Let us get a land policy for this country. Let us look at the national policy, which was done in error because we should have had the land policy first before the National Land Use Policy. 

The Ministry of Lands knows it because they mention it in this very thing. That mistake should be corrected. You cannot correct original mistakes without policy. The so-called colonial mistakes -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kawanga, I entirely agree with your way of doing things, but let us take a simple example. If you are staying in Mengo or Katwe and you decide that maybe you should move to Kololo, but as you are planning to settle in Kololo, there are leakages in the house, which you occupy at Mengo; does it prevent you from repairing the house before you complete the Kololo one? This is an amendment Act of an existing law and once the policy is formulated, maybe we shall have a new law. It is an amendment Act.

MR KAWANGA: Mr Speaker, it is now more than 12 or 14 years since the Constitution was last made, and it was a requirement. Surely, this is a matter which should have been handled a long time ago. 

As I am saying, in real terms, we are making an amendment, which we shall pass, but I can assure you I do not see anybody being excited about payment of rent - the tenants and the land lords; that is why, consequently, the land lords and tenants themselves have started finding solutions to their own problems. They are sorting themselves out, outside the legal process. It is easier; it is neater and is cheaper.

I pray that rather than excite the population about this, the spirit of trying to find a mutual solution among the population should be much more encouraged than doing this. That is why when we talk about 20 million people who are tenants, we are not being fair, because the real tenants we were talking about are the ones who are registered –(Member timed out_)

4.07
MR SAMUEL NJUBA (FDC, Kyandondo County East, Wakiso): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I find a lot of problems in supporting this amendment. It is because the Bill seeks to address just a little bit of the problem of land.

The problem of land starts in the land office. The corruption in that place is just too much. You find four people have got titles to the same piece of land. Some people knowingly or unknowingly have titles which are forged. So, the starting point should have been in the Land Office. That is why people yesterday were saying there is a spirit behind this law.

My learned friend, hon. Kawanga has been generous enough to say that the evictions we are talking about here concern only those who are on this land. I agree, and then I recalled a few minutes ago that government had conceded that section 32(b) will be deleted. Now, there is the spirit I am talking about behind this amendment, which is very little, but has a fundamental effect.

The spirit I am talking about is that; and my people have told me that the law is primarily intended to undermine the landlords on Mailo land. It is intended to hoodwink the tenants on Mailo land. That is all. It is also intended to benefit the rulers in the next election. That is the spirit. It is also intended with due respect, because I know the Prime Minister is a land lord; it is intended -(Interjections)- yes, he is a land lord. Can he deny it? I was his lawyer at one time in land matters. (Laughter)

This law is intended to undermine Mailo land owners; it is intended to devalue those who own the land; it is intended to show who has the power in this country, as if we do not know. People are being beaten to submission. 

With that kind of attitude, we are going nowhere. That is the spirit behind this amendment and people were afraid to say it, but now it has come out. The customary people have gone out. Mailo land is being undermined.

MR TIBAMANYA: Thank you, hon. Njuba. In Ankole by agreement, early last century, some people were given freehold land upon which there were people, and those people are now tenants. So, my information is, it is not true that it is only intended for Mailo land owners.

MR NJUBA: I am very grateful to my former student of land law in Makerere University. (Laughter) Let me add also that Mailo land, used in a loose sense, did not only cover Buganda; it also covered some parts of Ankole and some parts of Toro. So, I am very well informed about what I am talking about, my old student.

On a serious note, this law pretends to protect the tenants against the landlord with whom they have lived peacefully for many years - for almost a century. But let us look at it. You are not allowed, the law says, to evict the tenant for any other reason except for non-payment of rent after a certain period. It sounds good. But you know what is happening? It is condemning both the landlord, whether new or old, and the tenant, to poverty forever and ever because the landlord cannot develop his land and the tenant is too poor to develop that land and yet he is not willing to get off. This is a theory of no change; no eviction, no change and we progress ten years onwards -(Laughter)- this is all. But I even pity the tenants because they are going to stay impoverished thinking they are being protected. And as we were told by my friend hon. Tom Butime, this is only the beginning as he said. I saw my colleagues across the table excited. But he warned you that this is only the beginning of the nationalisation of land. I thank you.

4.14
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. When the Bill was tabled before Parliament, I went to consult my people about what they thought I should say about this Bill. My people think the Bill is not going to help them in anyway. I want to thank the Prime Minister for having assured this House that 32(b) is no more. That was their problem.

The other issue was that in Kasese, we have two major landlords and that is why they thought the Bill was not going to help them much. The biggest landlord is Government of Uganda and the second landlord is Toro Kingdom. My people told me to say that if the government minds about them, it should deregister its interest in the so much land it owns in Kasese and give them the certificates of title. The land I am talking about is in refugee settlement schemes, prison farms, Army farms, Queen Elizabeth National Park and irrigation schemes. Those are the chunks that Government owns in Kasese. The King of Toro owns almost a whole sub-county of Lake Katwe, Katwe-Kabatoro Town Council, some parts in Kisinga sub-county, in Mukunyu sub-county, Handiro sub-county and Kitooro sub-county. 

If the people of Kasese have faced any eviction, it is government that has evicted them. My people were evicted when the colonial government was creating Queen Elizabeth National Park. The people were evicted when they were creating Rwenzori National Park. They were evicted when they were creating those Army farms and all those institutions that I have talked about. So, the people’s main concern was that government de-gazettes these properties and gives the people the certificates of title if they really feel that they mind much about them.

Government should also implement the Land Fund so that they buy out the interests of the Toro King from the properties in Kasese. Otherwise, they do not see themselves paying Busuulu to the King of Toro, and I am seeing the King of Toro evicting them because they are not going to pay. So, can government please implement the Land Fund and pay off the interests of the King of Toro from the lands in Kasese? 

Otherwise, this issue is going to be bloody because they are not going to pay and they are not going to allow the King of Toro to colonise them again. We are a different kingdom now which is officially recognised by this government, and we shall not allow another kingdom to get Busuulu from us. That is why I am saying that our people are not ready to pay Busuulu to the King of Toro.

The people of Kasese are still encouraging Government to fund the land tribunals so that their land issues can be handled at those levels. Otherwise, even those who have land that they are ready to give away -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, to create harmony, why don’t you offer to buy it from the King of Toro?

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, when we became independent some 40 or so years ago, we fought for all those parts of land and we are not ready to release even an inch of it. That is why we are saying that the Government of Uganda, if it minds about the people of Kasese, should buy the interests of the King of Toro and compensate him so that Rwenzururu Kingdom can look after its people satisfactorily and effectively without any attachment.

We feel that if the land tribunals are really empowered and financed, the land problems will be no more. So, the people of Kasese said I should tell this Parliament that the law is not called for right now. Let us first harmonise the land policy, we put in place a land fund that will be operational, government de-registers its interests in the huge chunks of land it has in Kasese, and my people will be comfortable. Mr Speaker, I thank you.

4.20
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, I heard about a number of consultations that were going on in this country and I remember noticing hon. Michael Werikhe in my constituency during the consultations. At that time, I was doing my campaigns. I do not think that he would be right to dupe this Parliament that the consultations were in favour of the Land (Amendment) Bill because people would be gathered together and many of them were waiting for Shs 5,000 and Shs 10,000 that he was dishing out.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Speaker, is hon. Lulume in order to stand here and mislead the House that I was busy in his constituency giving out Shs 5,000? I do not think there is need to give people money.

THE SPEAKER: You tell us exactly what happened hon. Minister.

MR WERIKHE: We were explaining to people what the Land (Amendment) Bill was all about and they were asking questions while we explained. There was no giving out money. Is he in order to mislead the House?

THE SPEAKER: Can you substantiate?

MR BAYIGGA: I witnessed with my two naked eyes people lining up for money before hon. Michael Werikhe.

THE SPEAKER: Did you get an exhibit? Did you receive a note?

MR BAYIGGA: I know some people who received this money.

THE SPEAKER: Can you name them? 

MR BAYIGGA: Musoke Yusufu, Kamulegeya -(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Please, withdraw.

MR BAYIGGA: Mr Speaker they are killing my time, I beg to be protected.

THE SPEAKER: Apparently you cannot substantiate. Just withdraw and we proceed.

MR BAYIGGA: Because of the ruling I will withdraw and proceed. We were assured yesterday that Section 32(b) is going to be deleted and in this Bill there is going to remain 32(a) in contention for it is going to be an affair of Mailo land which is particularly here in Buganda. I envisage a situation when we make a law in this Parliament which is going to be meant for a particular region where this type of land ownership is.

Some people have been duping us that this Land (Amendment) Bill is going to stop evictions. I have been looking for it and I do not see any provision that is going to stop any eviction. Putting a process in place for eviction is actually legalising eviction, but it is not going to stop eviction. Members of Parliament should be responsible enough not to dupe the public that they are going to amend the law to stop evictions at all.

The highest degree of ensuring that people have got security of tenure is by giving them land titles. If at all this government is serious about that, let them buy land and give it away to people free of charge. If you want to actualise the Land Fund, the security of the Fund is the title and the impoverished people are not very likely to work and pay up government.

Maybe government can sneak in there and take away the titles from owners or bona fide occupants who have failed to pay. This means that this law does not really contain the basic things that are going to protect the people as they want to portray it. It is essentially good for nothing. I am also aware that the owner of the registered land or the owner of the title is being replaced by government departments, particularly the minister and the District Land Boards, removing him from the equation of setting the price of his land. You are duping somebody that you are going to this for eternity so that the price, cost or the rent on a registered land is going to be set by another authority. It can be sustained for a short and not for a long time.

The only security of tenure has always been the understanding between the registered land owner and the tenant or Kibanja owner. Hon. Kawanga has been candid enough to tell you that people are disregarding the law and sorting it out themselves.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Bayigga, from 1928, there was a set Busuulu, which a person was supposed to pay and it was not a negotiation between Mailo owners and Bibanja owners. It was set at Shs 8 per year and this was only abolished in 1975 when the tenure system was abolished. So, there was no time when they negotiated Busuulu. The only negotiation that took place was when there was an agreement for lease. They would agree on lease terms. I am a Mailo owner, most of the Bibanja owners were paying Busuulu, which were prescribed in the law.

MR BAYIGGA: There has also been a nominal fee of Shs 1,000. I challenge anybody who has received Shs 1,000 from a tenant.

THE SPEAKER: No. That is why it changed. When we saw this we said that let the local authorities set different rates. That is why there is a rate in Mbuya that is different from that in Kyanamukaka.

MR BAYIGGA: I agree, Mr Speaker, but the moment you eliminate the holder of the title from the equation of all this, we are wasting time, and that is why all the previous laws did not work out.

4.07
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. As we do debate this Bill, I want us to be reminded of our functions and powers under Article 79 of the Constitution. We are obliged to legislate for peace, order, development and good governance. Any legislation tabled before this House should be for the above or for the foregoing. 

I want us to look at this bill and see whether it promotes development, peace, good governance and order. Those are the variables we should always keep in our minds. It would take a fake doctor to get more concerned and treat a symptom of a disease without diagnosing the actual cause of the disease. Sometimes, you can use the symptom to diagnose the disease, but you cannot be preoccupied with the symptom and it looks like this Bill is doing that. 

We are all talking about evictions. Really, what is the cause of these evictions? Is it because we did not have any law in place or is it because at this moment in time we are trying to make them illegal as they have been legal? They have been illegal, but what has happened?

There are two reasons and one is impunity. As long as you do not tackle the problem of impunity, we are wasting time here. People come with guns irrespective of the laws and evict people. Whether you bring up a stronger law saying everybody will be shot on sight, it will not sort out this problem. 

There is only one thing that is confusing. Ordinarily, we know which side the people who have guns are because these are generals. The cries in Buganda have especially been about generals and we know them. Instead of government coming up with a very strong policy to tackle this impunity, they are enacting another useless law. I will give you an example. 

We have one of the best laws concerning elections in this country. One of them is that the army is prevented from being partisan and getting involved in politics. They do it and we know this very well. So, even if you come here and enact another law, it will not stop this. So, why can’t we handle the problem? The problem should be impunity.

With due respect to our colleagues who may have disabilities, we are not talking to the deaf. Let us listen to each other. It is quite unfortunate that the debate on this Bill started from more or less a partisan point and we are losing our focus because ordinarily, the issue of land unites the people. All of us should be talking with one voice.

Let us take two countries as an example. South Africa and Zimbabwe had more or less the same problems. South Africa has handled it differently and so has Zimbabwe. The consequences are clear for all to see. All of them arose out of a historical distortion exactly like the situation we have today. How do we perpetuate our people in this poverty? How do we enact a law that promotes this stalemate at this moment and in this century? We are now promoting a law that perpetuates this stalemate of dual ownership of the same piece of land. We should be debating how we should sort out this problem once and for all.

This is giving Panadol to a very serious disease and eventually the patient will die because we are more concerned about giving him a pain killer to reduce the temperature. We have all seen this before. What I expected hon. Omara Atubo to do is to come and bring us a comprehensive national land policy. That is what we should be debating. We should not be debating bibanja holders. 

I could not help feeling self-pity and pity for this country when a whole minister told us yesterday, here, to forget about these banks, that they are useless because they are for profit and that we should just talk about our peasants. He does not know the vehicle for development for any country or in an economy. This is populism. As long as we policy makers do not tackle the problem of populism and talking for the gallery, we are doomed as a country. 

We are now talking because elections are “tomorrow” instead of sorting out the problem so that our people who were dispossessed of this land, eventually get the land, can mortgage it, and use it as a factor of production on a commercial basis, such that they are transformed from subsistence farmers to commercial farmers. We are busy gossiping; this is gossip in my view. This thing cannot change this problem, it cannot and I pray to the government -(Interjections)- yes, there could be a problem with, especially the politics of the region, where this land is. Do not drag us into it –(Member timed out_)

4.38
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Land is a commercial commodity and it must be used to further your development. I have a report here by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which was written in November 2001. It is a site report on a place called Kitemba in Madudu, Mubende district where Uganda Investment Authority, which is a government body, went and evicted four parishes to create what we call Kawere Coffee Factory. Those people have never been compensated to date. Who is this government? (Interjections) I will lay it on the Table. It is a government document. It is unfortunate that there are ministers who do not know how to read. In the concluding remarks, it says that we need to deal with the land policy. 

Hon. Omara Atubo, before you crossed, you were very serious on the land policy. He was very serious that people should develop and he is now the one saying that there is no need for a land policy. 

I think that chair in front there is a very dangerous chair. Across there are over 70 MPs from Buganda. If you check now they are less than ten. Where are they? (Laughter) The majority of them are either in the corridors, in the canteen or in the toilets. (Laughter) They don’t want to go against what they agreed on in the caucus and what they agreed with Ssabataka. After here, they will go and tell the Kabaka, “Tuli wansi wo”. What is this?

For us 32(b) has done it. We don’t want anything to do with customary land as the Eastern and Northern regions are happy. Now Buganda is nowhere to be seen to deal with their problem. Recently, I read in the papers about a man called Bwayo from Mbale who was saying he has got customary land around Mulago. This is a Mugisu. You can imagine a man coming to collude with the Uganda Land Commission. This commission is a dangerous place and that is why when my senior leader, hon. Njuba, talked - Uganda Land Commission is a dangerous one and I am very certain that that the Front Bench is in Uganda Land Commission and it is cursed. Given the opportunity, we shall table evidence.

The key person who is mismanaging land in Uganda is the Uganda Land Commission. Mulago Hospital is a tenant with Uganda Land Commission. They are the ones who give away the land. You go to Butabika and they are the ones who are giving away the land. We met and talked about the Land (Amendment) Act of 2004, Section 39(9) especially about the interests of the person sitting on the land very seriously but the Uganda Land Commission has gone against it. If the Uganda Land Commission, which has the law, can go against it, what are we making this law for?

In the Constituency Assembly there were 66 MPs from Buganda and 47 walked out on Federo. I want to thank hon. Kawanga. He has been the only consistent Muganda MP I have seen around. I can assure you that if we pass this law in this form, we shall be judged harshly –(Interjection)– I am well informed. I came from Mbale and went to Makerere so you don’t have to inform me. (Laughter)

We may pay tomorrow. Even if it takes ten years, we shall pay and that is why I want to agree with hon. Abdu Katuntu that when we are making the law, we should make it for law, order, development and posterity. If you are going to create a land law, which will make tenants and the land lords have tension, that is dangerous! If I want my land and you are paying me Shs 1,000 per year and I want to go to the bank and borrow Shs 100 million that you cannot give me, why can I not evict you? What is the purpose of land? Land is a valuable item, which should propel me from the lower stage to the upper stage. That is progress and that is fighting poverty. If a tenant wants my land, he should buy it. If he has failed to pay me, why should I leave him on my land? 

Mr Speaker, I know you have studied law. There is what we call lease and sub-lease. I think it is important that we start telling our people how to get titles because sub-leases are allowed. If you are my tenant, you can get a sub-lease from me or an occupational permit. Article 327 is saying that we should find a way of dealing with occupational permits but we have not done it. These people, having first finished evicting their own people the tenants, are now coming to –(Member timed out_)

4.45
MS MARGARET MUHANGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also come from a region where these land imbalances have really taken root. The Constitution does say that land belongs to the people but 70 percent of Ugandans are squatters on bibanja. This Bill wants to sort out the imbalance and at some point I think it will do so such that people who are squatters on their forefather’s land can own it. 

However, I want to support this Bill but I have just one misgiving. It leaves a stalemate between the holder of the title and the person sitting on this land; the bona fide occupant. As long as there is this stalemate, which we can sort out at the time we are making amendments, we shall still have a very big problem -(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I feel most uncomfortable for this order but is it in order for this lady, the honourable member on the Floor, Margaret Muhanga, to bluntly put it that 70 percent of Ugandans are squatters? The entire North and East, which are part of Uganda, are not squatters. We are not squatters but are on communal land, which was left by our ancestors. We are still there, we are part of Uganda and you stand here to count me as part of the squatters? Is this lady really in order?

THE SPEAKER: Before you thought about the point of order, you had just stood to give a clarification then just in a second you stood on a point of order. Hon. Members, let us not misuse this. Proceed.

MS MUHANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My honourable colleague from Kasese raised a very pertinent issue.

THE SPEAKER: I have not ruled her out of order. Proceed.

MS MUHANGA: The honourable member from Kasese raised a pertinent issue about historical imbalances in some of these regions with kingdoms, especially Buganda, Ankole, Bunyoro and Toro. 

It is true the king of Toro owns a lot of land in Kasese, including Lake Katwe. I have ever wondered on the Floor of the House how somebody can own a lake –(Laughter)- I find it outrageous. But he has his title and there is nothing you can do about it. However, as legislators, this is what we must end – he owns all the land around the lake!

My late uncle, Edison Kazini, owned two sub-counties in Bundibugyo District. I do not know whether his children know where this land is; none of them knows the land. But about five Batoro own all the land in Bundibugyo. 

I wanted to raise a point of clarification when my sister from Kasese spoke because she shot herself in the foot by saying this law is useless to her. I thought this law is coming to sort out at least some of these imbalances. 

However, the Government of Uganda needs to fast track one thing; sorting out the land lords. We shall just be populists by putting across a law to help these peasants continue sitting as bona fide occupants while land lords are asking for their land with titles.

The other Sunday we were with hon. Kagwera in a sub-county in a church where people told me before we left the church - because I spoke first and wanted to leave and go for another function. The people told me that, “Before you leave, we want to ask you something. We know you are a grandchild of a man called Nekodem Kakurora and we are occupying his mile, including this church. Tell us when you are coming to evict us.” 

I said, “Let me first stay here and explain how the new law is coming to protect you.” I even told them that, “If you think I am a grandchild to this great man, land always goes to the men.” You know how selfish you can be. Land belongs to the men so my mothers and other females were left out. My uncles are the ones who own the land. I told the people to take it easy because the land law is coming. I told them, “We are leaving for Parliament and we shall begin debating the Bill next week”, and they would be protected.

However, the Minister of Lands must include just one phrase that shall save us. First of all, we do not doubt the corruption in that land office. Hon. Minister, I have been with you in that land office. You have walked me through for very small issues where everybody will demand for money, even the person who will write a letter. So when these peasants want to own land and they come to the office, they should find sane people; people who are not hungry for money so that the peasants can own this land. If that does not happen, there will be a stalemate even when the land lords have been compensated and they want to give the titles to the bibanja owners. They will reach a level where they cannot move forward.

The imbalances in these regions are such that every person feels they are sitting on someone’s land like the one for the King of Toro. They have been saying they want to compensate the land lord. Also, there is another place I went to on Tuesday last week and I was told that the tenants cannot build permanent houses because it is the king’s land. Once this matter is not sorted and we continue saying tenants have the right to stay on the land but cannot develop it, then the land is useless. We shall stay at the same level. (Applause)

The issue of giving the minister powers to fix the price – I think we can have the land commission. They need to be on the ground. The land commission is not on the ground. That is why they end up issuing two titles to different people. If there was a commission to help the minister set the price that would be better than saying the minister should sit and set the price.

4.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS (Mr John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to also contribute on this important Bill. 

I first of all want to set the record straight that land in the west – I think it was hon. Odit who said that for the land in the west everything was settled a long time ago. I come from Ibanda and I have the town council of Igorora sitting on one mile of somebody called Mugorara who has even been attempting to evict the people there. Part of Ibanda Town Council is also on mailo land. I have mailo land where I stay in my village, therefore, the issue of land lords and tenants in national. It has got a national character and that is why it is in Toro, Kasese and elsewhere. 

Secondly, when you look at this law, it is tackling only one issue: illegal evictions. That means that legal evictions can go on provided you go through the process and we must legislate for that. I happen to have originated from this end during the time of Junju and Suuna and one of my ancestors ran away to Western Uganda. We rebelled and we had a right to rebel and these are the reasons why we had to rebel. Because we were denied ownership of land and kingship and we decided to kill one of the Kabaka and went away –(Interruption) 

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am wondering because this is not an ordinary Member of Parliament on the Floor of the House. He is a minister of government celebrating the rebellion he made and the killing of the Kabaka then. He is standing here with an inference that probably he is about to mobilise his people to kill another Kabaka. Is the minister really in order to say that he wants to rebel again and kill the Kabaka?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, this law is trying to protect the poor, the unprivileged and the majority of Ugandans who are living on the land of the rich people. I also own land in Uganda, I am not hiding it and I also have squatters on my land. Well you can call them squatters or bona fide occupants but I found them there. And you can imagine 300 families who are on my land to move all of a sudden and I am chasing them the whole night around carrying children and baskets as other people have been doing. That is being selfish, greedy and being a glutton!

That is why I support this Bill that there should at least be some sense of protection to these poor, the majority Ugandans who are living on the land of these rich people. When you look at all these people, they own land in Buganda; they are all land lords and that is why they are opposing this Bill. (Laughter) No wonder nobody is even trying to support this Bill from this end. 

When does the minister determine the rent? First, it is going to be the district land board, which is going to determine the rent -(Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: Mr Speaker, I am very concerned. As I was submitting, I really said that this land is about to set people against others. The minister has just really dispelled that fear that for us on this side we are land lords that is why we are not supporting the regulation of evictions of other people. I think our argument is that the only protection to the landless is by giving them land titles. Is he in order to use a populist approach to set his side against the people we are trying to protect permanently rather than giving them half measure solutions to the problem of land? Is the minister in order to incite people against others? Are you an Interahahwe? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you vividly remember yesterday I said that I have detected that people devised strategies of trying to market their positions and when I say this I know who was making this contribution; these are strategies that should not worry you. Stay clear with your positions. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the wise ruling. But what I was saying is: how do they determine when the minister comes in? The minister comes in after six months when the land board has failed to fix the rent, which means this legal bona fide occupant has failed to get redress from the district land board. That is when he goes to the minister. Where do you want him to go? Since the owner has refused and the district land board cannot do it, where does he go? He goes to the minister to address his problem.

Then there was also big talk here that if people’s land is touched, there would be war. Everybody knows war. Who does not know war? We have seen war; even in Western Uganda –(Interjection)– yes, somebody was here contributing that, “You come to the North and touch our land, you will see war.” Let us debate this issue with one mind; let us debate this issue when we are in good moods in order to get a good law. Nobody has ever been affected by war like us in 1979 but we do not dramatise it wherever we go. I was at St Henry’s College Kitovu in Masaka when the municipal council building - I think seven floors - came down as I was looking at it; it was hit by a missile. We have seen war and so let us not talk the language of war because of simple things. What amuses me is that people who are so protective about their land –(Member timed out_) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the public gallery we have pupils and teachers of St Stephen Secondary School Budondo, which is represented by hon. Mbagadhi Nkayi. Please, join me to welcome them. You are welcome! (Applause) 

Hon. Members, I have detected that you are mixing the squatter with the kibanja holder or lawful – you are just using it anyhow. Squatters should really be trespassers and they should be expected to be temporary like maybe for a week and then they go away. But bibanja owners are not squatters but lawful occupants although you are interchangeably using this term. Squatters are illegal and can actually be forcefully evicted. I may not go to court but I can evict a squatter - that is different. But for a kibanja holder and a bona fide or lawful occupant, these are the people who are protected by the proposed law, not the squatters. Referring to somebody as a squatter is demeaning a person and so please avoid using the term “squatter” in reference to lawful occupants.

MR KYANJO: You have been of great assistance by that clarification and guidance to the House. I would like to seek your indulgence in as far as guiding us further is concerned. According to the explanation you have given, it looks like these are the people settled at Kawanda, Makerere and Wakaliga. Now what is supposed to happen to such people?

THE SPEAKER: They can be evicted as I have said.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Sir. (Laughter)

5.06
MS JOYCE KWEBIHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the amendment Bill for land because this amendment is fair, just and even better than whatever we have had before. In my view, this Bill if made law will protect the most poor and vulnerable people in our country especially women, widows, orphans, the elderly and people who are usually marginalised and victimised. 

I also support the idea that instead of the minister being the person to determine the Busuulu or rent, if the district land board has failed, it should be a committee or a team of people. So, it is my submission that we should amend that to make it a committee or a commission instead of only the minister. 

I also stand here to support the Land Fund as proposed by the government because it will help the poor to own land on which some of them entirely depend and it gives a chance to the land lords to be compensated for the property they have like those kings who have land in other parts where the system has already changed. I thank you.

5.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ECONOMIC MONITORING) (Mr Vincent Nyanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion. I am Vincent Nyanzi, Member of Parliament representing Busujju County. I am representing my people to whom I am accountable and no other person here. I have four sub-counties in my sub-county, there are 436 registered land owners and 11,708 lawful bibanja holders. Then in Butayinja sub-county, I have 111 registered land owners and 2,099 people who are lawful bibanja owners. Then in Kakindu sub-county, I have 177 landlords with 2,585 lawful bibanja owners and the last one, Malangala, there are 253 landlords with 5,361 lawful bibanja owners. 

I would like to inform the Minister of Lands that my people of Busujju are not happy with a word you are using in your Bill, the word “tenant”. In Busujju, we do not have tenants because all of them are lawful bibanja owners and they told me to tell you that you should change that word.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister Nyanzi, I think the language which was used in this Bill is English and when a person has a property and somebody is occupying it, the relationship that is created is one of a land lord/tenant which is the common technical word we use. We would not like to import that language - so take it that it meant ebibanja; in Luganda it means omusenze. “Omusenze” means osenga nanyini mailo. Therefore, they establish a land lord/tenant relationship. That is why I think those who formulated it used the word “tenant.” It is not abusive like “squatter”; but you can proceed.

MR NYANZI: Mr Speaker, if somebody is referred to as a tenant in that sense, then that can be moved anytime. I thank the government for having delayed to table this Bill because at the beginning, many people in Buganda or in my constituency were against the Bill but due to this delay, even those who were against it in my constituency are now on board, just because of the following evictions which have been taking place in my area. And for those who said that there are no evictions in the country, I want to show you that there are so many evictions and many of our people have been suffering. It is bad that hon. Katuntu is already out because when debating, he said that it is the Army Generals who are evicting people. 

This is Busujju and I have Mawundwe Block 25, plot 16; somebody called Serebe has been evicting people from 2003 and he is not a Major. There is a lady called Nabweteme in Mayobyo in Kakindu sub-county on Block 36, plot 84 and 91; she was evicting nine families. We have somebody called Magyezi, anyway this one is a big man from ESO. He is evicting 3,500 people from six LCs. Paul Bukenya on Block 150, plot 17, Lubagya and Nkazibuku Blocks, is evicting 400 people. Sarah Wanyana, Block 112, plot 8, Ndeese in Busujju, is evicting 37 people. Hasifa Mawenuko, Block 96, plot 26 in Kabira is evicting 122 people. Aisha Kyamumi in Butayunja on Block 171, plot 4 is evicting four villages. 

Asuman Mukiibi of Nabbaale Block 93, plot 66, is evicting the whole village. There is Nalugamba on Block 19, plot 6 and 15, this one is evicting about 500 people. Musujja of Kawanga on Block 11, plot 108, is also evicting four LCs on Block 11, plots 132, 134, 578, 279, 307. He is also evicting four villages. Emmanuel Kijjambu, Block 115, plots 2 and 8 is evicting the whole village. Hon. Besweri Mulondo is evicting nine families in Mawundo. We have a one Namande on Block 154 –(Interjections)- I want to show you that there are evictions within the country. Emmanuel Buzibazzi Musisi of Mwera – 

THE SPEAKER: You have brought overwhelming evidence that there are evictions in your area. 

MR NYANZI: I have somebody called Mutebi of Lubumbu and he is evicting 23 families. Leticia Abesiima on Block 129, plots 12, 13, 14, 15; is evicting 1,700 people. Dr Ibingira of Kikonge is evicting 178 bibanja people those are about 918 people. Dr Kiwanuka of Mengo gave 14 days and he is evicting three villages. Major Maganja is evicting 850 people on Block 133, plot 1. Adam Semakula – (Member timed out_)

5.18
MS JULIET SEKITOLEKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this debate. I would also like to take this opportunity to support this Land (Amendment) Bill. There is no doubt that in Kibaale District, my people support this Land (Amendment) Bill. 

However, this Bill mostly addresses the problem of evictions and indeed like my honourable colleagues from the two constituencies of Bugangaizi and Buyaga have clearly articulated the historical imbalances in Kibaale District, there is no doubt that this Bill will help. But I am certain that it is not a lasting solution. 

The people in Kibaale District are advocating for the Land Fund. Yesterday my colleague from Nakaseke District, hon. Rosemary Namayanja, told this House that she is actually surprised why all the time the Land Fund is being directed to Kibaale District. This is not true. Some years back the Ministry of Lands started implementing the Land Fund in Kibaale District but since the process stopped, we do not know what is happening. There has been totally no evaluation of this process. We are even wondering which people have actually been compensated and we feel that the lasting solution that will solve our problems in Kibaale will be the Land Fund. 

However, there was a lot of corruption in the land office at the time when this Land Fund was being carried out. I wonder how the land office can issue two land titles (for one piece of land). There was a lot of connivance. The rich people were buying these titles and they were getting a lot of money from the government pretending to be the initial land owners. So, I do not know how this Land Fund will actually be operationalised for the people of Kibaale to feel that they are benefiting from it. We appreciate the Land Fund but there is totally no evaluation. We do not know which people have benefited. It has actually hit a snag because the whole process is now at a standstill. We are wondering what to do next and yet people were actually excited with it.

Therefore, as much as this Bill is addressing the land evictions in this country and I am very sure it will also help the people in Kibaale, in Kibaale District we have not had so many evictions from the land owners. The biggest problem is that the people in Kibaale do not have land titles and are excited with the Land Fund and we feel the Land Fund should actually go on but it should have checks and balances because there is a lot of corruption in the land office.

The time this Land Fund was being carried out, most of the land owners were not surrendering the land titles. People are saying that the Ministry of Lands should set a deadline and after that deadline, let the process of issuing the certificates of title go ahead because we cannot continue pleading and waiting. Probably these titles are lost, probably the land titles got burnt and we do not know whether the land titles will be forthcoming.

The people are asking the ministry to set a deadline and the process moves on. Otherwise, I support the motion but for us in Kibaale, we feel the Land Fund should continue. Thank you. 

5.24
MR JOSEPH KASOZI (NRM, Youth Representative): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. For the record, I represent 16 districts in this Parliament and these are the districts that make up Buganda. For the record again, the phenomenon of bona fide occupants and those who are lawfully registered on land or those lawfully living on registered land is more pronounced here in Buganda.

It is not debateable really that according to what we have seen, what we have witnessed and what we have read, there are evictions in Uganda and they are very rampant. I do side with any law that comes in to protect our people. I do side with any law that comes in to make our peasants enjoy rights on the land that has been passed on to them by their forefathers and by their descendants. The beauty of the Land Bill is that it enhances the rights of bona fide and lawful occupants. That is the first objective of this law; to enhance the security of occupancy.

Enhancing means that, yes, these people had rights before but they have been abused. Therefore, we are bringing in a law to enhance their rights to prevent the abuse of these rights. That is the beauty of this law.

Secondly, clause 32(a)(iv) of this Bill, it criminalises evictions. Criminalising evictions means that evictions are now a criminal offence. What does that mean? It means that the state now comes in to prosecute whoever has been evicting or attempts to evict; to who actually evicts. What has been happening with my people before is that land matters were a civil offence, my people did not even know how to proceed in court. That is why many of their rights have been trampled on because they even fear; mere mention of the word court will make someone run away and abandon everything there. But now, when you evict someone, the state comes in to prosecute the individual who has evicted others. The state now becomes the lead prosecutor and the evictee becomes just a witness. This is going to protect as many people as possible. That is why I stand to support this law.

On page 7 of the report of the committee, this is the third bullet on that page; the committee noted that there were land lords who were stubbornly refusing to receive ground rent or Busuulu in order to create legal ground for evicting the tenants. I have witnessed this one in a certain sub-county in Luwero in a parish called Buyego. This land belongs to the late Kisingiri, one of the big people in our establishments here. The descendants refused to take the Busuulu in order to create that scenario that there was non- payment of rent. When I look at the Bill, this scenario is not catered for to protect us against these land lords who may refuse the rent in order to create that legal complication. At an appropriate time I will move an amendment so that we can also inculcate this scenario into our Bill to protect our people. I thank you.

5.30
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to inform you that I am a member of the committee but because of the importance of this Bill, I feel I should contribute something and clarify some issues.

THE SPEAKER: But then you are the vice-chairperson. I will give you next time.

MRS BABA DIRI: Can I continue -(Interjections)- I am listening to the Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I am giving you three minutes to make your point.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This Bill has come at the right time. This Bill is to cure anomalies, which were created long time ago by the colonialists by introducing these land titles. There are two types of bona fide occupants. The first bona fide occupants are those people who are actually found on the land; the owner of the land makes a title when people are already there. These are people who have been existing for years and the title is secured. The second category is when the people have come and settled there as friends for very many years and they have produced children; even the grandchildren have nowhere to go. 

Now because land has become a commercial commodity, the owner of the land who is also holding the title - they may be two or three - wants to send away these people who have been living there for very many years because he or she wants to sell the land. Where will they go? Even the method they use for evicting them is very inhuman. That is why this amendment has come, so that the bona fide occupant and the owner of the land title can agree to sell the land to the land owner or to the bona fide occupant in an amicable way. 

These evictions are too much and that is why we have introduced this Bill. I think the whole population of Uganda is thinking that the government is planning to grab land. That is not true. We are trying to improve the situation. So people must know that it is not grabbing land but we are improving the law.

On the issue of the minister determining the Busuulu, this is a last resort after the board has refused. It is a prerequisite for the bona fide owner to stay there. So, where the board has refused to set the Busuulu, the minister must come in. Even if you go to court, there is a court of appeal and where there is no way out, you have to go to a higher authority. That is why the minister is put there. Please, I beg you to support this motion so that we eliminate this problem. Thank you very much.

5.34
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. It is unfortunate that we are debating this motion before the presentation of hon. Ochieng’s report on the pastoralists - the mandate they were given in 2007. 

My problem with this Bill relates closely with those who have raised their concerns. My greatest problem with this Bill is the issue of the Ministry of Lands, or government in general, thinking that the judicial systems in Uganda are working in an appropriate order. It is as if there is justice in the courts of law in this country to the extent that all land issues are being given to the courts of law to handle. 

I want to pose a question to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, who is not here - if up to as late as the other day a magistrate was being convicted because of issues regarding corruption, how will you handle the corrupt judicial officers you have in the ministries? How will this be able to help the common man and woman outside there who is being evicted? I still expect that answer. If things have changed, then I would possibly be happy. However, at the moment I do not think any court of law in this country is a solution to the problems of land that we have in this country. 

The question I posed that was answered last week by the Ministry of Lands was the big question of land reforms in this country. Since time immemorial, the Ministry of Lands has assumed that the land lords we had in 1900 and before are the same land lords we have today. Things have changed and events have been overtaken by time. At this time we expect the Ministry of Lands to have come up with many land reforms in this country that would benefit the poor, the rich and all of us. However, up to now the question of the land reforms has not been addressed and yet we are hearing the same question in Kasese and in Toro while people of Kibale are choking with unfair land laws.

This land law is not any solution; it is not even near any solution to the problems that we have. Work on a massive question of land reforms in this country and that is when we will have a solution. The question of the bona fide occupants, the question of the tenants and the question of the land lords is even hard to understand in the House. As we speak, the Speaker is interjecting time and again to try to explain to us. That is the sensitisation we would have expected the Ministry of Lands to have carried out ages ago, but up to this moment that is still a problem. These are some of the land reforms we are expecting this ministry to carry out.

My other concern touches the question of government policy on economic transformation. Here I will talk about mechanisation of agriculture. Land fragmentation is one of the biggest problems of land in this country. At the moment the land lords, with the passing of this law, will remain at the mercy of the tenants. You are talking about mechanisation of agriculture and yet the tenants are on the land. If the tenants refuse to move off the land, someone cannot even try to use this land for mechanisation of agriculture or any other better purpose. So, is this how we intend to move? We are talking about Bona Bagagawale and at the same time we are promoting this! 

What we are not supporting is the evictions, but even the question of evictions is not being raised. When the minister was presenting this Bill before the committee, we asked for the lists of those who had been evicted but up to today he has never given us the list. These are some of the areas that we expect to have seen - the checks and balances. Who was evicted? Are they the same land lords of 1900 that bequeathed the land to their descendants that other people are evicting? So, to me this law is not near any solution to the land problems that we have in this country. 

The other thing is that I have pity on the Ministry of Lands. While other ministries are choking with trillions in their yearly budgets, the Ministry of Lands is choking with a paltry Shs 20 billion almost every financial year. What we expect of you, Ministry of Lands, is to seek funding. 

If I use the stroke of this pen as a professional marker, a teacher, I would give the 1998 Land Act, amended in 2001 and amended again in 2004, five percent of success. Ask me why. As late as last year and early this year, they were just fidgeting with training and forming area land committees and yet these were a prerequisite to sorting out the land problems by 1998. Up to this time, the ministry has not done that. We do not have land offices in most districts. The question of land, for example in Kaberamaido, the new district, is still handled by Soroti District, the mother of Teso, which also handles the Amuria cases, the Katakwi cases and all those. Districts do not have land offices. 

One time a budget was passed here and you were supposed to computerise the land registry. That has remained a myth. All those are questions that are supposed to be sorted out in order to solve the land questions in this country.

Also if all this has failed, decentralise the land offices. Remove the sorting out of land questions from the centre. Uganda Land Commission stands as possibly the most corrupt office in this country. What we expect out of you is to try to sort out some of these problems. If you did that, you would even discover those who are evicting, why they are evicting, and get to know that they are the wrong people evicting the right people.

5.34
MR BENSON OBUA OGWAL (UPC, Moroto County, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker for the opportunity. On 21 February 2008, under the auspices of the Lango Parliamentary Group, we organised a consultative meeting for all the leaders in Lango at the level of sub-counties. All sub-counties of Lango were represented at Lira Municipal Council hall. We had hundreds of people there.

The purpose of that meeting was to collect views and the only last voice of the people of Lango on this Bill. Our chairman, hon. Ben Wacha, who we all acknowledge as one of the best legal brains in this country, in his opening statement said, “This is a very brief but potentially the most dangerous Bill.” And he added that it had the potential of causing chaos in our villages. He, therefore, called upon us to debate the Bill or to give opinions on the Bill.

Some of the provisions that are being introduced, which almost everybody has talked about are the courts being given powers to handle land disputes, which was a sticky point. In Lango, we do not have land evictions, but we have small land disputes for which we have developed mechanisms for solving.

Research by some people who know better the issues of land indicates that if we go with this Bill in the present form then the land disputes in Lango will triple, meaning they will be three times more. Therefore, the mood in that hall was captured by a submission of one elder called David Livingstone Opio and everybody agreed with him. He said, “Go back to Parliament, present our views as calmly as possible; and when you are defeated, come back and tell us and we will see what we can do”. From a Lango elder, that is a very loaded statement. They also cautioned us against walking out during the debate - that is why we are going to stay here until the appropriate time when the Bill goes to the Committee Stage. 

Another voice that came out very strongly and everybody agreed so, was that when our cattle were being rustled - it was our son who was a Minister of State for Defence. This time round, when our land is being taken, it is a son of Lango who is the minister in charge. This one is a point of view coming from a whole district chairman of Apac and everybody is in agreement.

MR KIYINGI: Thank you hon. Member for giving way. My colleague has just said that according to the fears of his people, it is under the tenure of their son that land is going to be grabbed. I want to get clarification from him, under this Bill how will the land of the Lango people be grabbed?

MR OBUA OGWAL: I think it is common knowledge that all the Lango land is owned under customary land tenure system and Section 32(b) is a suspect provision that our people are very resentful of and, therefore, that is the contention of the people of Lango. They are saying 32(b) is suspect and we are being told that it has been deleted. Let us wait until that moment and I dare say that for as long as the customary land tenure system is being touched as it has been provided for under Section 59, we will have gone wrong and we will come back to square one.

Having said that, I want to repeat what somebody said here, that in Lango when it comes to land, there is no partisanship; we are all with one voice.

5.49
MS CONCY ACIRO (Independent, Woman Representative Amuru): I thank the hon. Minister for this Bill and I also thank the committee for the work they have done. Mr Speaker, I recall sometime back you sent all Members of Parliament to go and consult their people in their constituencies. I went to Amuru using my little resources and what the people told me about this Bill is that during the war from 1986 up to 1988 their cattle were taken away by the government and now again the government is going back to them to take away the remaining kraals of cattle. The honourable minister is my witness on this. 

When I came back, the issue was really going on seriously and the most serious problem now in Amuru district, as the committee pointed out in their report on page 7, is about District Land Boards not being given adequate guidelines by the minister on land allocation.

Recently I got a letter written by the hon. Minister Omara Atubo directing the District Land Board of Amuru to allocate land to an investor. That investor is called Gen. Oketa. I got his letter and talked to the people of Amuru, and yet at that time, people were returning home. It was a really very big problem and the people told me that I should come and tell the hon. Minister of Lands that if he wants to skin them, he should not skin them from the back because they are not lions. It is a lion that is skinned from the back because most people fear its ugly face. That is what they said I should tell him.

Another thing about this Bill is that most disputes on land occur within the local community and they used to have their own ways of resolving land disputes without going to court. If this Bill is to be passed, it means their power of resolving land disputes will be taken away. I do not agree with what the Bill is telling us, that if we pass this Bill, then evictions will stop.

Most of the evictions that are taking place here are done by the government and a case in point is NEMA. At times you find unknown people who just come from nowhere; they go and settle in wetlands and then the NEMA people have to go and evict them. So, does this mean that the NEMA people have to get a court order for them to evict illegal settlers? For example, in Kireka, people are settling in the wetlands.

Finally, this goes to the hon. Minister Omara Atubo. I am going to give this advice; if you buy a mirror and look at yourself, do not blame the mirror and say that maybe you should buy another mirror. That is exactly you. Do not try to say that this law is not good, and claim that you should bring another law. What we should do is to deal with the current law but not to bring a new law.

5.55
MR ISHAA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Mr Speaker, when this Bill was re-tabled on Thursday last week, I prepared my conscience, my physical body and the people I represent to be set and ready to debate this particular motion. But since yesterday I have been sitting in this House from the time we started debate up to now. I have been waiting to give my views about this motion.

THE SPEAKER: You are expected to be seated in this House when business is going on.

MR ISHAA OTTO: I was at the verge of thanking you for picking me to contribute on this Bill. I can sit here for 10 days, but may not be picked to give my view.

The problem is very simple and it is only one, what do we want to achieve with this Bill? If we had enough time, I would have loved to talk for one hour. When I was young, my grandfather showed me land and he told me one thing; that this land is my life, wealth and everything. That statement got stuck in my mind. Since then it has never changed.

When we are debating matters related to land, we should be extremely sober and we should know that we are dealing with a very sensitive matter -(Interjections)- Ishaa Otto cannot be intimidated by anybody in this House.

In the committee report on page 6, the committee remarked that the 1998 Principal Act and the 2004 (Amendment) Act have several provisions which were not operationalised for several reasons. They went ahead to say that stakeholders expressed concerns about enacting another law, which shall not serve the purpose, but rather be just left in the archives.

We have made laws on land in this country, we have Envujjo and Busuulu law; we have the 1995 Constitution; we have 1998 Land Act; the 2004 Land (Amendment) Act; and now we are coming to pick this particular Section to amend it.

What has happened over time; we have failed to use the existing laws to help this country; the people and their land, which is a fundamental asset. I was in Bunyoro and the magnitude of problems concerning land in Bunyoro is immeasurable. This particular Bill cannot address the problems that we have, not only in Bunyoro, but also here in Buganda. Why should we, as Parliament, take all this time, having known that we have all this conglomerate of problems? Why should we stick to a particular section of the 1998 Act without operationalising the existing laws even when the committee is recommending that this is a problem? Why should we be debating this?

I have seen a statement from hon. Omara Atubo saying that clause 32(b) has since been deleted and substituted with a new clause 59. I studied Mathematics up to university level and substitution does not mean deletion. If you are doing simultaneous equations, you will know what we are talking about. I do not want foul play and I think we should not be blind-folded. We should mean complete deletion of section 32(b) and it should be as it is but this statement of deletion and substitution is not correct.

Lastly –(Member timed out_)

6.02
MR JEROME KADDUMUKASA (Independent, Mityana County South, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. Since yesterday a lot has been said about this amendment Bill. I appreciate that there are rampant evictions in this country and we need to stop them. The question is, when and how. Is it this Bill, which is going to help stop these rampant evictions? My answer as of now is no. Who are evicting people in this country? Why are they evicting them? 

The biggest problem lies with three organisations or people. One is Uganda Land Commission, another is those who have become politically powerful, some are militarily powerful and have become dangerously rich in this country. Those are the people disturbing this country and evicting others. They are dangerously rich, politically very powerful and some also militarily very powerful. So they are conniving with the Uganda Land Commission and the commission is giving away this land like popcorn to those people. 

I can give an example. In Kiboga, there are two people complaining. One is hon. Wasswa Lule. He had land with tenants or occupants on it and he kept them there for some time. Some powerful person went to the Uganda Land Commission and the same land belonging to Wasswa Lule was given to another person. That person went straight away and evicted those people there with guns automatically. 

The wife of hon. John Sebaana Kizito also has a very big chunk of land in Kiboga. There were squatters, tenants and bona fide occupants there for so many years and she never evicted them. Another person went to the Uganda Land Commission, was given the same land with a title straight away –

THE SPEAKER: You mean this land was on a lease? Because if it was Mailo how can Uganda Land Commission give it away? We want to know.

MR KADDU-MUKASA: Mr Speaker, for hon. Sebaana Kizito’s wife, it was Mailo land and Wasswa Lule’s was a lease. His lease had just gone for about three years and it was changed. They can testify before the committee and I can bring them if you want.

These are the people we are talking about. I want to register my dissatisfaction with two honourable members who were here yesterday. One is hon. Ruth Nankabirwa and the other is hon. Florence Sekabira. The other time I was mentioning those people who were evicting very many people in their areas. I remember I mentioned Kayunga and Kiboga districts but they did not support me, they kept quiet. Surprisingly, yesterday they rose here to say the same; that people are being evicted by big men in Kayunga and Kiboga. Where were they when I raised it here?

Another problem is this Land (Amendment) Bill. It has created excitement amongst the people. The land lords are under threat and the tenants or bona fide occupants are jubilating. The land lords fear that if this comes into effect, their land is going to be taken away. They are now trying to dispose of the land before this is done. Who is buying? The powerful politicians and army men who are dangerously rich! They are using this advantage to buy off the land and they are evicting people before anything is done. What should we do to stop this? 

I remember when the President invited us to Entebbe; our presentation was led by hon. John Kawanga. He laboured to point out all the existing laws, which could stop those people from evicting others. The President was not satisfied and had to consult the Attorney-General, Dr Khiddu Makubuya. Dr Makubuya told the President that we don’t need another law, all the laws that we have are enough to stop these evictions. What has happened to those laws, which the Attorney-General advised that the government could use to stop evictions? Where have they gone to necessitate the tabling of this Bill? 

There is one other question that somebody raised. So many institutions and organisations rejected this Bill in its totality and to mention a few; bankers, Uganda Law Society, human rights bodies, churches, mosques and the Law Reform Commission. I remember Prof. Joseph Kakooza saying he was amazed that he was not consulted when they were drafting this. All of them called it a bad law. Have you consulted them? Are you in consonance with them that you are passing this? They are saying, no and you are saying, yes.

Another fear I have is that of late, the President said all grievances between the central government and Buganda, which is the biggest land lord, are going to be handled with the Kabaka. Buganda is the biggest land lord. 

The President is the chief executive of this country. Anytime he will be sitting with the Kabaka to deliberate on this issue but again, we are also here legislating! If we legislate differently and tomorrow the President meets the Kabaka and they come up with a different view, what shall we do? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I am inclined to conclude today’s proceedings now. I have to attend another meeting, but I have taken note of all of you who stood. Your names are recorded here: hon. Nampijja, hon. Amuriat we have you here. Professor, we have you. 

We are adjourning and because of other meetings tomorrow, including those of ministers, we shall not sit. Can we meet on Monday afternoon to continue with the debate? I want to give as many of you as possible an opportunity to debate. Let us try Monday afternoon.

Yesterday we had 27 contributions. Today, we have had 29, so over 50 Members of Parliament have made contributions to this Bill. There are more Members who want to contribute. I also want to give you an opportunity to prepare possible amendments to this Bill. As already communicated, if you have an amendment, commit it in writing and give copies to Members to internalise so that when we go to the Committee Stage, Members have been acquainted with the amendments they hear.

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, thank you so much and differences notwithstanding, I am satisfied with the way we have been going about this debate. We have had a lot of time. For that reason, I beg that we skip Monday because many Members who go upcountry may not be here on time on Monday. Therefore, I beg for your indulgence that we sit on Tuesday so that we have this important Bill debated by everybody.

THE SPEAKER: We have come to the end of today’s proceedings. The House is adjourned to Tuesday afternoon.

In the morning, there is an urgent Parliamentary Commission meeting.

(The House rose at 6.12 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 24 November 2009 at 2.00 p.m.) 

