Friday, 19 November 2010

Parliament met at 11.00 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you. We have guests in the gallery, but I will formally introduce them when we get their details. I thank you for your time this Friday, but I wish to draw your attention to the Order Paper. When you look at it, you realise that we have a lot of business that requires our attention, but time is running against us. I would appeal for sacrifice from you for the next few days so that we can complete some of the items on the Order Paper. 

At the end of today’s sitting, I will appeal to you that we consider adjourning the House to Monday afternoon so that we work on Monday and Tuesday morning. Then after that I can release you so that you can travel to your constituencies for Thursday and Friday programmes. I suggest that maybe after that weekend of preparations for your campaign, you spare just one week; we work morning and afternoon so that after that you can go for campaigns and Christmas recess. 

I hope that if we seriously use that time, we will be able to complete some of the items on the Order Paper. For instance, the loans – they are budget support and, therefore, if you do not pass them, we would have problems with the budget. And definitely I would like to see that we conclude the CHOGM report instead of pushing it to next year; it does not look good. You think about it and at the end of today’s sitting, we shall agree on what to do. 

11.04
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Soroti Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker, I will indeed think about how to campaign and also stay in the House. We hope that our voters will understand that we are still working. I stand to raise some three issues which are of serious and agent concern to me. 

The first issue is about the ongoing Police recruitment exercise. I am reliably informed that the cadets have been taken on and you recall that three or four months ago, this House raised this same issue with the view to understanding whether the recruitment of the Police force was being done according to the expectations; whether each district was getting the required quota to fit into the recruitment exercise. Unfortunately, the Minister of Internal Affairs did not come back here to give that report. 

But with regard to the ongoing cadet training, I know that my district of Serere has only one person. My other district of Soroti has only two people. The district of Kisoro has 22 people, and this is more than the entire Teso Region put together. I am very worried, anxious and very concerned. I would like the minister to tell me what happened; why should the whole of Serere have one person; Soroti, two people; and Kisoro gets more people than the whole of Soroti put together. I do not know why Kisoro has 22 people; those are serious national concerns because our Constitution implores us to have a Police force with a national character –(Interjections)– I think Sembabule has 40 or something like that. So, I need that minister to respond to that concern. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, this is a campaign session and as you know, the Presidential candidates are going all over this country selling their ideas to the population. The Inter-Party Cooperation has a candidate in the names of Rtd Col Dr Kiiza Besigye, who is currently in Bunyoro. But the real concern about this campaign and particularly the Bunyoro Region is that all the FM radio stations have denied us access to the airwaves. Bunyoro Broadcasting; King’s Broadcasting; Kitara FM; Spice FM; and Radio Hoima, and only yesterday, Radio Kagadi, Kibale which is a community radio, also locked the IPC Candidate out. Actually, he was on air after paying Shs 1 million; he was on air for about 19 minutes and he was switched off. 

The arguments in Bunyoro are that they have orders from above and that they have been told not to host the Opposition candidates on the radio stations. So, I want to understand, in this case, what would the role of the regulator be; is it a question of privatising the airwaves so that the rest of us cannot afford. If that be the case, I would like to note that as Forum for Democratic Change, we tried to apply for a licence and we were denied; we would be having our own radio station by now. 

Secondly, since the Minister of Information and National Guidance comes from Bunyoro, is it possible that she could issue a better order from above and tell these radio stations to host us; or she could clarify whether these orders are coming from her or whatever she knows about these orders. 

Mr Speaker, this is important for us to have a levelled ground, and it is important for us to access the rural communities and for the health of the entire campaign session. 

Lastly, I would like to raise a concern in regard to the issue of human trafficking in this country. You may recall that this Parliament passed a law regarding human trafficking only recently. And in the month of July, two young girls were trafficked form Soroti. They were kidnapped - abducted by a group led by a one pastor Moses Ngolobi; another pastor, Kasirye Sunvic, and Ms Isiga Martha. 

Fortunately, for these children - the one called Namusisi Juliet, who comes from Soroti - the Police swung into action and were able to intercept the children before they got out of this country, but they were already being kept in the suburbs of this city. The DPP has been pursuing this case, and the DPP and the Uganda Police Force have done their best, and charges of human trafficking and abduction have been preferred against this group.

Mr Speaker, the only challenge I would like the Minister of Internal Affairs to help this country with, is in regard to immigration. When these children were abducted from Soroti, the following day, their names were changed. For instance, Namusisi became Atukei Juliet the following morning, and in a day’s time, Atukei or Namusisi had a passport. If the Police had not intercepted this child, she was going to be taken out of this country.

Now, even with the case before courts of law, the Police have failed to access the officer who issued the express passport. I think he is called Arthur somebody, I can’t get hold of his name. Yet we all know that for you to process a passport in this country, you have to have a recommendation from your LC I, from your RDC, and all these guidelines were ignored - sorry; and then, there is an officer who issues an express passport yet the Police cannot get hold of him. As a result, this case is being unduly hindered. It is not making the required progress. I would like the Minister of Internal Affairs to produce this officer, take the person and let him explain to us why he is abating this crime; aiding trafficking in persons.  Mr Speaker, those are my prayers to this House. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe before they respond, I want to introduce the people in the gallery. We have pupils and teachers of Mpumu Primary School, Mukono District. This is the constituency of hon. Janat Mukwaya. They are here to observe the business of the House. Can you stand up? (Applause) You are welcome teachers and pupils.

11.13
THE GOVERNMEBT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Rt hon. Speaker and I would like to thank hon. Alaso for raising these issues. 

The explanation I would like to give is that yes, it is true Police recruitment has been taking place in the country. It is also true that interviews for cadet officers have taken place in practically every district in the country. For all I know, an attempt to ensure equitable representation in recruitment has been taking place as well. However, I do not happen to have the details and Rt hon. Speaker, with your permission, I will take up this matter with the Ministry of Internal Affairs, who will be in a position to appraise the House on the progress of this exercise. 

I request him to specifically deal with the issue of equitable representation and I am sure he will also be able to explain why for the first time, Teso appears to be under-represented in Police recruitment; for the first time really. I did not know that Teso had always over-subscribed to Police, but he will be able to avail us the latest figures and explanation as to why there can be such an anomaly.

Regarding human trafficking, this is a very serious matter. I am also going to take it up with the Ministry of Internal Affairs and all the issues that you have raised, including expeditious –

THE SPEAKER: Do you know the names under which the passports were issued as express? Do you know the new names?

MS ALASO: Thank you Rt hon. Speaker. The new name under which the passport was issued is Atukei Juliet. 

THE SPEAKER: And the second one?

MS ALASO: I cannot find it, but the details of this case are available here. Probably, I could – I had already given this to the Minister of Internal Affairs and to the Attorney-General, but I would like to also avail a copy to the Chief Whip so that he can pursue this matter.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, okay, right.

MR MIGEREKO: Rt hon. Speaker, I am sure, now, that I am armed with this information; it will make it easy for me to raise these big matters with the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs. 

Regarding the media, the media chief, the honourable Minister of Information and National Guidance is here; I am sure she will be in a position to attend to all the issues regarding the Opposition and the media. I thank you.

11.17
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION & NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Ms Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you very much, Rt hon. Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Alaso for raising this concern.

I first got to know about this in the papers; I think early this week, and there was one article today giving the details as hon. Alaso has outlined them. 

But Rt hon. Prime Minister, one, I would like to state on record that there were no orders from above to deny the Opposition an opportunity to address the nation through the media, whether it is radio or TV.

I would also like to say that there is no policy as Government, and in any case, the laws enjoin, especially the national broadcaster, to give equal access to all parties. The difficulty I have is the liberalization policy. As a Minister of Information and National Guidance, I oversee the national broadcaster; that is UBC Radio and TV. There are several channels of UBC and I want to inform this House that as far as UBC is concerned, it has been giving opportunity to all parties and all candidates. 

But for the private broadcasters, we are trying to see if we can get something in the broadcasting standards that will enjoin them and force them to host, and I hope it will not be interpreted as interference in the private sector. But I can assure you Rt hon. Speaker and hon. Alaso, that the Bunyoro incident – I know and I am close to some of those radios and the few I got to explained. Kagadi Radio was operating on a generator which developed technical problems and by the time they fixed it, it was already past the allocated time.

I also tried to find out from Bunyoro Broadcasting, King’s Broadcasting and Kitara Radio; they indicated that by the time the candidate of the IPC requested to appear on the radio, it was already occupied. There was no free space. So, Mr Speaker, I would like to request hon. Alaso and maybe IPC, if we could work together and see how we can synchronise their wishes and the provisions in the law. I thank you.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA FORESTRY ASSOCIATION BILL, 2010

11.20
MS WINIFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): I would like to move a motion that the Private Members Bill entitled, “The Uganda Forestry Association Bill, 2010” be tabled for first reading. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it is supported.

MS MASIKO: Allow me to lay on Table a copy of the Private Members’ Bill and the certificate of financial implications.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament for consideration and subsequent report to Parliament.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT AUTHORISING GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SDR 65.9 MILLION (US$ 100 MILLION) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK FOR THE EIGHTH POVERTY REDUCTION SUPPORT CREDIT (PRSC8)

11.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, Government is seeking the authority of Parliament to allow it to borrow Special Drawing Rights 65.9 million, equivalent to US$ 100 million, from the International Development Association of the World Bank for the Eighth Poverty Reduction Support Credit. 

Members of this House will recall that over time, Government has been securing annual budget support grants from the World Bank, to support the implementation of the poverty reduction strategy. Members, I am sure, are all aware that the commitment of Government to reduce poverty is total, and the domestic resource envelop, every financial year, is of course composed of domestic resource tax and non-tax revenues. But to finance a full budget, we need donor support, and that is why this credit has become necessary, as the previous seven. 

The credit is intended to assist Government in its commitment to reduce poverty, and I can report to this House that indeed, poverty has been progressively reduced. It has been reduced progressively from 56 percent in the 1990s to 44 percent. Currently, the proportion of Ugandans living below poverty income is about 31 percent, and it is reducing. I have poverty trends figures, which show that while the national average might be that high, even in regions, poverty has been on the decline. The figures show that in the central region, for instance, Eastern region, Northern region, and Western region, much as the figures are not the same, the trend in poverty is being reduced.  Our commitment is to have every Ugandan living above the poverty line.

Mr Speaker, the minister has reported to the committee of Parliament, and some of the issues that the committee raised, we can respond to them. The Eighth Poverty Reduction Support Credit has components. The first component is budget credibility. I want to emphasise that you need to have a budget which is predictable; that avoids frequent cuts; and you can disburse funds rather than monthly, you put it on a quarterly basis, based on work plans and procurement plans of the beneficiary institutions, and then funds are transferred and you can manage the budget properly. This credit is intended to strengthen the credibility and predictability of funds releases and implementation. 

The second component is service delivery. I should emphasise this point. As a Government and indeed as a party, in fact, in the NRM Manifesto, the theme is, “Prosperity for all with a focus on better service delivery and job creation”. (Applause) Consequently, the effectiveness of delivering services to our people is paramount. And this credit is requested to enhance the capacity of Government to deliver services to our population much more effectively. (Interjection) We are not going anywhere. We are here to stay.

Mr Speaker, we need to strengthen the local governments’ capacity to deliver services in the districts. This credit is to strengthen service delivery through training, administration, procurement, accounting and auditing. This is very important. In fact, when everything is said and done, we have excellent policies. The greatest challenge has been the implementation capacity for service effectiveness. 

Component three of the credit will look at compliance with public finance management regulations. We need to put in place a number of provisions for penalty and rewards in order to ensure that there is compliance in the systems we have put. We need to review workings of internal audit departments of the ministries. We need to strengthen the accountant general and subsequently, we need to see the roll-out of the system to central and local governments. Part of the outcry on corruption sometimes arises because of lack of capacity to comply with systems already laid down. 

Component four relates to public procurement regulations. Again Members of the House, you have been raising concerns about the PPDA law and its inadequacies. By approving this loan, you would have helped to address the concerns you have always been raising regarding strengthening and enforcement mechanisms, strengthening compliance to the PPDA law, control factor, improving value for money and budget absorption, and fighting corruption. 

Component No.5 is the performance of public servants. Again we need to improve the efficiency of the performance of public servants across the sectors of the economy. Also, this credit will assist Government. There are areas in the country which are hard - they call them hard-to-reach areas - and Members, some civil servants find it very hard to stay there; so you find there are inequities in positions vacant in some areas. This credit would help Government to address the uneven service provision arising from geographical peculiarities in parts of our country.

Component No.6 is accountability and fighting corruption specifically. I do not need to labour very hard on this point. Members in this House, you know only too well that the Government position on corruption is zero-tolerance and we need to strengthen efforts to fight corruption and improve governance.

Well, financing modality is the normal. The strategy of Government is to seek loans and loans which are concessionary; loans which are consistent with our external debt strategy to ensure debt sustainability. In other words, the country must have the capacity to meet the present and future commitments and that is calculated. It is not guesswork. There are thresholds which indicate solvency and liquidity ratios. These are computed and I want to confirm to the House that the borrowing of this amount is consistent with our external debt sustainability strategy. In other words, we are not mortgaging the future as some concerns are always raised. We are very careful on this and indeed when you look at these terms and conditions, they are concessionary. You have a loan amount of about 100 million; the maturity period is 40 years, including 10 years of rest; service charge of 0.75 percent; and commitment fees is only 0.5. Payment dates are indicated as February 01 and August in each of the commencing years.

You know Members, Mr Speaker, these conditions, of course - the Members you know the law. This loan will be effective only after a legal opinion by the Attorney-General has been given, which also of course will include the resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow. 

Without taking much more time, the issues that were raised by the committee were the issue of debt sustainability and I have answered it. They were concerned about the Government commitment to fight corruption, and I have assured this House, this is the strategy. 

I can only conclude, Mr Speaker, by requesting the House to note the effort Government has put in place to secure this loan and to request the support and approving of the borrowing, and authorise the ministry by the resolution to borrow SDR 65.9 equivalent to US$ 100 million from IDA for the purposes, and upon terms and conditions therein stated. Mr Speaker, I beg to move. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The Chairman of the committee.

11.35
MR ROBERT KASULE SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is the report of the Committee on National Economy and the request by Government to borrow SDR 65.9 -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, I was saying that if your report is covering similar matters that the minister has covered, then you can skip that.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Okay - from the International Development Association of the World Bank for financing the Eighth Poverty Reduction Support Credit, PRSC8. PRSC8 budget support is critical as it is part of the resources for financing the financial year 2010/2011 budget that has already been appropriated. 

I shall beg the indulgence of the Speaker and the whole House not to read the background because the minister has just read it, but it will be a part of the record. I shall go to the observations and recommendations of the committee on page 13.

We sat with the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development officials. We also sat with parliamentary Committee on Budget, because this is in their docket; and also the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We also passed through the project appraisal document, and we also got the minister’s brief.

So, the committee has observed that the total amount of PRSC budget support is US$ 100 million, which is a reduction from the planned amount of US$ 140 million. This is on account of the inadequate strengthening of the legal framework for public procurement and slow progress in Public Service reform, which are central aspects for achieving high value for money in public spending. 

The committee noted that in an effort to enhance efficiency in services to local governments, the PRSC8 is proposing that the budget should place more emphasis on front service delivery by providing more funds to districts on non-salary budgets, stopping the rise in recurrent spending hidden in the development budget, and reducing reliance on the supplementary budget.

The committee recommends that in order to enhance the efficiency in service provision, the Government must embark on efforts to align work plans with cash flow and procurement plans, before commencement of the financial year. 

The committee observed that since the enactment of the Local Government Act, 1997, a number of policy shifts undermining the spirit of fiscal decentralisation have taken place. Notable among these is the creation of districts and high conditionality on the use of transfers from the central government. These reforms have presented challenges to the Government’s policy on decentralisation. 

The committee supports the view that a review of the decentralisation policy is needed with a view of arriving at a clearer policy framework. It has been observed that in an effort to improve compliance to public financial management regulations, Government has embarked on efforts to achieve the functional independence of the internal audit department of the Ministry of Finance. There is also effort to embrace risk-based auditing as an efficient measure to effective public financial management.

The committee also noted that the strengthened compliance with the public procurement law is central in improving value for money at the core of fighting corruption. However, the execution of the Act has exposed inadequate mechanisms for its enforcement. Compliance and enforcement of the law is still weak. Procurement planning is still inadequate in guiding budget execution - risking cash crunches or idle balances, hence accumulation of arrears. In addition to low procurement capacity to ensure systematic monitoring, Government lacks a system to measure performance in public procurement.

The committee recommends, therefore, that the recently tabled procurement Amendment Bill be expeditiously handled to promote transparency and value for money. This also requires revision of the procurement regulations and guidelines in line with the revised law and international best practices.

Concerning the improvement of value for money in Public Service delivery, the committee observed that in the health sector, lack of drugs is still a major cause of poor health outcomes. This problem is not only a resource issue, but is also about poor management. The system National Medical Stores uses to transfer drugs to districts and hospitals is not demand-driven and is leading to wastage of drugs and other supplies.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should urgently review the checklist of supplies to lower health units, to reflect the demands of the health workers and the population they serve. This will go a long in controlling wastage of drugs.

The committee acknowledges Government efforts to improve human resource management in the social services sector. In addition, efforts are being made to ensure equitable distribution of personnel in the sector. This is through a policy to attract personnel in hard-to-reach areas.

The committee recommends, therefore, that these efforts should be expeditiously handled to achieve equitable distribution of personnel and improved service delivery in those areas.


In the education sector, the committee noted with concern that overtime resources for procurement of structural materials have not matched enrolment expansion. This has eventually put pressure on the delivery of quality education in the country. 

The committee acknowledges Government’s commitment to allocate at least 8 percent of the non-wage budget for primary education, for infrastructural materials procurement in future budgets.

The committee applauds Government’s decision to introduce new input and output codes for sanitation and hygiene. This development is expected to go a long way in improving service delivery because spending agencies will allocate funds directly to sanitation and hygiene.

In the roads sector, the committee noted with concern that the rate at which most roads are being damaged due to weak axle load enforcement is alarming.

The committee encourages Government’s commitment to study the development of a policy for axle load control. This is expected to provide grounds to amend the Traffic and Road Safety Act of 1998, to strengthen policing, legal follow-up and prosecution.

In conclusion, the committee has noted the Government’s efforts to undertake and implement the strategy focusing on measures that increase efficiency and effectiveness of Government operations, resulting in improved service delivery to the poor through improved access to greater value for money in public services.

The main objective of PRSC8 is to support Government’s reforms to improve access to and value for money in core services. 

The operation supports reforms in three areas: Economic management with a focus on increased budget predictability; efficiency, effectiveness, good governance, addressing cross-cutting impediments to Public Service delivery performance; and improving value for money in Public Service delivery, with a focus on four core delivery sectors of health, education, water and sanitation, and road construction.

The committee, therefore, supports and recommends to the House to approve Government’s request to borrow US$ 100 million from the International Development Association IDA of the World Bank for financing the Eighth Poverty Reduction Support Programme. I lay the paper on the Table and I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, chairman and members of the committee for the report. Hon. Members, debate is open.

11.45
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri Constituency, Iganga): I have a few issues to raise regarding the component on accountability and anti-corruption. This will only be in relation to local governments, a sector in which I head a standing committee in this House.

One of the biggest problems we have in local governments is capacity in terms of financial management. You move from local government to local government and in the majority of them, the personnel manning finance departments do not have the capacity. 

In fact, in some districts we are seeing accounts assistants holding portfolios of chief finance officers. These are people handling billions of money sent from the centre to the local governments.

It is my prayer; that the minister of finance urgently tackles this problem because most of these people may not be stealing, but they do not have the capacity to handle those resources. As long as you send money to people without capacity, then money will be lost out of mismanagement. Some of this money should address these problems. 

This has been made worse by the creation of new districts. We have been yearning for these districts for political expedience, but when you look at some of them, like Namayingo and Kibingo, they will have a problem of management of funds because the personnel are not there.

There has been a big problem of the appointing authority of Chief Administrative Officers (CAO). You find one CAO with a disclaim opinion by the office of the Auditor General. A disclaim opinion means that his accounts are so bad that the Auditor General cannot make head and tail out of them, and he is transferred from one district to the other; they rotate them around. One leaves a mess in Bundibugyo and the following year he is transferred to Budaka. 

Our view as a committee has been that if a CAO has a disclaim opinion, until he has cleared with the office of the Auditor General or with the Parliamentary Committee, he should not be given further funds, because he has failed to manage them.
We need to review this decentralisation policy. When you look at all these district service commissions, theirs is to recruit the children of the soil. People without any merit or qualification are being recruited to man these offices. In addition to messing up the financial management of their local governments, we are not even promoting unity as a country. 

An officer is born in Serere; he goes to school in Serere; marries in Serere; works in Serere; and dies in Serere, where he is buried. (Laughter) I think what we should be looking at, Mr Speaker is – actually when we were growing up in Busoga, there were some teachers from Kigezi, Acholi, but we do not have them these days. And this is a very big disservice to our country in promoting its unity. People are now short-sighted; they just look at this and that Serere thing. They do not even know that there is a tribe called Banyankole; they just study about it, but have never heard or seen somebody speaking a different language. So, we should be thinking about this issue; about decentralisation. Other than that, I support the motion.

11.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson of the committee for a very good report. I also want to thank the minister for a detailed exposé of what the loan is about. All I want to say is that this loan is for budget-support. We appropriated the budget and this is money, part of which we anticipated in the budget. I want, therefore, to move that a question be put that this loan be approved.

11.52
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I am being harassed of being born in Serere and dying in Serere (Laughter) [Hon. Members: “Married”] Married in Serere; thank you. But for me [The Speaker: “You are Serere conc.”] (Laughter) Serere is known for many other good things, including good people like myself.

But regarding this loan; I know it is for budget-support, but I have some concerns worth reflecting on. I see that the bulk of this loan, unless the chairperson convinces me otherwise, is called “capacity building” simply put as workshops. You get people to a very good hotel, talk to them and keep talking. You talk to them about corruption, rural electrification, and lack of drugs in hospitals, water and the like.

I want the chairperson to convince me that that is not what the bulk of this loan is going for. The people we represent out there have actual and tangible problems. If you look at the question of drugs, for instance, one of the key problems about drugs is not just capacity; it is that we do not allocate enough money to drugs. The Serere we are talking about is perpetually short of drugs, not because the medical personnel there cannot dispense the drugs, but because the amount of money we give to it as a district – If you break the Shs 250 million that the old Soroti gets and divide it by a population of about 500,000 people, it means each one of them is entitled to Shs 200 worth of drugs for a whole year. These are the real issues, but not workshops to tell us we do not have drugs.

When you look at the issues of corruption, we have institutions. But it is about our attitude; it does not require a lot of sensitisation, but it is our attitude to some of these things. Can we have the courage, as a country, to fight corruption? Do we even have the will to fight it or the tolerance to have it mentioned in this House? We have been grappling with the CHOGM report here and you could see that we do not want further investigations on certain matters.

So, this zero-tolerance to corruption that hon. Ephraim Kamuntu talked about is a zero-tolerance for the sake of a manifesto. However, I think the NRM Government is not zero-tolerant to corruption.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Alaso for giving way. I want to make it clear that Government is not opposed to other institutions like IGG and CID to investigate corruption. I want to make it very clear. Indeed, as I mentioned it yesterday, His Excellency the President had already requested the IGG – some of you said “directed” but the President does not direct the IGG – he requested the IGG and CID to investigate CHOGM issues. Do you see what I mean? 

So, we are not against that investigation; what we objected to yesterday was for Parliament not to examine the report, make the necessary amendments and pronounce itself on it. The Speaker made it clear that when Parliament does so, we do not prejudice those institutions which investigate corruption. That was our position.

But I have also read in the press that “they have tended to give opposition”. We have that problem, but it will be our role to correct that impression. Thank you, hon. Alaso and hon. Members.

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you, hon. Alaso for giving way. I am looking at page 11, No.8 - “PRSC8 FINANCING”. Because you asserted that this credit is for capacity building, namely, workshops, workshops and workshops. 

Page 11 says: “Uganda is no longer a beneficiary of the Multilateral Debt Initiative and hence, PRSC 8 was sought for financing critical public investments in priority areas. The PRSC budget support, therefore, provides a modality for extending IDA support to the national budget and gives Government greater autonomy in ensuring that the funds are directed towards priority expenditure areas identified in the National Development Plan.” These are not workshops or capacity building. Thank you. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I get the impression that the Prime Minister had wanted to make an independent statement and response to the public outcry on CHOGM, and I think, maybe at an appropriate time - because now I would be forced; I would be dragged to debate it and yet I really have very strong views and I do not know whether it fits within this loan. But I take the information of the Rt hon. Prime Minister and I hope that I will be able to respond at the time when we are considering the CHOGM report again. 

I also wish to take note of the information that has been given to me by hon. Daudi Migereko and that is why I am asking the chairperson to convince me; to point out specifics because I looked at the report and I thought about the critical investment areas apart from the mention of it. I thought that there would be some mention of the critical investment area that is going to be addressed by this special drawing. So, that is why I had asked the chairperson to give me that information. You will give me the information, but let me make mention of these two issues that I really want to concern myself with. 

First of all, I note from the committee chairperson. He talks about the reduction in the number of people who live under absolute poverty and he talks about better crop prices. I would like to draw the attention of this House to the fact that I do not see better crop financing at least in my part of the country. What is happening, for instance, is that the maize farmers this season had to sell their maize at well below Shs 50 per kilo. I do not know whether this is what this committee considers as better crop financing.  

I also know that those who grow cassava have had to sell it at well below Shs 100. So, if you wanted to eat a kilo of meat and you are a cassava grower, you need to sell 100 kilograms in order to get a kilo of meat and some tomatoes. I do not really think this constitutes better crop financing. We would like to urge Government to focus on helping Ugandans who live their lives and earn a living through agriculture to access markets that will help them sell their produce. Because just mentioning here that there is better crop financing is actually ignoring the realities on the ground. 

The second concern I would like to address myself to is the question of rural electrification. Mr Speaker, one of the things I do not understand and have no idea about what has happened is the issue of rural electrification. From the time hon. Daudi Migereko was minister in this sector up to now, I cannot follow what happened to rural electrification in this country.  I have no idea whether it is –(Interruption)

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform and assure hon. Alaso that it is not true that when I left Ministry of Energy, rural electrification came to a standstill. In fact, a lot of work is going on in as far as rural electrification is concerned. And as Secretary General of FDC, if you only took off a bit of time to look at the NRM Manifesto, the achievements that have been registered between 2006 to date, you will note that many schemes have been worked on. 

But even more reassuring is the fact that many schemes are going to be worked on if all of us can vote NRM in February, 2011. For the benefit of hon. Alaso and everybody in this House, I would like to lay a copy of the NRM Manifesto on Table so that we can all get abreast with what NRM is doing and what NRM intends to do once we are voted back into power in February, 2011.  I lay the NRM Manifesto on Table.

12.06
MR ROBERT KASULE SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Alaso, this budget is essentially for budget support and it is upto Government to seek out priority areas and deliver this money. It is not a project to the extent that they shall not be holding fresh workshops to teach people about what this loan is going to do. But it is specifically targeting health; as you have heard from hon. Katuntu, it shall go to local governments in terms of educating our accounts assistants; to either be sacked and new ones are replaced. And when it comes to health, tracking the medicine from where it is supposed to come from up to the hospitals and health centres. And I think that this money shall be divided by the Ministry of Health as has been done since 1997. This is the eighth in a series of –(Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much hon. Sebunya for that very able presentation. I would like to give information to hon. Alaso and the House that this is PRC8. Parliament has earlier approved budget support for PRC1 to PRC7 under PEAP. Why I have raised this is to bring to the attention of Parliament that under the NDP, which I think Parliament is about to pronounce itself on, we as a country which is planning to take off, expect to move. 

We are no longer in the MDR arrangement where we used to be assisted for rehabilitation and recovery. We are now a country, according to IDA, which may only possibly benefit from PRC8 and PRC9. And after that, Uganda would have become a middle income country and, therefore, our financing mechanism will not be of this arrangement. I think it is a sign of credibility of a country, to even be getting this kind of direct budget support. 

So, I thought that I should bring this to the House and actually thank Parliament and Government for moving to this level. We are no longer as needy as other countries, which are under the MDR arrangement. And if we can implement the NDP religiously, the country will move forward, and that is the purpose why we are having PRC8 now and we hope PRC9 will be the last, and as Uganda gets its own resources, we should be able to be self-reliant in future. I thought that I should bring this matter up. I thank you.

12.09
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I rise to support the loan, but with certain observations, which I would like to make, especially on the recommendation of the committee on page 17, the second paragraph, regarding the road condition of this country. 

I know this is a budget-support loan request and it is basically to cover the area of health, roads, education and other sectors.

The road condition of this country is terrible. Two weeks ago, I had to rescue the Minister of State for Northern Uganda who spent two nights on the road from Gulu to Nwoya district, a distance of about 35 kilometres. The population who are trying to improve the road, after seeing that that was a government vehicle, said, we are not going to help you; you will have to sleep here because you ate the money meant for this road. 

I had to call the LC I chairman and mobilise the population to help. I said, “He is not the one in charge of the roads in this country and he is a very good man, and that is why he is ever with you.” I told them that, that same minister also had a similar problem in his constituency in Bududa, where people planted tomatoes and cassava on the main road. I had to convince the population to come and rescue him. 

I want to appeal to Government to rescue our population. Let us be practical and walk the talk. Let us try to monitor the money that we pass in this House; the money that we borrow. It must impact on the population and on service delivery. It should not just be a question of passing the loan and then we sit here and relax. It is about the population down there whom we are representing and that is a big issue. I want to make a special appeal to the Leader of Government Business who is a very good friend of mine, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, to prevail over the Cabinet and make sure that the Cabinet takes on its roles of monitoring and supervising the technical team.

In the last financial year, we got a very shocking report of the mid-term review budget performance from the Ministry of Finance indicating that the Ministry of Works had failed to absorb Shs 220 billion. Everybody was asking, “If they have Shs 220 billion that they cannot utilise, why is it that some of the roads that were taken over by Government from the local governments are not being worked on?” We want to know the status of our roads condition. 

A similar question was raised some time back here and you made a ruling that the minister, who is currently here in the House - the State Minister of Works - comes out with a status report regarding the road condition of this country. To date, we have not received any report. Where are we heading? Why must we continue borrowing even when the condition of the people is not being improved? Thank you so much.

12.12
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank those who brought the proposal to Parliament and also thank the committee. The reason all of us are here, including you, is because we want to better the lives of Ugandans and if anything, all of us would want to have this poverty reduced ‘yesterday’.

When a loan like this comes, all of us will want to be seen to associate ourselves with it. Only, we express a few concerns here and there to make things work so that this loan is not mismanaged. So, in this regard, I want to share the fears of hon. Alaso, because when you look at the committee report, some of us who did finance and economics will fail to understand what this loan is going to do exactly. Much as we are already aware that this is a continuation of some other programs, which have already been going on as far as poverty reduction is concerned - I can see my honourable colleague, hon. Stephen, who also did economics like me shaking his head in agreement.

Like hon. Alaso has said, you will never see a single example of the specifics this loan will address. So, I would like to request the committee chair to give us some specifics; because when you go to page five, No.7, the committee talks about this PRSC8 component. Under this sub-section, you would have expected the committee to go a little bit further in explaining each of these components by -(Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, hon. Franca for giving way. The information I want to give is that what she is saying is actually true. The difference between a PRSC loan and another loan is that they are project specific. This is in the sense that if it is a road like Gulu-Atiak or Kisoro-Kabale, the money is directed towards that.

This is a budget-support loan and as I mentioned earlier, it means that the development partners like the IDA have confidence in Uganda that you have allocative efficiency within your budget deficit to allocate, but they mention the priority areas in the report. So, what is mentioned in the report is the priority areas this money should go to, like you have seen; areas of service delivery, deepening the fiscal decentralisation, issues of fighting corruption. So, it is not project specific and we cannot attach amounts to a particular item because it is direct budget-support. I thought that is the information I should give.

MR KASULE: Maybe some small information is that this PRSC8 loan is going to be used like any other money; like internal revenue money that goes to the Treasury in a pool, and from the pool, this money is allocated to priority areas. It shall be disbursed in a similar trait; 100 million shall be brought to our coffers at once and then Parliament - just like the previous PRSC loans have been used; it is not specifically to physical items like infrastructure, as it is going to be used in different sectors. I thank you.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I have some clarification; maybe the minister will help me. So, in terms of oversight, what do you expect me to do when it comes to this loan? If you say roads, and you say poor road safety - that is a component under this loan and it is called “poor road safety”. What do you expect me, who will be looking at what Government does with this money, to be following up?

If we are asking for too much, then I think - yes, if you think that we are asking for too much, then the little you would give us would be that it is proposed that with this Shs 100 million, this amount is going to support the road sector, maybe Shs 20 million as already provided under the budget, so that I understand. But for you to come and just make statements in passing, “poor road safety”, then what do I do as somebody who is going to follow-up this loan subsequently?

MR KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, you realise that this is Poverty Reduction Support Credit. My colleague, if you want to know the output of this, you can measure it, because in 1992/1993, the proportion of Ugandans living below the poverty line was 56 percent. In 2001/2002, it was reduced to 44 percent. In 2006/2007, to 31 percent. 

Consequently, you can say that the outputs resulting from poverty reduction support credits can be measured by the number of Ugandans moving out of the poverty trap. That is an output that is measurable. Additional information to this, Mr Speaker, is that when you have credit support reforms in the financial economic management of the economy as a whole, it is an efficient criterion that you are trying to address for the whole economy to perform well. It is not a project. It is just a reform for efficiency for the performance of the economy to be more effective and indeed now that hon. Katuntu is here, I can answer him. When they talk about capacity, surely they are talking about knowledge, skill, and experience of the officers who perform tasks and you need that skill. In fact, ultimately, if you really want, Uganda is a third world country largely because of lack of capacity – knowledge, skills, and experience. Consequently, any support that improves the capacity of Uganda as a country, especially in service delivery, is something we should support because that is what we are really crying about. 

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank all the colleagues that have given me information. This kind of information is what we would have yearned to read about in the committee report, and just like hon. Alaso asked, what are the terms of reference a Member of Parliament will carry in his or her pocket when doing an oversight over this loan?

Secondly, like the honourable minister said, these variables you want - the outputs – for this report, they have actually written poverty reduction in percentage, but how do you measure it down there anyway? Where do you think a poor man who comes from Lara village where I come from, will start when he picks a copy of the Hansard of this debate? At least, we would have given the nitty-gritty to those who would pick up this, to find out what this loan was going to do for that poor man in the village. I do not think we are really asking for too much. Just go a little bit more to give a few specifics, Mr Chairman. 

On Page 7 - compliance with public procurement regulations - you go ahead to say, “This sub-component will support efforts to amend the Procurement Act to make public procurement more efficient and to strengthen enforcement mechanisms.” How does this poor man know that this is going to improve his poverty levels?

Lastly, when hon. Alaso was making her contribution, the Chief Whip gave her information on page 11 where he quoted point No.8 – PRSC8 Financing. When you read the first paragraph, at the end of it, a lay man will ask: “Can you give me an example in order for me to appreciate?” 

So, Mr Speaker, all in all, I am simply saying that all of us would really have loved to have this loan, and because all of us are here, we want the lives of those people improved. We will support this loan, but it would be fair if we went ahead to make sure that even a lay man in Parliament and a lay man out there will really understand what the loan is about. Thank you. 

12.25
MR ALEX NDEEZI (PWD): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I strongly support the loan request. Also, I will use this opportunity to commend our NRM Government for working very hard to reduce poverty in this country. I would like to request the chairperson of the committee that if possible, you can in future improve upon the presentation of requests of this nature. I want to point out four areas. On page 2, in the first paragraph, you are analysing factors relevant to inequality and poverty. You mention regions, rural and urban, but some of us would be interested in other factors. For instance, this is gender bent. What is the gap between the men and women?

Secondly in future, it would be a good idea if, after analysing the background situation, you could clearly explain how this specific request is going to address the situation you have already articulated, in more specific terms. The information is there, but it is in the general sense. 

Thirdly, I do not usually side with those people, but it would be a good idea if you could indicate specific activities. The activities are there, but are indicated in the general sense. It is very hard for one to know how his or her constituency will come in. For a request of this nature, where are the activities that are going to be implemented? Again when borrowing money, people want to know how they will benefit from it. How many people are going to benefit from this loan? Which areas in this country will benefit? Some people are talking about outputs; yes, it is good to indicate outputs, but also impacts and results. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I support the motion, but I appeal to the chairman of the committee and the Minister of Finance, that next time you come with a request of this nature, bear in mind the fact that as you walk back home, many people in the villages and the common man on the streets will want to know why you approved the loan and how it will benefit them. Thank you so much. 

THE SPEAKER: The motion is for a resolution of Parliament authorising Government to borrow SDR 65.9 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank for the Eighth Poverty Reduction Support Credit. I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in these reports, we have been hearing of the National Development Plan, which was presented to us, but we did not give it approval. We did not consider it before it was launched and we have been told that this is affecting our budget. Don’t you think we should consider it now so that we clear it? 

REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN

12.30
THE VICE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule Sebunya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am the Vice-Chairperson of the Finance Committee. My chairman is not around, so I will present this.

As you remember, the National Development Plan was brought to this Parliament. It is unfortunate that before we looked at and passed it, it was inaugurated, but that notwithstanding, Parliament still has its powers. We shall go on to critic the plan and any amendments made shall in turn affect the National Development Plan, and I think, we have that assurance from the Ministry of Finance.

The National Development Plan was laid before Parliament in March 2010. It is a successor programme to the Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP) that defines key development interventions within the next five years. We recall that Section 8(6) of the NPA Act mandates Parliament to approve and adopt plans formulated by the Authority.

The NDP was referred to the Committee on Finance for scrutiny and thereafter, make a report to the House. The committee has since interfaced with stakeholders, scrutinised the plan in relation to the other documents like the National Budget Framework Paper, the budget speech, the Public Investments Plan (PIP), and now wishes to present its findings.

An overview of the five-year plan

The NDP covers the fiscal period 2010/2011 to 2014/2015; five years. It stipulates the country’s medium-term strategic directions, development priorities and implementation strategies. The theme of the NDP is, “Growth, employment and social economic transformation for prosperity”. The driving force of this plan is accelerating socio-economic transformation to achieve the national vision of a transformed Ugandan society, from a peasantry to a modern and prosperous country within 30 years. This is to be demonstrated by improved employment levels, high per capita income, improved labour force distribution in line with the sectoral GDP shares, substantially improved human development and gender equality indicators, and the country’s competitiveness position, among others.

Poverty reduction efforts in Uganda have evolved over the years with specific emphasis on reducing high income poverty, inequality and all efforts to enhance human development. The focus of poverty reduction evolved from the national goal of the Government of Uganda in the mid 90s, when it was observed that the trickling economic growth as a result of various economic reforms, that is, the Structural Adjustment Programmes, which were geared towards stabilising the economy and promoting growth, were not addressing poverty.

This resulted into the development of the Poverty Reduction Action Plan (PEAP), which was also Uganda’s Poverty Reduction Strategy. All other policy initiatives towards poverty reduction were embraced within the PEAP strategy that was revised every three years through high participatory processes.

However, over the inter-generations of the PEAP; 1997-2008, it was observed that the strategic importance of improving development outcomes of PEAP had become critical. This was emphasised by the need to harmonise strategies geared towards rapid growth and development, and also focusing on poverty eradication.

The challenge was to try to convert policy strategies into action, and real development results in the communities. This challenge required more attention than the past versions of PEAP, hence the formulation of the five-year National Development Plan.

I will beg the indulgence of the Speaker and the House that the situational analysis be part of the record, but I shall not read it.

The structure of the NDP

The structure of this plan is premised on four clusters; primary growth sectors, complementary sectors, social sectors and enabling sectors; and the definitions follow. Primary growth sectors are directly involved in the production of goods and services; complementary sectors provide institutional and infrastructural support to the primary growth and other sectors; while social sectors comprise those sectors that provide services required to maintain a healthy and quality population and human resource for effective engagement in rewarding economic activities.

Enabling sectors encompass all sectors that provide a conducive environment and framework for efficient performance of all sectors of the economy. This conceptual framework is aimed at harnessing inter-sectoral linkages, functional relationships and synergies among economic sectors, which have in the past received insufficient attention.

You can go on to read the objectives and strategies of the NDP, and I will also seek the indulgence of the Speaker and the House that this too is a part of the record, but I shall not read them.

Let me continue up to the national core projects that shall be involved in the National Development Plan on page 8.

The National Core Projects

Specific interventions through a flagship project will be to augment other interventions and provide impulse to unlocking the identified binding constraints. These projects are expected to take the first call on budget resources. These flagship projects include - refer to table 4.9, page 63 for details in the national development plan which was laid here –

i) 	National skills programme;
ii) 	Construction of a standard rail gauge from Malaba to Kampala, but as a committee, we referred to the whole network of rail;
iii) 	Rehabilitation of the existing rail lines;
iv) 	Development of greater Kampala metropolitan area and implementing the rapid transport system;
v) 	Improve water transport on Lake Victoria and other lakes;
vi) 	Construction of Karuma hydro electric power and its infrastructure; 
vii) 	Construction of Isimba hydro electric power; an
viii) 	Construction of Ayago hydro electric power;
ix) 	Development of an oil and gas refinery;
x) 	Develop public irrigation schemes;
xi) 	Construction of oil and gas pipelines;
xii) 	Development of ICT business parks;
xiii) 	Construction and development of 4 regional science parks and incubation centres;
xiv) 	Construction and development of five large-scale irrigation systems;
xv) 	Construction and development of a phosphate industry in Tororo; and 
xvi) 	The development and production of iron ore and ingots.

The Microeconomic Strategy

The NDP envisages a balance between macroeconomic stability, sustenance or acceleration of economic growth, and continued progress towards the achievement of the set social development goals will be pursued. Hence, efforts will be expended on the mobilisation of more domestic resources in order to increase public investments in productive areas, while at the same time avoiding unsustainable public sector indebtedness and increased dependency on donor aid.

Part 3 is on implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the NDP, which I beg and indulge the whole Parliament to consider as part of the record, but I will not read it. Let me go straight to the key observations and recommendations by the committee.

Popular support

The success and implementation of the NDP will require popular support at the highest political spectrum to the lowest community level. 

This in essence requires the plan to be comprehensively scrutinised, debated, approved and above all, owned by Parliament prior to implementation. The committee observed that NDP is being used as the country’s planning framework without approval and adoption of Parliament. This is what we are doing and are supposed to do today contrary to section 8(c).  It was, therefore, a mistake on the part of Government to contravene the legal requirements, and we hope that our observations and recommendations if adopted by this House should amend the NDP retrospectively. 

The committee now wishes to caution the hon. Minister, Prof. Kamuntu, to learn how to respect institutional arrangements so as to avoid retrospective approval in future, and in addition, attempts should be made to bring all political and technical leaders of higher local governments on board so that NDP is owned by all Ugandans.

Binding constraints

The committee observed that the NDP is silent on other pertinent issues that the public perceives as critical binding constraints to economic loss. These among others include corruption, which is rampant in the country. 

The committee notes that corruption, especially in procurement processes, has undermined implementation of Government programmes - Government policy initiatives for socio-economic transformation. 

Therefore, the committee recommends that for the NDP objectives to be fully realised, Government should strengthen its efforts towards realising the goal of zero-tolerance to corruption. 

The committee further observed that the current land acquisition and management policy by Government for public interest and projects may hinder the implementation of the NDP objectives. 

The committee notes that the NDP did not consider the acquisition of land by Government as a constraint given the fact that the cost of compensations of land owners in infrastructure development as per the market rate is increasingly becoming unbearable. 

The committee recommends that formulation of the Land Policy be expedited to enable effective implementation of the NDP, and Government should continue to invest money in the acquisition of land from willing sellers in order to expand its land bank. This can be cheaper compared to compulsory acquisition and compensation.

The committee also notes that whereas NDP identifies inadequate data and information as a constraint to attaining economic growth, it is silent on the role of data and information sharing between institutions, which brings about lack of co-ordination and duplication of roles.

The committee further notes that the NDP does not rank binding constraints according to the order of priority and critical need. And because of that, the committee recommends that the NPA ranks the binding constraints to reflect the order of priority and critical needs so as to prioritise budget funds allocations. 

The committee further feels that infrastructure, both physical and technological, should be the first and top priority binding constraints. 

The NDP objectives

The committee appreciates the NDP objectives as identified by the planning authority. The committee observed that there is no clear linkage between the NDP and the Millennium Development Goals. 

The committee recommends that another stand alone NDP objective, “Facilitating the realisation of MDGs” be considered. This should involve identifying, guiding and facilitating interventions across all sectors and enabling the realisation of MDGs.

The committee also recommended that there be a standing committee to oversee the NDP and the Millennium Development Goals. This would foster efficiency in the implementation of the national development planning together with the Millennium Development Goals, since Parliament by next sitting shall be bigger in numbers.

The NDP Strategy

The NDP alludes to the role of the private sector through which Government actively promotes Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) as an engine of growth and development.

The committee observed that the policy and the enabling law on PPPs is not in place. The committee, therefore, recommends that a policy on PPPs and the enabling law, be put in place to enable the NDP realise its objectives. 

Public-Private Partnerships is both an investment and procurement tool. It has merits and demerits depending on how it is managed and negotiated, thus, the rationale for fast-tracking of the efforts to adopt its policy and enacting the enabling law.

Investment interventions

The committee recommends that the design of interventions should be targeted towards attainment of quality and sustainability.

National Core Projects

The committee observed that the specific interventions as stated among the flagship projects, which are aimed at providing an impulse to unlocking the identified binding constraints, do not cater for the critical need for food security.

In this regard, the committee recommends that industries that will process and preserve food should be among the flagship projects and have them established in all districts of Uganda.
This will also facilitate the President’s aspiration of processing any food item that is not eaten fresh at the sub-county level - that is, post-harvest handling.

The committee further notes that among the flagship projects is the construction of the standard rail gauge from Malaba to Kampala. 

The committee recommends that a modernised railway network for both cargo and passengers should be put in place, not only for the Malaba-Kampala line, but for the entire country. Specific attention should be given to the idea of exploring the possibly of constructing a circular ring or metro rail system around Kampala City, to decisively deal with the traffic jam menace, and thus ease transport for the poor and the unemployed.

The committee observes that flagship projects require heavy investment of funds. The committee learnt that the capacity of most of the spending agencies to undertake these huge procurements is limited in terms of setting the specific standard requirement for procurement processes.

The committee, therefore, recommends that MDAs should benchmark other successful cases that have implemented similar projects, by coming up with the rightful terms of reference for the contractors. 

The committee further recommends that PPDA periodically audits these procurement processes. 

Monitoring and Evaluation of the NDP

The committee observed that Section 7, sub-section 2(b) of the NPA Act mandates NPA to monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of development programmes.

The committee also notes that coordination and implementation of Government policies is by the Office of the Prime Minister as stipulated in Article 108(A) sub-section 2(a) of the Constitution.

The committee, therefore, recommends that MDAs in consultation with NPA develop capacity to monitor and evaluate implementation of Government programmes at a micro level. This will aid NPA in its monitoring and evaluation mandate without conflicting with other agencies. 

Inconsistency in resource projections
The committee observed that the medium-term resource envelope was projected to be lower than what had been projected in the NDP by about Shs 8 trillion (refer to page 41 of the National Budget Framework Paper 2010/11); this difference in the projection by the Ministry of Finance and NDP is very significant and if these projections are not harmonised, the implementation of the National Development Plan in the medium-term is likely to fall short of its expectations. Therefore, the committee recommends that NPA in consultation with Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, harmonise projections of the resource envelop for the effective implementation of the National Development Plan.
Consistency of the National Development Plan objectives and interventions with other key instruments 

Whereas it is emphasised that key instruments have been prepared in harmony with the National Development Plan, a lot of inconsistencies do exist. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in the budget speech informed the nation that in the Financial Year 2010/11 budget priorities seek to implement the goals of the National Development Plan. But the committee observed that the budget allocation to the various sectors for Financial Year 2010/11 is not consistent with that of the NDP (refer to National Development Plan, pg. 56). 

For example, the percentage of allocation to the agricultural sector 2010/11 in the National Budget Framework Paper is 5.4 percent compared to 6.6 percent in the National Development Plan. Allocation efficiency is critical in accelerating social transformation. Therefore, the committee recommends that the sector budget allocation should always be harmonised with the National Budget Development Plan for successful implementation of the NDP. 

Based on the sectoral shares of the total national budget, the planning framework places more emphasis on works and transport. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development places more emphasis on education, and the MFED framework allocates the least amount to ICT, while the National Development Plan Framework allocates the least amount to lands, housing and urban development. 

The committee recommends that priorities between the NDP and the National Budget be harmonised.

National Development Plan and oil revenues

The committee observed that the National Development Plan resource envelop did not critically take into account future oil revenue projections nor did the plan critically consider the annual oil revenue and management strategy. 

The committee recommends that an oil revenue and management strategy should be clearly spelt out in the plan to avoid the “Dutch Disease” phenomena. 

On the inconsistency of the National Development Plan strategic actions and projected allocations, the committee observes that the NDP pointed out enhancing transparency and accountability as one of the strategic actions for improving public sector management and administration. However, allocations to the key implementing agencies are projected to decline over the plan period. 

The committee recommends, therefore, that the budget allocations for the relevant sectors should progressively be increased to cater for this need. 

Measurement of the National Development Plan objectives, strategies and interventions

The committee observes that that NDP objectives, strategies and interventions to achieve economic growth and transformation are not specific and measurable. For example, the NDP targets in Table four 1.15, page 72 are 50 percent incomplete. This may suggest that National Planning Authority did not undertake sufficient baseline studies to gather sufficient evidence that would inform the planning process. 

Effective planning of the NDP progress will, therefore, be a futile task if these data gaps are not rectified. The committee recommends that the National Planning Authority gathers sufficient evidence to enable it determine performance indicators or else it would render the stated objectives unrealistic and untenable. With these indicators the stakeholders would be in position to effectively monitor and evaluate the implementation of the National Development Plan.

The legal framework for the National Planning Authority intends to undergo transformation into a planning commission. While the committee supports the strengthening of the National Planning Authority and the need to make it an independent body, the transformation to an independent commission as alluded to in the NDP should not be rushed, as this may result into conflict in as far as executing the planning function is concerned, on issues of policy, especially before the entire Government structure is reformed to provide for the same.

The committee observes that the NDP has identified capacity building constraints across the ministries, departments and agencies and measures to address these constraints have been mentioned in the NDP too.

The committee recommends that building capacity of NPA in terms of financial and human resource and equipment should be taken as a matter of urgency to ensure effective implementation of the National Development Plan. 

Addressing the cross-cutting issues

The committee observes that there is fair coverage of cross-cutting issues in the NDP such as gender, environment and HIV/AIDS. 

The committee, therefore, notes that mainstreaming of cross-cutting issues requires agent capacity strengthening of responsible agencies, including the gender department in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

Conclusion

The NDP has generally identified and put together critical needs the country requires for socio-economic transformation. It outlines the specific strategies and interventions at both the national and sub-national levels, designed not only to unlock the most binding constraints, but also to spur accelerated economic growth and economic transformation for prosperity.

Despite this measure, the challenge that remains is whether the resources that are required to implement the plan will be adequately mobilised and whether the activities prioritised will be efficiently and effectively implemented in a timely manner over the planning period. The costing of the NDP lacks a comprehensive revenue framework with the necessary resources projections over the planning period. This needs to be urgently put into consideration for the effective implementation of the plan. 

The committee, however, proposes that the National Development Plan be approved by this House together with the proposed recommendations, which should constitute retrospective amendments. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairman and the members of the committee, for the report. 

12.59
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, Persons With Disabilities, Central): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the chairperson of the committee for the job well done. In principle, I appeal to this august House to approve the NDP. But I have two questions I would like to ask. On page 18, let me read the third line, “For example, the NDP targets..”  - 4.15, pg. 72 – “...are over 50 percent incomplete”.

Now, Mr Speaker, I am meant to understand that the President already launched the NDP. Are we saying that the plan that was launched was lost - was still incomplete, and today, are we debating a plan that is incomplete or complete? That is my first question, Mr Chairman of the committee.

Second, on the same page under (n); on legal framework for the National Planning Authority; you mention the National Planning Authority and the envisaged Planning Commission. What is the difference between the two? What is the difference between an authority and a commission in the context of our discussion?

On page 19, I am suggesting an amendment to (p), hoping that the chairman and the minister will, in good faith, accept our improvements to this important document. I hope these words - we are actually debating this important document in (p) - are not - that it is a very good commendation relating to cross-cutting issues. The emphasis here is on lack of capacity in the ministry responsible for social affairs. However, from my experience, we also know that the portion of resources is more of priority than that of capacity, because in order to fill capacity, you must have resources. So, I am requesting the chairman of the committee and the minister to accept and insert the word “resources” between “urgent” and “capacity”.

Lastly, you mentioned the Department of Gender; very good. I also request you to mention some two other important departments which relate to social issues; that is, department for youth - Mr Chairman, I hope you are getting me clearly - and that of the disability and elderly.  

That is my amendment. I want to add “resources” between “urgent” and “capacity”. I also want to add the Department for Youth, Disability and Elderly in (p). Thank you so much.

1.03
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Rt hon. Speaker. I also want to thank the chairperson of the committee and members of the committee for preparing this report –

THE SPEAKER: Sorry, let me just introduce people in the gallery again. We have pupils and teachers of Semuto Church of Uganda Primary School. They have come to see what is happening here. Please stand up for recognition. You are welcome.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was thanking the committee for the report that has been tabled and presented. In the field of medicine, we have specialists called pathologists. Pathologists usually interface with a patient when he has already died. I think the role of Parliament now is like that of pathologists, because the law -(Laughter)- requires that Parliament comes in before the completion of the development of the National Development Plan. But in case it was already completed and launched, and is being implemented, therefore, we are truly coming in as a formality. (Interjections) Yes, we are lucky that it is not yet dead, but I hope it is not sick. 

The point I was emphasising is that Parliament should have come in at an earlier stage so that we make an input; we improve the contents of the National Development Plan and then move together. But we are now doing this as a formality. I do not think we can do much to change the contents and what is there -

THE SPEAKER: No, let me explain. We were supposed to approve it; we did not; and it was effected. Therefore, if we suggest amendments, they have a legal basis. So, it is not a formality. The authority has to take into account our recommendations.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Okay, we can change it to succeed now. I take your guidance Mr Speaker, but the law - the NPA Statute, is very clear that Parliament has to get involved before it can be formally launched; but that is not my major problem. I just wanted to alert the people who are in charge that next time, I think the law and the process should be followed, since our Parliament works full-time, and we are always around.

The major challenge we have, which the report also highlights, is that the National Development Plan (NDP) is supposed to be a national instrument, which provides a framework upon which the planning function is hinged. I think the committee has correctly observed that so far, some of the major instruments of Government like the national budget, are not clearly aligned to the National Development Plan.

It is also true that a number of sectors - the sectoral plans which are supposed to be derived from this plan, sometimes do not align themselves to this plan. 

We are just calling upon the people in charge of implementation and monitoring of this plan, to ensure that this plan should not be there for the sake of it, but it should inform planning and programming within this country.

If I use the example of the loan request, which we recently passed with conditions on maternal health and strengthening of health systems; we were shocked when we reviewed the project document as a committee that what the ministries were suggesting as areas to be implemented are not those which will have high-level impact in terms of reducing maternal mortality and improving health services, yet what needs to be done is known by the experts in the ministries, and everybody else. 

We want to urge the minister in charge of planning and the Office of the Prime Minister, which is mandated to undertake and oversee the function of monitoring and evaluation, to ensure that the different departments of Government adhere and use this development plan to inform their strategies; to inform the programmes and interventions, which they put in place to help our people; otherwise it remains a mere document on the shelves. 

I have also had the opportunity of reading the National Development Plan and I want to emphasise the issue of population growth, which is mentioned, but does not come out strongly. It is a critical area in terms of planning for this country. We have one of the highest population growth rates in the world, estimated at around 3.2 percent per annum; one of the highest. It is being driven by high fertility. Uganda has the third highest fertility rate in the world after Niger and Yemen.

Therefore, this should be the central focus of our planning. Projections have been done and they show that if we are to turn into a developed country, then the population growth rate must start reducing; particularly, the fertility rate must reduce. I see hon. Rukutana laughing -(Laughter)- he is one of those contributing to the increased population growth rate.

But Mr Speaker – I am just acknowledging his –(Laughter)- acceptance; his appreciation –(Laughter)- of my contributions. 

Scientific projections have been made by the Population Secretariat, assisted by other technical experts. And they show that if Uganda is going to transform from the level it is to a middle-income country, it will require that our total fertility rate must reduce. In other words, the average number of children born by women in Uganda must come down, but also, our economic growth rate must be at least 10 percent. That way, within 30 years, which is a generation, we can transform. And I see this is the objective of this plan and other planning frameworks. Where we are now, we are not achieving any of those; our population growth rate is increasing; our economic growth rate is not anywhere around 10 percent, and when you read through the National Development Plan, the issue of population is not captured very well. We actually need a law on population. We have a policy, but we also need a law. Government needs to take up the issue of population growth, by particularly putting in place services and interventions like family planning and maternal health programmes to help improve the quality of life of people, and also ensure that the population growth rate comes down. But this issue is not sufficiently captured in the National Development Plan. Since you have assured us that our views and submissions will be captured and integrated within the Plan, I hope the ministry and those responsible will be able to take that up.

Lastly, I appreciate the efforts to transform the National Planning Authority into a commission. Hon. Ndeezi was wondering what the difference was, and we need to know the difference. I think at the moment, the National Planning Authority is not in charge of planning in this country. Probably on paper, but on the ground, I do not think they control the planning function in the country. 

I would want to see the strengthening of the relationship between the National Planning Authority or whichever name it gets with the local government, so that they can be guided and they are able to plan better and execute the work more efficiently than the way it’s being done today. 

There are challenges; like, under the decentralisation arrangement, the health services are failing. It is difficult for districts to attract qualified health workers, particularly doctors, and I think the planning function of Government must come in and see how they can better streamline some of these bottlenecks.

Therefore, the connection between the National Planning Authority and decentralised local government units must clearly be spelt out in the plan so that we see how to proceed. 

Otherwise, I thank you very much. I thank the minister and the committee for preparing the report and I hope our submissions will go a long way in informing the report, even when we are coming in later than we should have done. Thank you very much.   

1.13
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you very much. I also want to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report and the minister, for the opportunity to make an input into the National Planning Authority. 

I just want to begin with the point hon. Baryomunsi ended with, the issue of population growth. Scientists suggest that for a country to develop, it must have an economic growth rate that is three times more than the population growth rate, and that is how the 10 percent is coming in, given that we have a population growth rate of 3.2 percent. 

Contrary to the committee’s recommendation that the ministry should not hurry to transform the National Planning Authority - page 18. I would probably have expected, and I think we need to set the tone that suggests that this National Planning Authority should be supported; it should be independent and strengthened, rather than suggesting that the process should not be hurried. 

If we are to have a very strong planning tool, we need to have the framework for the execution of this plan well stipulated, and have a clear institutional framework that will implement this plan. 

I think it is important that we support the National Planning Authority; we make it more independent and give it the necessary resources to implement the plan. 

The committee raises a very important point when it talks about the Private-Public-Partnership law. It would help make the process of how Government interfaces with the private sector very transparent, and especially for the small to medium sized companies/organisations that would need the doors of opportunity from Government to open. So, this law - well, we are ending Parliament - but this is an important piece of legislation that we need, if we are to effect and support the planning process in this country. 

The committee wants to involve the National Planning Authority in monitoring Government programmes. I have a reservation on that. I think we need to restrict the monitoring and evaluation of Government programmes to the Office of the Prime Minister. That is an institution that is mandated to do that and we should leave the planning component to the National Planning Authority. 

On a certain page it is mentioned that we should recommend that NPA monitors at a micro level. This will create a lot of conflict. What is micro level and what is macro? We have local governments in place. It is important that we leave the monitoring component with the Office of the Prime Minister and the planning function to the National Planning Authority. 

I am very surprised indeed that the National Planning Authority had forgotten to capture the projections of oil revenue. If they did not look into three years, because we are starting to get revenue in three years, how accurately did you look into the five years or 10 years?

I thank the committee for raising this observation and I hope that the minister will be able to incorporate it and then harmonise with the minister of finance on the budgeting aspect, and have this tool well implemented. 

I also thank you for including behavioural change. I have not read the document extensively, and I do not know how far the behavioural change component goes, but I think, Mr Speaker, as our Government concentrates on Prosperity-for-All, the most important component that we need to focus on is change of attitude. We can invest a lot of money, but if people do not change their attitude, the way they want this country to be run; the way they want their lives to be, then we still have a long way to go. So, I am happy that this component is also equally in the document. I thank you.

1.19
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you. Mr Speaker, for so long this country has been working without a national plan. I think two years ago, the National Planning Authority invited Members of Parliament for a workshop, and surprisingly, most Members of Parliament learnt that the National Planning Authority was not in charge, and we were not even recognised. So, many of us were pondering on why a system we all love should do things without a very important component for any good and functioning system. 

Now that the plan is here, although it is already being implemented, Mr Speaker, all of us as Members of Parliament are very happy that it is finally here, and I want to thank very much all those who have been behind this document. We saw it when it was being launched by the President, although the implementation started before Parliament approved it, and we are glad that this committee report recognises that the National Planning Authority be directly in charge, and they propose that it be transformed into a commission, which I believe is a very welcome idea.

This document is voluminous. It would be very good for Members of Parliament to have ample time to have a look at it and really - maybe there are some other issues the committee did not see; but individually, as Members of Parliament, we would have really loved to have some input. Mr Speaker, you could guide us; at what point shall Members of Parliament give their other views other than those of the committee? 

But I want to thank the committee so much, because given the short time, they were able to make some really good observations. I read the committee work and it is commendable. 

However, I have a small problem. It is in the second-last paragraph, where the committee says that this needs to be urgently put into consideration for the effective implementation of the plan. Actually, they were referring to the issue of costing of the NDP, which lacked a comprehensive revenue framework, which is actually the gist of a plan, because for any proper plan to work very well, it has got to have its cost implications well worked out, and all the revenue implications have to be included. Now that this is lacking, I do not know; because the committee recommends that it is urgently put into consideration. At which point are we going to do it since the plan is already being implemented? 

With those short comments, that is my input. 

1.23
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for looking through this report which was quite important. For a long time we have had different plans - the Poverty Eradication Action Plan, now followed by the five-year development plan. But there has been one question that has been disturbing us; that is the question of poverty and poverty reduction or poverty eradication in this country. We have always and we continue to say that we are going to reduce poverty or eradicate poverty in Uganda through private sector economic growth and investment in that infrastructure to create jobs. 

But the recent Uganda National Household Survey and the previous ones since 1992, have shown one part of the story. Whereas we are reducing poverty - now we have come from 56 to 23 percent - there is one element of this poverty reduction story; the story of increasing inequality. Inequality in our country has been increasing. In 1992 it was about 0.3 then it came to 0.43 and in the recent household survey it is going up. And I do not see in our national plan, as it stands now, any effort made directly to see programmes trying to address this problem of increasing inequality. 

And I think that is why many people always complain that whereas economic growth in Uganda is very high - at 10 percent - and poverty is falling in terms of percentages, there is this glaring visibility of so many poor people in the countryside, and one of the challenges is that we have not had a chance to listen to, or to study further, what kind of programmes should be in place to help people who are increasingly becoming poorer to come out of this poverty.

For instance, in the recent household survey we have reduced poverty from 31 to 23 percent. It is a reduction from nine million people - a reduction of about one point something million people in terms of absolute numbers - and if you look at the other variables and measures of poverty, what they call P1, P2, you see that those who are poorer are really too poor and are below the poverty line. I think it is important for the National Planning Authority to look into this question.

It brings me to the second point. How does the National Planning Authority link with other existing institutions in Uganda, for example, the Economic Policy Research Centre, the Bureau of Statistics and other support institutions in the country that can help it to do its work? You do not necessarily have to recruit all the economists in the country to be able to do your work. There are existing institutions in this country that could help to study and help us to come up with clearly defined programmes to address the problem of inequality.

Hon. Members, I am questioning the idea of transforming an authority into a commission. I thought an authority is a firmer body; it has a legal basis. Now, to transform it into a commission, if I compare it with - we used to have the Teso Commission - and if we could get up tomorrow and it is not there. So, why would you want to go the commission way? I think it is important to examine the problems that the authority is facing rather than transforming it into something else. If it is a problem of human resource, then let us focus and budget for it and train more staff. I do not think we should really go the commission way. I have seen many organisations, semi-autonomous organisations in the country, struggling to transform themselves into authorities. I do not see why an authority is already trying to come down and become a commission.

Mr Speaker, another issue that this national plan raises is the issue of a weak public sector. There are so many problems mentioned with respect to civil servants: A weak public sector; a non-responsive public sector; the issue of not being committed; issues of its work ethics. But I see little in terms of what extent or what proposals we have to work towards having a better Civil Service in Uganda. I think it would have helped that there are a lot of other issues relating to the public sector. Is it a question of salaries? Is it a question of little training? What is it with this weak public sector? What should we do? I think that needed to come out.

On page 12 of this report, the committee says that successful implementation of the NDP will require building a public that is accountable, responsive, service-oriented and free from corruption, as a foundation for good governance.

It also says that supporting legislation and regulation will be instituted to clarify rights and duties of accounting officers. I think this has been a problem; in as far as we have the rules and laws, to what extent is the existing legal environment supportive?

MR SAM KUTESA: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. This idea of changing the National Planning Authority into a commission may require a constitutional amendment, because in our Constitution, Article 125 says clearly that there shall be a National Planning Authority whose composition and function shall be prescribed by Parliament. So, I think we need to note that before we go ahead.

MR ACHIA: I think it is clear that taking that road is not possible right now. In this report on page 12, the committee observes that our Civil Service is not responsive, less accountable, less service-oriented and not free from corruption. It goes on to recommend that the problem is with the legislation. To what extent can the National Planning Authority review these challenges in the Civil Service? All we hear in the press and from interacting with a number of persons in the service is the focus on increasing salary. Is that the only problem that we have with our Civil Service? Is there something that we need, to improve the performance of our Civil Service? For example, a local government can take about half a year to contract out a project such as a health unit. Why should someone, who is paid every month, take half a year to approve a contract to build a health centre? What are his/her obligations to the people for whom he is being paid for?

I think we need a law that holds politicians and civil servants individually liable for the non-timely delivery of services to people whom they are supposed to serve. We have had many districts of recent returning monies to the Consolidated Fund because they were afraid of doing certain things. NAADS money was returned because there had been an investigation in which some of them had been caught misusing public money. Just because you do not want to be involved, you decide to sabotage everything and send back the money.

I think this is one area where we can explore to find out to what extent we can make legislation that binds severally and individually, both politicians and civil servants, for the timely delivery of services to people that they serve. Those are some of the things that this report raises. 

We have been focusing on the market; this report also highlights lack of investment in key sectors, like the iron ore; but we have waited for the private sector to deliver on these important areas. When you go to Uganda Investment Authority, there are publications asking people to come and invest in these areas. I think it is high time - and it is properly mentioned - that the public-private partnerships Bill comes to the Floor of this House and that Government takes a lead role in these investments. We cannot continue to wait for the private sector, which has failed to invest in many critical things that would help us industrialise.

We had to do it with oil, but we have waited for the private sector to do it elsewhere, but it has not come. This Bill will bring clarity in the way Government supports and partners with private sector operators. It will give criteria through which anyone who wants to invest in a public-private sector arrangement can access Government money. Sometimes we have asked how Bassajjabalaba got public money. Those who have their money and want to partner with Government can have a legal basis on which they can access public monies.

1.36
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): I would like to propose an additional objective number nine in regard to post-conflict reconstruction and sustainable peace. I am convinced that this country understands and knows the full brunt of conflict, whether you talk of Kasese, Luweero, Northern Uganda, Karamoja and others. Whether you talk about areas that have had spill-over effects; the list will go on and on. Because of human dynamics I believe that there will still be conflict and I think that it is important for a framework like this one to keep an eye on issues of post-conflict reconstruction and work towards sustainable peace.

I think that sustainable peace is a pillar upon which everything that will happen in this plan will be anchored. Whether you want good quality human resource or ICT, if sustainable peace is not one of the frameworks you are working towards, those others get destroyed in a minute. I also think that it will bring into focus the requirement for affirmative intervention in those areas that have undergone conflict. That is the reason why I propose an additional objective which reads, “post-conflict reconstruction and sustainable peace”.

I also bring the sustainability of peace and working towards it because it would be better in its prevention than let things go off. I am also convinced that it will give opportunity for this country, which has a national plan of action, for instance, on the involvement of women and such related stakeholders in the development of peace. So, if we bring in this objective, I think it will go a long way.

The other addition I would like to propose is in the principles. I note that the principles - without referring to the parent document - as reported in the committee’s report, are ownership, political will, good governance and the rest. Mr Speaker, I would like to propose the obvious one, but for some reason, I do not see it here. I think the obvious thing that has to be done is to have a gender eye in these principles. Yes, “gender lenses” or “gender mainstreaming” or whatever you want to call it. But I would like it to be one of the key principles here.

We can have a national plan without “gender lenses” which will leave out the womenfolk and the interventions that pool them. You can be sure that that kind of country will not move forward since 52 percent of its population will have been left out at the intervention stage.

Mr Speaker, you recall very well the PRDP framework that was passed - and we tried to engender it after - was a total failure! Now, at implementation, PRDP lacks the gender responsiveness that would have pulled out the women in conflict areas. But it cannot just happen. So, if we do not say the obvious here, it can never be said when this plan is being implemented.

The other thing that I think is obvious but needs to be said again, is what I will call principle (h) - is accountability, and transparency. This is about resources, but I have not seen a principle that underlines it to talk about accountability. We are looking at all the money we can ever collect in this country and how to invest it. But, Mr Speaker, you know our record as a country on misuse of public resources is a terrible one. The World Bank recently said that the amount of money that gets lost, swindled or misused in Uganda is about Shs 500 billion per year. So, how can we forget to talk about accountability and transparency?

Those are my proposals and I hope they will find space in this report. But if they do not find space, I hope that they will find space in the minds of the people who are going to be implementing this plan. Thank you.

1.44
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Mr Speaker, I want to start by thanking Government and in particular the National Planning Authority, for this very good planning document that they have given us. Many times we have complained about lack of planning. But now that we can see that the National Planning Authority is working, we can only be grateful and supportive. So, Mr Speaker, I rise to support this initiative and to raise a few issues, while recognising and appreciating the work of the committee. 

The time we were putting this plan in place, it was the same time that we saw the documents in our pigeonholes and the President was invited to launch it. Unfortunately, we did not hear a lot about this process, especially when it came to involving the stakeholders at the grassroots level. We never felt that work of getting the ordinary person to put in his or her aspirations on what they would want Uganda to be in the next five years. So, I hope it was done. But if it was done, then it must have been done quietly because we did not feel it at our constituency level. However, looking at what is reflected in the document, there is no doubt that it is of substance.

I do not have to rub in the issue of population growth and population policy; I think this is a missing link that Government must attend to. We must control our population. Otherwise, this growth that we are yearning for is in trouble.

The other thing is our policy on labour, particularly fixing the minimum wage and also protecting our migrant labourers. I have not seen much being said about the many Ugandans who work abroad and would need protection in terms of policies and laws in place that protect them. And yet we recognise and acknowledge even in our government planning documents and the budget, that Uganda receives a lot of money now from our workers abroad. But when it comes to policies to protect these workers, we seem to be assuming that they just go, earn money, and bring it home, without need for some kind of protection. But I think there is a lot of abuse in this area that needs to be checked. And I hope that at long last there is going to be minimum wage fixed in this country, now that we have proper planning.

Mr Speaker, I also wanted to mention something about our regional integration policies. Quite often, I hear a lot being mentioned about the East African Community, but we also seem to be key stakeholders and players at the Africa or regional level. When it comes to a planning document, budget and policy statements, we seem to be absent on the African Union and our position on that, yet we are spending a lot of money at that level. So, I hope that planning will also take into consideration the African Union as a regional body. Whatever approach we want to take – it can be gradual – but even that gradual move needs to be reflected in our planning.

Lastly, there is the issue of implementing such a well-thought out and well-written document. I think Uganda is well-known for putting in place good documents, but when it comes to implementation, we seem to have a gap. I want, once again, to call on Government to respect what has been put in place by the National Planning Authority and support and implement it. Let it be reflected in the budget without letting this document to gather dust while we return to doing things haphazardly. Thank you very much and I support the committee’s report.

1.49
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to congratulate the National Planning Authority for coming up with this document. We happen to have received this document before, but as other MPs have already expressed, the document was launched before we had the opportunity to make our input. If that happened before, I think that there are certain contributions we would have made to enrich the document. But I think that it is not too late for us to make certain suggestions if that is acceptable. 

I have noticed that the vision of the National Planning Authority is, “Poverty Eradication with emphasis on transformation and wealth creation.” Now, that vision is very loud and clear. Unfortunately, when you move to page 8 and focus on the core priority areas, I thought that it would have been best to focus on the agricultural sector. Because, really, that is the fan belt that drives the economy; that is the backbone of the economy. 

What I see on page 8 does not bring out what I am talking about. Wealth creation would have put a lot of emphasis on agriculture, which is our backbone. You would have put a lot of emphasis on agro-based processing; you would have put a lot of emphasis on the culture of farming in the country. Because the country predominantly remains peasantry; but I think the government should consciously come up with a policy to transform the method of farming. 

If you just tell a rural person that you must grow two acres, he doesn’t understand. But there must be a system in place that will move the rural population to shift in their paradigm. And by changing the paradigm, changing the method of looking at things, changing the culture, then they will be able to transform the wealth in their homesteads. I think that is paramount. 

I know that in Lango where I come from, people are stuck to growing cotton. They don’t look at the economic value of cotton, but rather the traditional value of cotton. So, this rural population remains poor and bound on cotton growing when they could actually be growing other crops which are more economically beneficial like beans, sorghum and others, which you can grow twice or thrice a year unlike cotton which is a one season crop per year and yet people are bound to it. But this is because people have not been sensitised to understand the economic value of the various crops that we grow. So, I would like the National Planning Authority to put a lot more emphasis on the transformation of the agricultural sector and agro-based industries.

I am appreciative of the objectives of intertwining economic growth with poverty eradication. But you missed out intertwining economic growth with population growth. And I think this is where the developed countries have benefited a lot; we should learn from them. You see, a country like Australia restricts its population, why? It is because they want the population to match its population growth so that poverty cannot over shoot whatever benchmark they have set. So, I think that is one area where I feel that the National Planning Authority could come out and help us on how we can match the population growth with our economic growth. And that way I think we shall have effectively dealt with the poverty situation in the country.

When we turn to page 7 and 8, we talk about the target of matching the production sector. It is important in our budgetary activities and processes to be conscious of how much resources we put in non-productive sectors and how we can reduce in expenditure. When you look at our budget, you get ashamed to see how much money is pumped into the President’s Office as well as in state house, which are non-productive. And you find that when the two are put together, it is even higher than two huge ministries; the Ministry of Agriculture, which is productive and other ministries. You know, we should know which sector is going to be productive and enhance our wealth; but we are putting more emphasis on status, which are of no consequence. We know a President must move in an aeroplane, but we don’t have to pump all our resources there. I think this is unrealistic.  

I would also like to give my views on the inter-linkages between the ministries and the National Planning Authority, which will help us in the budget. We have just passed a loan, which is a budget-support loan. I am surprised that even the Chairman of the Committee on National Economy just stood up and supported it. We should identify the gaps; quantify the gaps and be able to evaluate the gaps so that we can be able to know where this money is going. 

You remember the loan that we approved about two to three days ago, which excited the women because they talked about maternal health? That particular loan has a huge component of enhancing manpower within the Ministry of Health. So, there is no target. When you look at that loan, it is targeting health. When you look at other loans, they are targeting health. So, it is an uncoordinated resource movement - that is our concern!  How will you monitor some of the double-budgeting and overlapping? This is how corruption comes in. So, we should be able to monitor and track the money. The uncoordinated resource movement must stop. I think this is where you must help us and maybe that way, we shall be able to fight corruption effectively. 

The role of women has not been dealt with adequately. I think it is important that you know that when you talk about MDGs, women are really at its centre. Poverty targets women; maternal health targets women - about three MDGs target women. So, in your planning, you must make women the centre of all this. When you talk about agriculture, women are the ones driving the peasantry sector of agriculture. So, it is important that we put women at the centre of planning so that we are able to see how much our women can do. 

There is particularly a lot of production and contribution of women through the informal sector, but nobody has been able to quantify in monetary terms how much women produce. There is a lot that is produced, but is there any way that it can be quantified? Is there any way you can develop a mechanism of quantifying how much we contribute to the economy through the informal sector? 

Finally, I would like to say that I happen to be a Member of the Budget Committee and sometimes the policy proposals given to us by the various ministries are not properly analysed. In fact, we have identified that in some areas, the ministries reproduce policies of two to three years as if there are no people in the ministry to actually look at the activities and match the activities to the requirements of the resources. So, I think the National Planning Authority should take a closer look at the demands of each ministry so that we know that what they are budgeting for is actually what is required. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: This is the last contribution.

2.00
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Masindi): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I must thank the National Planning Authority under Ministry of Finance for having brought us this far, but I must also add that the womb that has delivered NPA cannot allow it to grow. Why am I saying this? The last two decades we have been in private sector led - the development partners introduced structural adjustment programmes, we were tutored about liberalisation and privatisation and, therefore, the PEAP was running under that regime. You can call it a “plan-less regime”. 

So, it is important to understand that these are changing times and we are now in the times of planning. Even those countries, which had relegated planning, are now rushing back to rescue national companies. So, it is very important at that ideological level, to understand that planning is more important than budget financing. Our Ministry of Finance is right now preoccupied with resource mobilisation and deficit financing. How do we spend the little money we have? That function negates a primary planning function, which needs to sink beyond the resource envelope and for that reason, I want to thank the Committee on Finance, which invited some of our committees like that of National Economy and Budget into this issue.

What we thought would be a cure was not to create a commission. What some of us proposed then and I would like to request, is that a substantive Ministry of Planning is put in place because that gives the latitude, the thinking, the harmonisation, and the bringing together of all that matters. Look at the oil which we are going to handle. We are lucky that Government has pushed this far with investors, but where we are going, we need a refinery, we need a national oil company, we need a pipeline and that requires a stringent arm of Government. Therefore, we need to re-think and review the role of the state when we get some of these critical industries like oil.

The challenges, for example, in the oil area are that systematic demarcation of land cannot be left to a private sector. We need to see the central government taking a strong hand in some of these areas.

Regarding physical planning, to stop the speculation in the Albertine is a central government requirement. So, we need to see the state more at the centre stage, taking action. If we are going to get profit from oil, then we also need to re-think what Members have been raising for so many years, and what we have been putting in our Economy Committee report, that the state can invest in strategic areas across the board; not in one investor who kneels and cries crocodile tears to get money, but strategic investment across the board. If you say you are going to intervene in textiles, it must be Lira Spinning Mill, it must be ATM Mbale, it must be Bunyoro Growers, it must be across the board, and that requires a UDC model of investment; a UDC model where Government can have money and where Government can identify, under public-private partnership, the progressive lead and prime driving sectors, give them money and even put resource management. 

If this management does well, there is even nothing wrong with going into a management buy out because that is actually how privatisation should have been done. Government can invest in strategic areas. If it is the area of dairy, Government puts in all the agro-processing and the value addition in those areas. It can even invest in nucleus industries so long as those prime movers can cause change in that area.

So, I want to emphasise that while approving this National Development Plan, we need to review the role of the state; how much the private sector can do, what the state is going to do in these critical areas that this country badly requires.

On the point of population, the NDP raises danger areas and population is mentioned, but the NDP is not informing and directing enough to give us a way out because we have the youngest population in the world; most of them either school-going or not even in school. The exit route would be a vocationalised business-minded education system, which will change this burden of a young population into a lucrative job-creating population that has to be instructed, and that has to be coming from our NDP as a way out. 

So, if we agree that we are comfortable with our population, then we must have a way out; how we are going to turn this population not to be a liability - because currently it is a liability and the education system, UPE and USE, is still not going to give us people who are more productive. It is mentioned somewhere in the NRM Manifesto, and I think the chief whip has laid it on Table, and I can talk of it with authority here. That is the way to go.

I think the NPA is also silent. Whereas you talk of a learned challenge, whatever you want to achieve in this country, whatever infrastructure development you intend under the current legal regime of our learned system, you cannot. So, NDP should mention the need for serious reforms even if it means constitutional amendments. 

If you are silent and you say you are going to invest money in our current land regime where more than 70 percent of the land in Uganda is not even surveyed and registered, you cannot take-off because what we are talking of in the NDP as we move from the PEAP is that the country is ready for take-off. What is your land regime? What is your population structure? What is your education system to provide the long-term need of 30 years, mid-term need and five-year plan? That is why I thought that since you have mentioned the flagship project, you must go ahead to quantify the cost.

Finally, you mentioned tourism as a serious potential of this country, and I entirely agree, but you have not gone ahead to quantify how much is required to make Uganda a tourism destination. Our national parks and areas of tourism are still bare or natural. There is no human addition and if you are to go there, you still have to move by the colonial town administrative roads. We don’t have tourism statutes. Have you contacted Ministry of Works to tell you what the cost is of just having a lakeside road around Lake Victoria in the Albertine? How do you move from Kanungu to Buliisa without coming back to the towns of Mbarara and Fort Portal? That is a challenge and it reduces the costs of a tourist when he is in these areas.

I think tourism is an area where Government must find some money to invest if we are going to have tourism as another sector which will move this country forward.

So, I want to thank the ministry so much for mothering the National Planning Authority, but I am dead sure that the womb that produced NPA cannot allow it to grow. They need more latitude; they need more space; and they need more support from Parliament in terms of financing this budget. I thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, what we have been doing is to consider our committee report, which should have been done before the launching of the plan, but there it is. We have done it and according to the committee, the approval is subject to the proposed amendments in the plan, and that also, when considering the committee’s report, we have made certain observations. Therefore, the question is to adopt the report, subject also to the observations made by us during this debate. I think it is clear and I want to put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that disposes of the business we had today, but as I indicated earlier, my proposal is that we make some sacrifice next week. We should come here on Monday afternoon, continue with the business on CHOGM, sit the following day – Tuesday – in the morning, and go up to about 2.00 p.m. and adjourn; and then I can let you go to prepare for the events of Thursday and Friday. 

I will again beg that after the events of 24th to 26th, we come back just for that week and sit in the mornings. After that, I will say, “God bless you; go and engage with the people in the rural areas.” I think this is a reasonable request and I see that my sister, hon. Alaso, is accepting it. (Mrs Ogwal rose_) no, I will give you an opportunity to say what you want to say, maama. Are you contributing to my request? 

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I was trying to slot in something to say that before you conclude, I want to request that you give time to Members of Parliament to prepare for nomination on Thursday. Some people live very far and their vehicles are not in good shape and so on. So, I thought that next week, you would at least allow Members of Parliament to sort themselves out as far as nominations are concerned. I beg you. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, maama, that is what I am saying. We should come on Monday afternoon and Tuesday morning and do some business and after that, you can go. Isn’t it sufficient time for you to travel to the distant areas? That was the request.

MRS OGWAL: We cannot go and come back because we are going today and to come back on Sunday in order to attend one session and go back is – have pity on us, Mr Speaker! Give us the weekend to prepare and then we can come back after next week.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, that is her suggestion –

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I think that given the fact that we are going to begin campaigns on 19 December, it will be very difficult after that. So, I would imagine that coming for one and half days next week is not so bad, so that we finish the business that is there and come next week, because it will be very difficult to have a session here after 19 December. So, I support the proposal of Monday afternoon that we can continue and finish the report and other issues and then we move on. 

MS AKELLO: Mr Speaker, you know I border Sudan; so to keep me here up to Tuesday will be so unfair, and considering the fact that nominations end on 26 November, that means that for the week that follows before the campaigns begin, we shall have ample time to proceed. 

THE SPEAKER: So, you want to go now and prepare for nominations and come back after the other weekend?

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, my sister Franca comes from the border with Sudan and we appreciate the problems of border people. Hon. Bahati also comes from an equal distance like you from the border with Rwanda -[Ms Akello: “But his roads are good.”]- I know heavy investment has been made on security roads which are not in any other part of the country, but Sir, the point I would like to make is that Members should really bear with us. There is some very critical business which the Committee on National Economy has been handling, which we thought we would be able to clear today. In fact, I thought that we would break for lunch so that we can come back in the afternoon to clear some of the business from the committees of Finance and National Economy. 

There have also been all these accusations against you, Mr Speaker, and that we are doing everything possible to frustrate debate on the CHOGM report, and I know that if we do not clear this CHOGM report before we go for nominations, it will become a big issue in our constituencies. I wouldn’t want to find myself in a situation where people are carrying newspapers - and hon. Alaso, you know this very well, because these newspapers have been distributed in my constituency by your office. I am now pleading that you create time –(Interjection)– Mr Speaker, can I be protected from the all powerful Secretary General of FDC.

THE SPEAKER: I will give you time. Let him finish. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, he has some gaps in his sentences and you know in Teso, we do not talk like that; you say what you want to say. Which papers am I distributing in your constituency? That is what I want you to put on record. 

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, there have been newspapers which have been carrying whatever the Opposition comes up with whenever I seek to vary the Order Paper so that we can attend to some urgent business. They have done a lot of injury to some of us and I thought we would put the record straight by you conceding to my plea that we deal with the CHOGM report on Monday and Tuesday so that all of us can be in position to go to our constituencies when there is no extra baggage to carry on our heads. This is really a plea. We can go, come back on Monday and Tuesday and thereafter go for nominations, spend a week out there and later on come back. That is my request and the request of Government, Sir. 

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, you can see from today’s attendance. Yesterday, you told us that we should converge here so that we deal with some urgent matters, but you can see and some of us have even tried to ring here and there for our colleagues to come, but they are all trying to put things together to prepare for the nominations.

So, you can insist that we come back on Monday, but the attendance may not be all that good. So, I would want to beg you; let us be realistic and in any case, to engage Parliament on Monday and Tuesday and you ask us to travel on Wednesday in order to be nominated on Thursday, you are being unfair. I think let us be realistic so that we finish the nomination, we come back, and we can thoroughly deal with the issue of CHOGM.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, so the consensus is that we adjourn and then we resume business the other week after the nomination. Is that the consensus? Well, consensus is not total - when you say consensus, it is not 100 percent agreement.

MRS MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, I am also from the border and it is very far, but those of us who are named in the CHOGM report, which they have been using politically against us, would not wish to go for nominations when that report is still pending. It is being used against us; we are being de-campaigned with it. So, we would like to deal with this CHOGM report on Monday like you had ruled and we deal with the urgent matters so that we can go and spend more time; after all it will be after nominations that we will effectively be campaigning. So, I wish to plead with you; we need that fair treatment. All the newspapers and all the radios are on us. So, we feel that we need to deal with the report and conclude it. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, when we started debating the CHOGM report, sometimes we would get up on the Floor and we say, “This is urgent” and Members would say, “But what is special; it is like any other report of this House?” So, we are not going to use the CHOGM report today, making it to feel so special for Monday.

The reality, however, CHOGM or no CHOGM, is that even when you and I, and probably hon. Daudi Migereko, agree that the House will sit, the stack reality that will face us on Monday is that there will be no Members unless you find - I do not know which trick you will use for bringing Members here on Monday. So, you could substantively say, “Yes, people will come” and you will reach and you do not find Members here. I think the commitment the House is making to come back after nomination is a reasonable commitment. It is something we can stand by and also you notice, the people who are here are really the ones that have been driving the House by being consistent, and if for once today they are saying, “We are not likely to be here on Monday” you could get shocked when you finally find this lot absent on Monday. 

So, I would like to agree with the proposals made by my colleagues that we get off some time, go and prepare for nominations and come back on the 30th, and continue with the CHOGM report; after all it is like any other report of this House.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we come to the end of today’s business. House is adjourned to Tuesday, 30th November at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 2.24 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 30 November 2010 at 2.00 p.m.) 

