Wednesday, 11 November 2009

Parliament met at 2.54 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FORM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. Sorry to say that since the adjournment last Thursday, two tragic incidents have happened. On Sunday morning, Cadet Brian Bukenya, 26 years old, son of H.E. the Vice-President, died in a road accident along Mityana-Kampala Road. Burial took place yesterday. 

Again, yesterday early morning, Gen. Kazini, well-known for his service in our Army, died in a homicide incident. Arrangements for the burial will be communicated to us. This morning I went to the home of the late Kazini and conveyed Parliament’s condolences to the family. I now request that we stand up and observe a moment of silence.

(The Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members of parliament. I stand here to make a statement about the death of the late Maj. Gen. James Kazini. I am sure copies of my statement are being distributed.

Mr Speaker, about 0600 hours on Tuesday morning, 10 November 2009, we at the Ministry of Defence learnt of the tragic and untimely death of Maj. Gen. James Kazini, which occurred at 8th Street, Wabigalo Parish in Namuwongo, east of Kampala. A number of Ministry of Defence officials, UPDF officers, the Police and members of other security agencies rushed to the scene to ascertain what had happened. 

The body of the late Maj. Gen. James Kazini was found lying in a pool of blood with multiple cuts on the head. The Police immediately arrested the prime suspect by the name Ms Lydia Draru. Joint investigations are on-going and being handled by the Police, the military intelligence and other security agencies. We believe that very soon we shall know exactly what happened.

A post-mortem has been carried out by the Police at Mulago Hospital and doctors will soon release a report. Until this afternoon, the body was still in the mortuary at the Mulago Medical School, but is now already or is about to be moved to his home in Bbunga.

The late Maj. Gen. Kazini was a freedom fighter and peace-loving citizen who did so much for peace, security and stability of the country and our region. We will definitely greatly miss him.

In brief, Maj. Gen. Kazini joined the Uganda Army in the late 1970s just before the late President Amin was overthrown. In 1979, at Bondo, he joined the then Uganda National Liberation Army (UNLA) as “other rank”, meaning not private, not an officer, but a commissioned officer. He then joined the freedom fighters of the Uganda National Rescue Front (UNRF) under the leadership of Gen. Moses Ali in the early 1980s from the West Nile Region. Later in 1983, he joined the protracted people’s struggle by the freedom fighters of the National Resistance Army/Movement under the leadership of President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, which was then operating from the Luweero Triangle.

After the NRM took over Government, he continued serving in the Army. He rose through the ranks from captain through to the rank of major general before taking on responsibility of the Army Commander of the UPDF in 2001.

While Chief of Staff of the UPDF, he commanded operations against the ADF in the Rwenzori Mountains and Operation Safe Haven in the DRC between 1998 and 2001.  

He also held various command and staff appointments in the UPDF including being a battalion commanding officer, brigade commander and divisional commander before becoming the Chief of Staff and finally, the Army Commander. He was a graduate of the Senior Command and Staff College in Ghana, and a Fellow of the War College in Nigeria.

In the course of his duties as the Army Commander, the late made some errors, which led to his trial and conviction in the courts of law. At the time of his death, he had appealed against the court ruling. The issues had not been resolved. Honourable members of parliament, I am adding this particular point so that we do not get opportunists insinuating bad motives. I am saying this because I was told, for example, that one person yesterday said that Gen. Kazini died because he was not deployed. That is not serious. We need to be clear to the population to let them follow the sequence of events.

On behalf of the Ministry of Defence, therefore, and on my own behalf and on behalf of my family, I wish to extend my deeply felt condolences to H.E. the President as Commander-in-Chief of the UPDF, the bereaved family, the country and the UPDF fellowship following this tragic and untimely loss.

In the meantime, Mr Speaker, the Government, through the Ministry of Defence, is making appropriate arrangements for the burial of the late Maj. Gen. Kazini, which will take place at his home in Sanga, Kiruhura District on Friday, 13 November 2009. Maybe I need to add that although the late hails from Kasese, his family had long shifted to Nyabushozi, which is the present Kiruhura District. This is where he has developed a home although he has also been carrying out some significant businesses in Kasese District.

May the Almighty God rest the soul of Maj. Gen. Kazini in eternal peace. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister, for the statement. 

3.07
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We would like to join Government in sending our very sincere condolences to the family of the late former Army Commander, to the people of Kasese, the Government of Uganda and the UPDF fraternity.

We share the pain of losing a distinguished person who has served the country with dedication. It is a tragic loss. We even find it more tragic that a man who has survived bullets dies the way the former Army Commander died. It is very unfortunate for this country. We pray that somehow, we will be spared the pain of losing people who have dedicated their lives to serving this country in such tragic incidents.

I would like to say that death is a very serious reminder to all of us, small or big, civilian and Army, that one day we will meet our creator. I would also like to remind members in this House that no matter what we do, each of us should have it in mind that at some point in our lives, the Lord Jesus will call us. We have to be prepared because we do not know the hour or day when the calling will come.

Lastly, the hon. Minister of Defence has mentioned something under point No.9 about the errors made by the late Maj. Gen. James Kazini, which he said earned him a court trial and a conviction before the courts of law. My understanding is that the Minister is referring to the ghost soldiers’ inquiry, which had not been concluded. I would like to say that we in the Opposition are concerned to the extent that we want to see this matter being logically concluded.

We know that Maj. Gen. James Kazini is dead, but it would be good to have this matter concluded logically to the extent that whoever was involved and whatever the outcome, this country gets to know. Even if it comes out that the inquiry finds that the late Army Commander was not actually guilty, it will be very helpful for the sake of his family and the nation at large. 

I am saying this because creating ghost soldiers onto a payroll cannot be a one-man show. There should be people who are still at large around this country, but who were a party to this incident. We hope that Government will have the courage to ensure such people are brought to book. Also, Government should ensure it wipes out the ghost soldiers’ presence in the Army so that the Ugandan taxpayer stops feeding those who always want to take advantage. 

I am saying this because it is possible that somebody will say that with the death of the former Army Commander, the culprits can now go free; there is nothing more to pursue. We are saying no; there are people who may have been involved and who should be brought to book. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: That is okay, but in respect of the subject you have raised, we have been told that this matter went to court and has been pending between the state and the person who has died. The earlier findings of the lower courts were being challenged. However, now with the death of one of the parties, how do you continue with this matter? Do you continue ex parte? No, you cannot. So, this matter has died a natural death. We should forget it because you cannot try somebody who is dead. If you choose to proceed ex parte, how do you check on it? This is the problem. Anyway, the Attorney-General will advise, but I think this is something that should just be terminated because of the unfortunate death of a party to the proceedings.

MS ALASO: Well, for lack of technical ability, Mr Speaker, maybe I did not bring out what I want to have done clearly. What I am saying is that I am sure there are other people who were involved and we should not just close this matter like that. You know, some people will hold onto this as an excuse to try to close that chapter, but there are still other people who must account to this country.

THE SPEAKER: It would have been different if the late Kazini had been charged with another person, “X”. Obviously, the state would continue against that person X, but apparently he was alone in this trial and because he was alone, the trial cannot continue.

3.13
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you. In the Sixth Parliament, the late Maj. Gen. Kazini was the 4th Division Commander in Gulu and we had a lot of meetings with him. He helped us a lot with escorts, advice and everything. 

Yesterday morning as I was preparing to go to Kakiri to bury the Vice-President’s son, I received a call informing me that a woman had beaten Maj. Gen. Kazini to death. At first I thought it was a joke, but then when I read the papers and called other people, it was reality.

Mr Speaker, it is very abnormal for someone to die like this. I think the Government should do more to get more information and inform the country better. To just make everybody believe that a man and a woman fight and then a woman beats a whole major general and kills him is not fair. (Laughter) This is a serious matter. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okello-Okello, it is clear from the minister’s statement that joint investigations including the Police, military intelligence and other security agencies have been ordered and investigations are ongoing to unearth what exactly happened. So, the investigations are pending. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think that is what we should wait for. But I think death by violence in Uganda is on the increase. I do not know whether our people have lost confidence in the judicial system or there is something else, but people are being killed violently every other day. Government should wake up to this and find out the reason why Ugandans are killing themselves violently. 

I join my colleagues to convey my sincere condolences to the bereaved family. Yesterday I was a bit disturbed because somebody called me and said it was an Acholi woman who had killed Kazini and I said, “Again!” (Laughter) Fortunately, it has come out clearly that the woman was not an Acholi. I thank you. (Laughter)

3.18
MS KIIZA WINIFRED (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you. I wish to join, in sympathy, the Ministry of Defence for the loss of comrade Maj. Gen. James Kazini. Like you heard in the report, Maj. Gen. James Kazini hails from Kasese District, his district of birth. 

Death is death, irrespective of how it occurs. At a time like this one, we should all check ourselves. Have we lived to the expected standards? It is up to the individual to check himself because today it is Kazini, tomorrow it may be someone else, God forbid. 

The people of Kasese are in sorrow and tears and they are very grieved at the loss of their son. Maj. Gen. Kazini went to the Rwenzori region at a time when nobody was ready to sacrifice himself and he stood with the people. He went to the mountains and jungles of the Rwenzori region and there he displayed his patriotism, charisma and talent and the ADF was wiped out of the Rwenzori region with his help.

It is quite unfortunate that we are losing him at this time when the country needs his services the most. Even when he was still out of service – actually he was not out of service but he was temporarily relieved of his duties - the people of Kasese still cherished Kazini. I still believe in him and even the nation cherished him. This nation has indeed lost a leader, a man with a vision, a man with talent, a man with passion for the people. If Kazini decided to do something, he would do it to the end. 

Just like others have said, it is really unfortunate that he died the way he did but as I said at the beginning, death is death irrespective of how you meet it. We shall greatly miss him. Our sympathies go to his family and his colleagues. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

3.21
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute on the death of Maj. Gen. James Kazini.

Let me first thank you, Mr Speaker, for visiting the home of the late Kazini. I saw your vehicle pulling out. Kazini was my immediate neighbour. The gate you saw just before you got to his home is my home. We have lived together with Kazini for about six years. 

Mr Speaker and fellow colleagues, Kazini lived his life with a purpose, dignity and in a professional way. Kazini tamed the Army. In that neighbourhood I never had any problem with his soldiers. It was a very peaceful place. Kazini was very generous. If we did not have electricity or water or if our road was bad, he would stand up and go fix the situation. Therefore, I stand up to thank the late Kazini for what he did during his life. 

I am standing up to thank Government for the statement made. There should be equal treatment. Whoever killed the late must be investigated and given the same treatment. (Laughter) Yes, there should be justice given. I am speaking from the Quran, surah baqarah, surah isra – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, the major general was murdered but the one who caused this, once found, will be treated according to the law.  

MS MUGERWA: Yes, Mr Speaker, and that is why I am calling for that law of equality so that the same treatment is meted to that person. 

I too would like to join colleagues who have sent condolences to the family, especially to Phoebe, the wife, the children and the people of Kasese. We have lost a great man, we have lost a great son, and the government has lost somebody with experience. I ask God to keep his soul in eternal peace. I thank you.

3.24
MS MARY KAROORO OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): I also wish to thank the Minister of Defence for this statement. 

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, what has happened is what is called a classical tragedy. A classical tragedy does not just touch the family alone, it touches the entire nation and this is what the death of Kazini has done to this country. Last evening I went with a few colleagues to the deceased’s home and when we met the widow, it was impossible to say “I am sorry” because those words cannot convey what one feels. 

Kazini was a valiant soldier. I remember Shakespeare saying, “How the mighty are fallen.” Indeed, how the valiant are fallen. There is no way we can replace Kazini. Whatever he got, he always shared it with the people around him. He was a philanthropist.  

The Bible says there is a time and place for everything; this is not the time to judge and condemn, but a time to condole and mourn with the family. So, honourable colleagues, there isn’t much we can say. He lived his life as a valiant soldier, but it is the way he has gone that is really hurting most of us and this brings to mind the Bill which is about to come before us, the Domestic Violence Bill. 

I am telling you, we are in trouble. I was reading in the press that when some of the neighbours heard the screams, some of them said, “No, we are not going there because this is a domestic quarrel”. So, you can see, honourable colleagues, how important it is that we pass this Bill. It may be able to stop some of these deadly actions that we are witnessing day-in and day-out. We should not genderise it and say that men should not support it or that women should support it. We should all support the Bill. May the soul of our fallen colleague rest in eternal peace.

3.27
MAJ. DAVID GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Mr Speaker, it is a very unfortunate for the people of Kasese that when they were still basking in the excitement of the enthronement of their king, they get into this difficult moment of losing one of their great persons. It is sad for the Kasese people and to the whole country. 

I met Maj. Gen. James Kazini in senior one in Ntare. I was just telling Hon. Okecho William this. He had asked me whether hon. Kazini went to Ntare. We were together in senior one. I met Kazini when we were in senior one at Ntare School in Mbarara. He never used to read. He was stubborn, but you would never beat him in class. So, he was an intelligent and brilliant person. 

He had a problem with the headmaster at that school then, around about 1973 or 1974, I cannot remember the year exactly. We dispersed and I saw him again in 1979 when he was already in the Army. He looked cheerful and intelligent. He never read up to university, but he was a very upright person. 

Kazini was an extremely valiant person and there is no doubt he finally joined the Army. If you are not stubborn, you cannot manage the military institution; you cannot manage soldiering. Some level of discipline is necessary, but at a certain level, the profession itself requires some level of madness in order for you to be a successful person. (Laughter) Maj. Gen. Kazini had that dose that is required, and that made him climb up the military ladder. He would climb very fast because he had the credentials to face military challenges. 

For people who are saying that he died in shame; I do not like pretence –(Interjections)– Yes! A majority of the people like to pretend and look good during the day, but when it is night they behave differently. Maj. Gen. Kazini has died as a man, not like a man. Some of you would like to make it appear like he died in a shameful way; how shameful was that? Alifariki vitani – [Hon. Members: which war?]- That very war. (Laughter) So, I salute him. He has been a fearless person; the manner of his demise notwithstanding. We pray that the Almighty God receives him. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

3.32
MS MARGARET MUHANGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think it is very unfortunate that we are debating the death of James Kazini. This major general, I think, was very frustrated of recent. We need to look back at other Army officers who are unemployed, on Katebbe, and know the level of frustration they are going through. Having fought for this peace that we are enjoying in this country and yet you being underplayed, no one thinks about you; you are in court over so many cases; I think that man had reached a certain level of frustration. 

I was with him last month. He took me out with my spouse and we had dinner. He said, “Dear long lost relatives, why have you forsaken me?” I said, “Let me tell you James, even when you were in things, we never used to look for one another. We are scattered all over this world and we are an endangered people”. He knew that my grandparents come from Busongora. We talked for a long time, but in him I saw some level of frustration. He spoke like the world was about to crumble on him. I had met him many times before, but he had never asked why we did not look for him or forsake him. 

When he was working, I never heard stories of him having scandals with women. I think it has been part of the redundancy he faced. You look at his life; how come when he was at the helm of things, no one talked about Kazini having a girlfriend or Kazini fighting with a doctor over a girlfriend. I had never heard about it and I think you had never. So, I think we need to roll back our minds and look at other people before we even look to the killer. Even others may get to this. 

What I know is that Kazini was a very humane person. He had a lot of humility. He had a giving hand. He gave all he earned to his friends. 

Last night I went to his house - I went with Mary Okurut – and we really did not have words. I was wondering, “What can we talk about with this woman?” I just told her to take heart. I think Kazini knew he was going to die somehow. He bid me farewell and the way he spoke was like the world was crumbling on him. He took me for dinner which I had never seen. I think it is fate. His calendar had gotten full and he had to die. 

I thank God for his life, but he has left a very young family. I know the UPDF have a mechanism and they are going to look after this family, but let us look beyond Kazini. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

3.35
MAJ. GEN. JIM MUHWEZI (NRM, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to speak about my fallen colleague and comrade, Maj. Gen. James Kazini. I knew Maj. Gen. James Kazini in 1984 when he joined us in the bush war. I had heard about him being in West Nile fighting alongside Hon. Moses Ali and others. 

I knew him as a nationalist, a patriot and a courageous Army officer. He served, as the Minister of Defence said, in various capacities, rising to the level of Army Commander. It is a pity that he has died in this way. As a General, he was still very young and we still expected more from him. In spite of the problems he had recently, I am sure he would overcome them and knowing the way this government works, maybe he would have come back and served this country, Uganda. 

It is a pity that we still have in our society people who can take the law in their hands when they have complaints with people they are intimate with, and they decide to take their lives. I think we should look at that aspect as well - why this young lady killed her friend in such a violent way, at least from what I have heard. I trust that the investigating arms of Government will find out the true circumstances under which he died. 

My heart and that of my family and the people I represent goes to his very young family - he has very young children - to the President and Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, to the comrades, members of the UPDF and to the people of Kasese where he hailed from. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

3.39
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we learnt about this tragedy, many people started asking, “Who is this woman and where is she from?” It happened that she had a confused identity; at one point she was called Atim and at another, she was called Draru. And by every definition, Draru is a name from West Nile and Arua District in particular. 

So, when this happened, a number of my friends started calling up and saying, “Christine, is this the way you people behave when you are in love?” I was so saddened because according to the most recent UNFBA, the Lugbara women are the most virtuous and the ones with the highest level of fidelity in this country. So it hurts me that in this incident, there is generalisation. 

When I was having lunch, a friend told me, “You know Christine, I was trying to find a wife for my son from the West Nile, but now I am so disturbed.” (Laughter) Mr Speaker, it is not a lie that we women from West Nile are not only beautiful but also principled. By every standard, no ordinary woman from West Nile would do such an inhumane thing! It is not in the normal life of we Lugbara people that we would unfairly kill anybody we love so dearly. 

So, this points to some issue in our lives today. You and I know that there are a lot of multilateral love relationships in this country. That does not imply in anyway that we are honest to ourselves; not even one single bit. You have the official love kingdom and you have a series of other multilateral connections. But when we tell people we love them, we make a commitment. And once we do not live to the expectations and hurt our friends deeply, then anything is possible. 

Now, this reminds us all that it is not how far and how wide we continue telling people we love them, but how we live the love we pronounce. I have a principle in life, that you can break my heart, but I will never lend you my soul to tread on. And that simply means that when we commit ourselves to people, we must mean that commitment. 

Last Sunday, I was in church and the head of the Episcopal Conference told me something. That, “Today, we have failed to manage the world and the world is managing us”. How on earth can we live with this? I want to reassure Ugandans that we people from West Nile are loving people and it is no wonder that the General found solace in one of us. We are very honest people and the death of Gen. Kazini, probably caused by this lady, should not be generalised that all the people of West Nile are heartless. It is just an individual and look at us from that perspective. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

3.44
MS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for according me this opportunity to say a few words about the fallen patriot of this country. As you may know, Kampala is home to everybody. And most of the shocking incidents are happening in the suburbs and the slums of this city. We got an incident last year of a death in Kinawataka, where a woman was hacked to death in front of her children by a husband who had been in the Army and was diagnosed with some disease. 

Last year, there was an incident - which we should not over-look - that involved our General in Kansanga, and it was a tell-tell sign of violence that had started penetrating his life. 

About three months ago, I went to Kabalagala; there are two bars called, Shellie’s Bar. On Mondays and Wednesdays, our youth who are launching their music careers normally start in those bars. They hold Karaoke and live music shows. I did not know Gen. Kazini, but I met him in those bars –(Interjections)– I am the MP for Kampala and I should support our youth when launching their careers in music. 

So, I met him on one of those occasions. I did not know him, and when they told him that she is our MP, he said, “Oh, so you are Nabilah.” I said, “Yes”. He said, “You come here”, and I sat with him. But I realised that this was a guy on the verge of a break down. 

I met him on two occasions and there were young, intoxicated girls around him. Twice, I met him in those bars at Kabalagala. I wondered after the other incident of a scuffle, why an institution like the UPDF did not care for the security of such a high-ranking officer! Unfortunately, I have to think about it because we know very well that institutions offer welfare and psychological help to some of their people. But why should we wait for death before we can help such people? 

I think we should not overlook the fact that our institutions have an obligation toward their officers, especially when there are tell-tell signs in the newspapers. We should not wait for tragedy to strike before we come out to take charge. 

Unfortunately, I have to talk about this issue of security and I think as Parliament we should not overlook security of high-ranking officers when there are incidents that have been public. How about the smaller ones? What will happen to them if security of high-ranking officers is not really secured in this country?

I want to note that maybe in the rural constituencies there is some social network that is still available. Kampala is a metropolitan area where the community and LC structures have completely broken down. Security is an issue in this city. There are many deaths, but when this happens to somebody and we start discussing it, we should bring to question the security and the social structure systems in the city and how Government is working around them.

I want to convey my condolences to the family, but I want the UPDF to come out and also show us what mechanism they have in place to take care of their officers.

Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for this opportunity. Once again, I send my condolences to the family.

THE SPEAKER: We shall end with hon. Kibanzanga.

3.49
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Gen. Kazini comes from my constituency. He has the biggest business, I think, in this country, in my constituency, at the gate of our palace.  

We shall remember Gen. Kazini as a professional soldier. I think he has been a role model within the Army. He chose a career to be a soldier and he lived by it. Whenever it comes to elections, so many soldiers in this country today cause headache for the people they are supposed to protect. James Kazini never lived that double life. He was a soldier and that was it. If he was like other amateur Army officers, Kibanzanga would not be here on the Opposition. 

We are remembering James Kazini as a businessman; we remember him as a father; we remember him as a friend and we remember him as a social bridge. In all those conflicts between the cattle keepers and the cultivators, Kazini belonged to one group but he never took sides. 

We are talking about a Pan-African. Although people blame him for some actions he took on the African Continent, Kazini gave freedom to the people of Congo. He gave freedom to the people of the Central African Republic. He gave freedom to the people of Rwanda. We remember him as a Pan-African and for us, whoever offers freedom on the African Continent we are not shy to say it. 

Our problem is not that Kazini is dead, but the circumstances under which he died. He protected all of us, but we were not there to protect him at the time of need. At an appropriate time, I pray this House to give us time to work with the Army leadership in this House to come up with a substantive motion to honour the achievements, the contributions and the challenges of Gen. Kazini. 

I pray that we are told the truth in this investigation. We have never seen killers having make-up. It is the first time in the history of violence that killers can have make-up on their faces. We must be told the truth!

Mr Speaker, let me ask the Almighty God to forgive James Kazini for his shortcomings and receive his soul in eternal peace. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this was a procedure that we are allowed to debate a statement made by the minister. Should somebody want a formal- he will take appropriate steps for that. 

Now, in the gallery, we have LC - I do not know whether they call them LC V councillors - and LC III chairmen from Buikwe County. I think Buikwe has a business here and I think these people came to see how their business is progressing. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have pupils and teachers of Keeka Church of Uganda Primary School. I believe this is from Kayunga District and they are represented by Hon. Tom Musisi Kazibwe. You are welcome. (Applause) 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

PENSIONS ADMINISTRATION

3.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): Mr Speaker, the statement is being circulated. 

On 29 October 2009, when I presented a statement on the implementation of the Straight Through Processing (STP) system of paying pension and gratuities by Government, I was asked to make a comprehensive statement to the House on matters of pension administration. I requested for a period of two weeks in which to prepare the statement and it will be two weeks tomorrow. I, therefore, make the statement to update the House on the development in pension administration by my ministry. 

There are 40,754 pensioners and beneficiaries on the monthly pension payroll. Out of these, 6,949 are widows and orphans; 4,273 are UPDF veterans; 11,024 are teachers and 18,508 are traditional civil servants.

The Pensions Amendment Statute No.4 of 1994 and the Statutory Instrument No.6 of 1995

The above statute was enacted to address the following: 

•	To restore the value of pensions, which had been adversely affected by the 1987 currency reform, and to comply with Article 254(2) of the Constitution. In effect, pensions were indexed salaries with effect from July 1988. Each time salaries are increased pensions are computed at the new salary levels.

•	To introduce payment of survivors’ benefits to the estates of deceased public officers and pensioners. Survivors’ benefits are payable for a period of 15 years from the date of death of an officer or in case of a pensioner, for the remaining period up to 15 years from the date of his or her retirement. 

•	To increase the mandatory retirement age from 55 to 60 years.

•	To consolidate the teachers, local governments, urban authorities, police and prison schemes into the public service schemes to be managed under the Pensions Act Cap. 286. In effect, retirement benefits previously computed using different parameters would be assessed using a uniform formula. 

Use of consolidated salaries for pension assessment in 1996

In 1996, Government consolidated the salaries of public officers. Pension benefits were consequently to be assessed using the consolidated salaries. This decision partly explains the exponential rise in the pension amounts and the Pension Bill since the financial year 1996/97.

National census of pensioners in 1997

In 1997, Government conducted a national census of pensioners to establish the accurate number of pensioners. The census was also a precursor to the implementation of the statutes mentioned before. The results of the census were used to build a pensions database and to implement the Pensions Information Management System (PIMS).

Transfer of the management of teachers’ pension and payment of UPDF pensions and gratuities to the Ministry of Public Service

During the last decade, there have been the following measures to amalgamate the hitherto different pension schemes in the Public Service into a unified scheme:

The Teachers’ Pension Scheme

In 1998, Government transferred the management of the Teachers’ Pension Scheme from the Ministry of Education and Sports to the Ministry of Public Service. At the time, there were 6,674 retired teachers on the monthly pension payroll. 

The Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces (UPDF) Pension Scheme

In 2003, Government transferred the responsibility for payment of UPDF pensions, gratuities and survivors’ benefits to the Ministry of Public Service.  At that time there was no monthly pension payroll for the UPDF veterans and widows. Since then, a monthly pension payroll for the military veterans and widows has been developed and is being implemented by my ministry.

Administrative reforms

Since the early 1990s, Government has implemented administration reforms in the Public Service. These reforms entailed, among others, early retirements and retrenchment of relatively young public officers. The retirement benefits of these officers further increased the pension obligations and bills.

Compensation to the former employees of the defunct East African Community (EAC)

Since 1992, Government has paid a sum of Shs 94,113,742,985 as terminal benefits to the former employees of the defunct East African Community. In July 2001, all pensionable former employees of the former East African Community started to receive monthly pension through the Ministry of Public Service. 

Reforms in the Public Service Pension Scheme

The lack of adequate funds to cater for the increased recurrent pension budget and pension arrears has been a prolonged challenge. There was pressure for Government to find a sustainable solution to address the problem. It was subsequently agreed that the pension arrears would be paid using budgetary allocations while efforts would be made to appraise the Public Service Pension Scheme.

In 2003, Government, through a consulting firm, Ms Delloite and Touché, carried out a study of all the Public Service pension schemes. In 2006, the World Bank also undertook an actuarial appraisal of the scheme. Both studies confirmed that the scheme in its current form and state is unsustainable. They, therefore, recommended that the scheme be reformed to a contributory scheme.

My ministry obtained approval of Cabinet to introduce the contributory scheme. My colleague, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, is finalising the law of a regulatory framework of the pension sector. As soon as this is concluded, my ministry will proceed to introduce a contributory scheme for the Public Service. 

Payment to Local Government

Resulting from persistent inability to meet the pension obligation of local governments, the government undertook to help the local governments to clear the backlog of pensions up to June 2007. In this respect, in the financial year 2007/08, Government provided Shs 17.5 billion to kick-start the settlement of pension arrears due to local government pensioners. This amount was released and paid to 3,300 beneficiaries. Another sum of Shs 30 billion was provided in the financial year 2008/2009 and paid to 5,460 beneficiaries. 

The challenge now is to complete payment to those not yet paid. My ministry recently undertook a mop up exercise of all unpaid up pension arrears in all local governments. These will be subjected to the due auditing exercise before they are cleared. This is being undertaken by the Auditor-General.

Improvements of pension management at the Ministry of Public Service
My ministry has stood up to the challenge of managing these increased pension responsibilities. I now wish to inform you about the improvements that we have over time initiated:

Abolition of cash payments 

In April 2003, my ministry abolished all pension cash payments which were being made at the Ministry of Public Service cash office, as well as district education offices and city council in the case of retired teachers. This was in preference to payment through individual bank accounts. The arrangement has worked very well; pensioners receive their payments from locations of their convenience and third party transactions have been eliminated.

Client management at the Ministry of Public Service

The Ministry of Public Service launched its Client Charter in December 2008. I would like to put on the Table the charter for the benefit of those who would like to look at it, and the commitments of my ministry, and this is being implemented and the staff are obliged to comply with the obligations in the Client Charter.

Establishment of a pension inquiry reception

The ministry set up a computerised information centre in the pensions department where all information relating to the status of any case can be availed to a client instantly. We, in addition, need to post this information to the ministry website.

The pensions reception area has been expanded, renovated and equipped with better facilities including water dispensers for our clients.

Expansion of the pension’s registry 

The registry has been expanded, renovated and re-equipped.

The staffing levels have also been increased. 

The staff in the department has been periodically undertaking in-service training in public relations and customer care. They have also undertaken outreach activities and have participated in meetings with pensioners, and have had radio and television programmes where both political and technical staff have got involved.

The Pension Information Management System has been upgraded in order to cope with increased volume of operations. 

The processing of retirement claims as well as pensions assessment is now computerised.

We have undertaken payment by Electronic Funds Transfer since July 2007.

I recently presented the payment through straight processing two weeks ago.

The integrated personnel management system that is being developed we hope will undertake direct payment, where a transfer is made from the salaries payroll to the pension’s payroll.

Work is already being undertaken to identify those people who will retire in 2010/11 so that action can be taken.

Reports of corruption have consistently been made and investigated and culprits prosecuted. The Criminal Investigation Department as well as Office of the Inspector General of Government have been actively involved in these investigations. My ministry has always taken collective action in submitting these cases to the Public Service Commission for action.

In my statement of 29th October, I informed this august House that Government had, with effect from October this year, decided to pay all computed pension gratuities (lump sums) and monthly pension that will accrue this financial year using Straight Through Processing (STP). This will further eliminate further accumulation of pension arrears. In the meantime, the Auditor-General is carrying out a forensic audit of pending arrears before funding will be provided to clear all backlog.

The Auditor-General’s report is expected by March 2010. We have been informed that the Auditor-General is also undertaking the value-formoney exercise that will supplement the forensic audit.

I want to put on the Table a Guide to the Public Service Pensions Management Process: What every citizen should know, for Members to look at.

I want to conclude by assuring you that Government and my ministry in particular is adequately addressing the pension problem and is indeed committed to ensuring that the pensions are paid promptly, regularly and are easily accessible as provided in the Constitution.

4.13
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): I want to agree with the minister that Government is committed to clearing pension and specifically to thank you, Mr Speaker, because it is Parliament that has been putting a lot of pressure on Government to have this matter of pension arrears handled.

I want to thank Government because it provided the money. But as the minister was asked to make a comprehensive statement, her statement is comprehensive in volume but not in content.

I have an internal audit report from the Ministry of Finance; if I had time I would table it here. If you went to the pension offices, the files are scattered on the floor everywhere. Whereas the minister has told us that there is a computerised system, if you go there today and you are looking for a given file, it will take you six months or more  to know if that money has been eaten or not. 

So, we wanted the minister to really tell us because in the 6th Parliament we passed a loan here to computerise the system, to improve on filing, even in Makerere University if you want any given book, you go to a filing system and indexing and you will get the information you want; but if you go to Public Service, the information is on the computer, but the files are missing. What is the issue? Why do files go missing? If Ekanya had a pension to be paid, there will be a name Ekanya Geoffrey T. with a different account number. So, when they are sending money to a bank, the money will go to the other Ekanya T. Geoffrey, but not Ekanya Geoffrey. And what the ministry has been doing deliberately, and what I want the minister to clarify, is that when they are sending money from the bank to clear this pension, they send a lump sum of Shs 2.0 billion instead of sending maybe Shs 200 million; then they get returns from the bank. So, you find that because some pensioners walk and die, some of this money that bounces back the ministry does not report on it. This is in the Internal Audit Report from the Ministry of Finance.

We wanted the ministry to tell us how many officials in Public Service who have been involved in corruption and have been interdicted? How much money have you recovered from them, because some of them are very rich? 

We also wanted you to tell us how you have improved your registry, because as of now, the files are scattered on the floor and mostly files of people whose money has been embezzled.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, would it not be better if you tell us when you last visited the office.

MR EKANYA: I last visited the pension’s office last week because I have been chasing for a pension of my uncle who is supposed to have gone for medical treatment in the USA.

MS AOL: I would like to thank the honourable for giving way. I think what the honourable is emphasising here is not about him alone. It is not news and our people are really grappling with getting files. I want to say that personally, I lost my brother in October 1994. It was so difficult and it is only recently and I think because of my position, that I managed to get his file. Yes, because before when I went, I refused to identify myself and it was not easy to get the file. It was when somebody got to know that I was a Member of Parliament, but I had moved there many times. So, I am not complaining about my case, but there are very many people who walk to that office without being helped. We really need to help our people, thank you.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, the minister knows because I have gone to her office several times and given her this information and the details of the files concerning my uncle’s pension and she has delegated to her staff, but to date, the files have not been got; they have kept on disappearing. 

One time I went there and I lost my cool. I threatened to invoke my powers as Chairperson of Local Government Accounts Committee and that is when the file appeared the next day but again it went missing. So, our people don’t demand for water. We wanted the minister to tell us, for example, what action she is taking on her chief accountant. Where is he? He has been interdicted, but tomorrow he will get back. How rich is he? You ask those people; they should give you the names. One example is your chief accountant, Mr Obe, who has frustrated so many people.

In the Public Service there is a network. There is a former office messenger who is stinking rich and has property in this city. Since you want information on corruption, what people do is that they don’t put property in their names. They get Indians who go and buy properties then they sit and sign agreements as if they have bought those properties from those people. They then get the title and the file and put caveats on the same property. 

If the minister is very serious that she wants to fight corruption, ask all your staff because this information is at liberty. Some of them drive the latest Land Cruisers. Their children are abroad. What is their cost of living? How much do you pay them? 

I wanted the minister to give us statistics on how many people she has disciplined; how much money has been recovered; and what action has been taken on the banks that collude with your staff.

4.21
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for providing this statement and also for having beaten her own deadline, which she committed to this House. We applaud her because it is not very common of our ministers. Many of them have made commitments to this House and have not lived by them.

I also want to thank the minister and the ministry for attempting to improve the administration of pensions’ management in Uganda. When we first came to Parliament in 1996, when they were still using cash payments and pensioners were picking cheques from the ministry, there was a lot of suffering by our pensioners and many of them missed out on their money. I think nobody has ever investigated this to find out what exactly happened.

I interacted with a few pensioners last week and quite a number of them are happy because they get their money on time and it is worthwhile because they can live on it for sometime before they find other means of living to sustain themselves.

What the honourable minister did not, however, handle are the specific issues, which were raised at that time, especially the inconvenience to which we subject our pensioners when they have retired and the level of documentation that is required. It is not uncommon to find a retired civil servant’s documents having been certified, by the CAO as having been verified. When he comes over to the Ministry of Public Service, he is actually asked to provide additional information. 

My concern is whether the officers at the district are aware about the requirements of the Ministry of Public Service so that they can adequately advise the pensioners or retired officers on what type of documentation the ministry requires? This is because quite often, the CAO sanctions files. I have carried some of those files to the ministry and when you reach there, the CAO has certified but then they tell you certain documents are missing. 

I have been asking the officers, why don’t you link up with your personnel officers at the district so that you tell them exactly what is required? Let it be displayed so that it is public information and so that whoever is retiring and is carrying his or her file to the ministry can have a checklist to say, I have the last pay slip, appointment letter etc. 

Also, in some situations, we should accommodate cases where some of these officers have lost their letters. This is because if you are going to use an integrated payroll system where there is going to be an automatic switch, will that automatic switch also begin looking at these documents or is it because we are going to have the documents centralised and scanned on the system?

Also, when you look at the minister’s statement on pension reforms, one of the things she has said is that the ministry is working out a law on how the contributory scheme is going to be managed. I want to bring in the NSSF because the function of social security and pension money is the same although they are being administered under different Acts.

I was recently surprised when I read in the media that the NSSF board had decided to pay three percent interest on the pension money. That is the lowest interest rate. Even commercial banks pay a minimum of seven percent on a savings account. But you collect people’s money and pay them below the discounting rate of government. This is absolute robbery and I would request the Minister of Finance to urgently bring a statement to this Floor so that we can see how the administration of social security money is being done. 

If the board cannot pay adequate money to the workers, let us liberalise the sector so that other players and financial institutions can come in to take this money from the workers and pay them a decent return. This will help our pensioners to earn a decent living. 

May I propose at the end of this debate that this statement becomes raw material for the responsible committee of Parliament? There are issues on which we can make recommendations and advise the government, but we have not been having sufficient information. Can we refer this statement to the committee so that they can verify whether what the minister has stated here is right? They can also evaluate all the loans that we have been approving and sending to the ministry. How have they contributed to development? Have they been useful? After they have gone through this statement, they can make recommendations, which this House can debate and approve together. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: He is saying that we refer this statement to the relevant committee so that they can discuss with the minister if they have any enquiries to make. Is that the consensus? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: So the statement is referred to the Committee on Public Service.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT 2003/2004

THE SPEAKER: I think we have done a lot of this business. For the time being, let us consider another issue because last week we spent a lot of time on the Public Accounts Committee and so forth. Let us have a break. Next item!

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT UNDER ARTICLE 179, CLAUSE (1) PARAGRAPH (b) OF THE CONSTITUTION PROVIDING FOR CREATION OF NEW DISTRICTS

4.29
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker and colleagues, you can recall that a few months ago, I tabled a motion for the creation of new districts and that motion was referred to the Committee on Local Government and Public Service. I am now moving an amended motion, which includes the districts that have been considered by the committee but also the new requests that have been considered by government and authorised to be moved before this House. I, therefore, move a motion for a resolution of this House under Article 179 Clause (1) Paragraph (b) of the Constitution for the creation of new districts.

Government has considered it necessary to create the districts specified in this motion for effective administration of the areas listed and to bring services closer to the people. Government has taken into account the means of communication, the geographical features; the density of the population, the economic viability and the wishes of the people concerned. Whereas the creation of the new districts is supported, I am requesting that it is supported by Members. Therefore, I beg to move that the following new districts be created in Uganda and their headquarters be approved as indicated herein.

i) 	Zombo District, which is currently part of Nebbi District, consisting of Okoro County with its headquarters at Zombo Trading Centre.
ii) 	Amudat District currently part of Nakapiripirit District consisting of Upe County with its headquarters at Amudat Trading Centre.
iii) 	Otuke District currently part of Lira District consisting of Otuke County with its headquarters at Alangi-Orum Trading Centre.
iv) 	Lamwo District currently part of Kitgum District consisting of Lamwo County with its headquarters at Lamwo Township.
v) 	Kyegegwa District currently part of Kyenjojo District consisting of Kyaka County with its headquarters at Kyegegwa Trading Centre.
vi) 	Buikwe District currently part of Mukono District consisting of Buikwe County with its headquarters at Buikwe Trading Centre.
vii) 	Buyende District currently part of Kamuli District consisting of Budiope County with its headquarters at Buyende Trading Centre.
viii) 	Maracha District consisting of Maracha County with its headquarters at Maracha.

I propose that the districts, which I have mentioned, take effect from 1st July this year. I further propose that the following new districts be established with effect from 1st July 2010.

i) 	Namayingo District currently part of Bugiri District consisting of Bukhooli South Constituency with its headquarters in Namayingo.
ii) 	Luuka District currently part of Iganga District consisting of Luuka County with its headquarters at Luuka Trading Centre.
iii) 	Kiryandongo District currently part of Masindi District consisting of Kibanda County with its headquarters at Kiryandongo. 
iv) 	Ntoroko District currently part of Bundibugyo District with its headquarters at Kibuuku Trading Centre.
v) 	Serere District currently part of Soroti District consisting of Kasilo and Serere counties with its headquarters at Serere Trading Centre. 
vi) 	Alebtong District currently part of Lira District consisting of Moroto County with its headquarters at Alebtong Trading Centre. 
vii) 	Gomba District currently part of the Mpigi District consisting of Gomba County with its headquarters at Kanoni Trading Centre part of Masaka District consisting of Kalungu County with its headquarters at Kalungu Town Board. 
ix) 	Buvuma District currently part of Mukono District consisting of Buvuma County with its headquarters at Buvuma. 
x) 	Butambala District currently part of Mpigi District consisting of Butambala County with its headquarters at Butambala. 
xi) 	Bulambuli District currently part of Sironko District consisting of Bulambuli County with its headquarters at Muyembe Town Board.
xii) 	Kyankwanzi District currently part of Kiboga District consisting of Kiboga West Constituency with its headquarters at Butemba Trading Centre. 
xiii) 	I further propose that the boundaries of Arua District be altered to incorporate Terego County in Arua District.

Finally, in my original motion I had proposed that Tororo District be split into Mukuju and Kisoko. This proposal attracted a number of arguments from either side and government is still consulting the people of Tororo on this matter.  I, therefore, propose that the division of Tororo be deferred until these consultations have been completed.

The headquarters of each of the districts I have proposed, which are not yet a town council shall become a town council in accordance with the provisions of the Local Government Act. Mr Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Well, hon. Members this matter has been here before and it was referred to the appropriate committee but now the minister is amending the original motion, which is with the committee. Since there are more new districts, which are being proposed, the committee cannot now make a new amendment because it will be duplicating its efforts next time. So you take up the new amendments, consider them and bring up a comprehensive report on the minister’s motion as amended. And whoever has any query should go to the committee. 

4.38
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I looked at the original motion of the minister and the list of a couple of the new districts covered today. If you take a closer look, you will find that there are a couple of new districts included. However, I want to remind the minister that there was a very strong petition made by the people of Kole because it is almost like an island; it neither belongs to Lira nor Apac. And geographically, it is misplaced although with a very huge population. 

We had requested the minister to ensure that Kole should be part of this new arrangement for this consideration but to my surprise, while other new districts are being added, Kole, which is a very serious case, has not been considered. 

I am seeking clarification and serious persuasion so that I can appreciate what the minister is doing. I am sure the minister knows what he is doing but just wants to be reminded. I just want to remind him that the Kole issue is very serious and needs to come in this current amended list. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know what we are debating because this case has been tabled and I have said that it has to be studied by our committee. Whoever has a case to raise should go to the committee, which may come with the recommendations that may adjust the motion, which has been presented. Those with adjustments should make your case before that committee. 

MR EKANYA: I thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for granting me the opportunity to raise a procedural issue. The question of Tororo was brought in this House in 2004 and 2005 and this House took a decision that one district be granted comprising Tororo County as its headquarters and another district comprising West Budama with its headquarters in Kisoko. The House adopted it and it was forwarded to Cabinet, which also adopted it. I now wonder what new procedure we are following when the minister now comes with his statement where Tororo is even missing; are we just following it verbally - are we really not violating our Rules of Procedure and the Constitution? 

THE SPEAKER: No, the thing is, the minister moved a motion and before the motion has been disposed of finally, he has come with a motion to amend the motion, whether rightly or wrongly justified, I do not know. This matter has to again go back because we have not finally pronounced ourselves on his original motion and that is why he is amending. We may accept or reject the amendment –(Interjections)- no, I will give you an opportunity. 

MR OKECHO: I thank you very much. I thank the minister for the new motion he has presented to the House today and your ruling that the matter be referred to the committee again. It is important for us to understand that the issue of Tororo, which is not actually on the list, and I thank God for this, can be handled after all these consultations have been undertaken. It is important that consultations go ahead before we even think of including Tororo in any other motion for now for consideration as a district. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: My view is that this matter has been pending for quite a long time and we should not allow it to go beyond Christmas time. We should urge the committee to expeditiously handle this matter and bring to us the report within three weeks.

MR YIGA: Thank you very much. The committee was actually ready with the report on the original motion but now that you have given us three weeks, I promise that we shall be able to deliver within the three weeks.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MS LAGADA: Thank you. I rise on guidance because you are aware I brought the petition from the people of Kole. I wrote a letter to you with the petition signed by the people of Kole with a pledge from His Excellency the President as far back as 2002 to the people of Kole for the creation of the new district. In that petition, you wrote back to me indicating that the Clerk can put my petition on the Order Paper. But since the minister also received the same petition, the minister asked me to stay my petition because the matter of Kole was being considered under the new districts. The guidance I am now asking from you is what the fate of Kole is since the petition was with you and I had taken the word of the minister in good faith that he was going to deal with the matter. I do not see the matter being dealt with yet I see new districts that were brought yesterday appearing here. Kole that was pledged by the President in 2002 is not here. In Lira District, I even see a district that was not asked for. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, Kole will be a subject to be considered by the committee, which will come back here with their opinion. So you go back and persuade those people so that we amend the amendment.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Thank you so much. Since you have referred this matter to the committee, before it goes back to the committee, you remember very well that for those of us who come from Masaka District in a meeting we had under your chairmanship, you assured us, when this issue of Kalungu becoming a district was brought in the meeting – and indeed we had seen that Masaka District which has got over one million people compared to other districts whose population is less than 200,000 or even 100,000 - you assured us that there was a committee of this House that was looking at the criteria being used first, to give capitation grants to big and smaller districts, to find out a formula which is applied and can enable bigger districts like Masaka District – if Kalungu is made to be a district, you know very well that we can now even afford to have three more districts out of Masaka because we shall remain with a population of 1.2 million if Kalungu takes 250,000 people. Sub-counties like Kyazanga, Malongo, Ndagwe, Lwengo, Kisekka and Kingo are already over 250,000. Can you assure us that this committee will look into these specifications otherwise we also now demand for the division of Masaka District into more districts?

THE SPEAKER: I think the committee has sufficient mandate to consider that one and make its own recommendations. It can consider that. As I have said, the committee could opt to reject a proposed issuing. So it has a very wide mandate and that may be one of them to be considered. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you – 

THE SPEAKER: I know you are talking about Buhweju, but hold on and let him finish.

MR KATUNTU: I would like to get some assurance from the minister. Is this the last we are seeing of new district being created? And if this is not the last we are seeing I only wish he was listening. If this is not the last we are seeing and the demands on you to create more districts are still coming to your office, why don’t you really consider naming each and every county a district -(Applause)- and we sort out this thing once and for all? We cannot waste time every other day because we are going into electioneering to create districts for political reasons. If the reason, as you say in your motion, is to bring services nearer to the people, then let us name each county a district and services will go to the people and this matter will be sorted out. 

I really pity some of my colleagues. It does not matter whether we need a constitutional amendment; we can do it. We have seen some districts, which as of now lack even human resources. There are districts which have got an accounts assistant as a chief finance officer and you are busy creating new districts. I really pray and I beg government to consider naming each county a district such that this thing is buried once and for all.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, about two years ago you went to Buhweju and observed the area and when you came here, you said that the area deserved a district. You mentioned it in this House. The people of Buhweju submitted their request as early as 2006 and a copy was given to you and you wrote back praying that the authorities would consider it. You have referred us to the committee – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I have no reason to retract what I said. Unfortunately, I am not the one that makes motions. If I were the one, I would say, yes. 

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When this motion was brought on this Floor, I sought advice from you and you referred me to the committee. I had a delegation from Buhweju and we went to the committee and interacted with the Minister of Local Government and the minister assured us that we will be included on this list. The list has come with many more districts added on to it but I do not see Buhweju. So, when you tell us to go to the committee -

THE SPEAKER: The committee has a mandate in its report to say, “Yes, we have considered your proposal for a district and we agree with you or we do not, but we have seen that there are deserving cases, which have not been considered including Buhweju.” They can say so. 

MS AMUGE: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you. I just want to clarify this for purposes of the record of the Hansard. My sister, hon. Beatrice Lagada rose and said that she saw districts in Lira which were not requested for; I think that is not true. Both Aleptong and Otuke districts were requested for by the people of Lira. Thank you. 

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. The minister has presented a motion but in No.18; on page 3, he alters the boundary of Arua District and he has also included Maracha District. This House pronounced itself on the districts of Maracha and Terego. If you are altering the boundary of a district, it has to be a different motion from this because you would be talking about two different issues. We should rightly follow our procedures. We pronounced ourselves on the matter as Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Maybe the minister can answer that. 

MR ADOLF MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, first of all, all the districts that have been proposed here have been created as a result of altering the boundaries of some other district and Article 179 of the Constitution says that, “Parliament may alter the boundaries of the districts and create new districts.” So, I do not see anything wrong in creating new districts. (Laughter)

MS ANGUFIRU: Mr Speaker, is it on order for the honourable minister to confuse the House about Arua District issues? Arua is the largest district in Uganda and it has four counties; that is Vura, Ayivu, Madi-Okollo and Arua Municipality and this House had already given district status to Terego and Maracha. Is it therefore in order for him to say that Terego District should move to Arua, making it five counties and yet the aim of creating new districts is to bring services nearer to the people?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we are prematurely taking over the function of the committee. There are merits in what you are raising here but I think the proper place to raise these objections is in the committee. The committee may disagree with the proposals of the minister but they will come here and discuss with us and we may also agree, disagree or adjust. I would pray that we give a chance to the committee to scrutinise the entire motion and make its own findings and report to us.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am very much convinced and I thank you for the wise guidance you are giving us. Given the fact that now you are saying that we take all the issues to the committee so that all these demands emerging like Buhweju, Rubanda which has already passed a resolution - this motion which is on the Floor now goes back to the committee so that all of us take our demands there and then we bring the motion once and for all instead of continuing debating this motion in piecemeal.

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you. Taking into consideration your guidance and what Members are expressing, there are so many other districts or areas which were not considered in the minister’s motion. For example, you agree with me, taking into consideration the issues, the area, the politics and the population of Sembabule District, Lwemiyaga and Mawogola should have a district. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, when the committee is considering this motion, the minister will attend to the committee to explain and justify what he has said. Whatever you are saying here will be raised by the minister because the minister will give audience to justify his motion. So, you should not be worried.

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the month of August, we received some circulars from the Ministry of Local Government telling Members of Parliament and all district local governments that there will be no creation of other administrative units until after 2011. Basing on the fact that during the budget process we were also placed with a good number of districts which were already under consideration, today in this motion, I again see about seven new districts that were suggested, which were not in the circular. I was wondering whether the minister can clarify to us because some of us know very well - like Pader District had also submitted last year. A district of 27 sub-counties deserves another district. There are districts which are not even having six sub-counties and are being sub-divided. I would rather go with the proposal by hon. Katuntu that we declare all counties districts.

Secondly, on the case of Lamwo, the minister is suggesting that the headquarters of Lamwo District will be in Lamwo Township. Pader District was in Kitgum before it was separated and I know very well the geography and every part of Kitgum. I do not know of any township within Lamwo. There is no township called Lamwo Township. Could the minister clarify where this Lamwo Township is going to be? Isn’t he actually meaning Padibe?

THE SPEAKER: I think what you do, honourable member, go and assist the committee and say “Lamwo cannot be the headquarters because it does not exist and I propose that this town should be the headquarters.” They may adopt your report contrary to the wishes of the minister.

MR WACHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I do not envy my friend, the Minister for Local Government. I think you have a big job at this rate. The issue of having districts is now becoming an issue of politics. We should seriously consider the suggestion made by hon. Katuntu but we should not only stop there. I am proposing to the minister that he needs complete restructuring of administrative units in Uganda. If we have all counties at the level of districts, then we must try to think again whether we do not need bigger units as administrative units to administer Uganda. If we do not do that, we are just going to have a multiplication of administrative units which cannot be financed by our budget. I think the minister should urgently bring to us a paper proposing what he wants to do to get bigger administrative units so that this headache of having small entities called districts should be stopped. I thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting regional governments?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have told you that this business has not ended. Most of the business will be done in the committees and you know the offices of that committee. Please take your views to the committee, which may adjust the motion that the minister has presented today -(Hon. Members rose_) nobody is against Buikwe District so please wait for your time. Can we handle another business, please?

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE DOMESTIC VIOLENCE BILL, 2009

5.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker sir, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Domestic Violence Bill, 2009” be read for the second time. (Applause)

This Bill intends to provide for: 

•	The protection and relief of victims of domestic violence; 
•	The punishment of perpetrators of domestic violence;
•	The procedure and guidelines to be followed by the court in relation to protection and compensation of victims of domestic violence; 
•	The jurisdiction of courts including the issue of protection orders and enforcement of orders made by the court; and
•	The handling of domestic violence cases by the Family and Children Court and related matters.

For the avoidance of doubt, cases of domestic violence will be handled by the LC courts, the Family and Children Court and the Magistrates Court.
I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

5.12
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to make one clarification. I was not able to sign the committee report because I was away, but I associate myself with it because I was part and parcel of the proceedings that led to the production of this report. 

I would like to also report, on behalf of the committee, that we are happy to present this report, which has been of concern to you, the Deputy Speaker and Members of Parliament. You have been concerned about matters concerning domestic relations, in particular domestic violence. We had to fast track this Bill and it is the first Bill we are presenting after the budget process.

This is a report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Domestic Violence Bill, 2009.

The Domestic Violence Bill, 2009 was read for the first time on 16 June 2009 and it was then referred to the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs in accordance with rules 112 and 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. In analysing the Bill, the committee was guided by Rule 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Methodology

In the process of analysing the Bill, the committee discussed the Bill and received memoranda from the following stakeholders:

1.	The Deputy Attorney-General and Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs.
2.	The Uganda Law Reform Commission.
3.	The Uganda Joint Christian Council.
4.	The Coalition of Non-Governmental Organisations Against Domestic Violence in Uganda. 
5.	The Uganda Human Rights Commission.

The committee also made a comparative study of different legislations in different jurisdictions that have enacted legislation on domestic violence such as Botswana, Rwanda, Ghana, Namibia, Seychelles and the United Kingdom.

Objectives of the Bill

The object of the Bill is to provide for protection and relief to victims of domestic violence by providing for the punishment of perpetrators of domestic violence and the procedure and guidelines to be followed by the courts in relation to protection and compensation of victims of domestic violence.

The Bill also provides for the jurisdiction of courts including the issues of protection orders and enforcement of orders made by the court, and provides for the handling of domestic violence cases by the Family and Children Court. 

Observations

The committee observed the following:

i) 	The Domestic Violence Bill, 2009 provides for the offence of domestic violence and provides for a broad description of what constitutes domestic violence. It further provides for the protection and relief to victims of domestic violence, the punishment of perpetrators and the procedures to be followed to prosecute the perpetrators.

ii) 	The existing laws - suffice to note the Penal Code Act, Cap.120; the Local Council Courts Act, Act 13 of 2006 and the Children Act, Cap.59 - are not adequate and do not provide for redress of the specific and unique nature of the offence of domestic violence.

iii) 	It is necessary to distinguish domestic violence from the general category of assault, grievous bodily harm and battery under which it is usually clamped, to ensure that it is given adequate redress.

iv) 	Through the enactment of the Domestic Violence Bill, 2009, Uganda will have implemented Amnesty International’s 14-point programme for the prevention of domestic violence.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the Domestic Violence Bill, 2009 be passed into law subject to the amendments that are proposed.
Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairman of the committee, for the report.

5.17
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to first thank the minister for this Bill. I want to thank the minister because he has been very dedicated to both this Bill and the Marriage and Divorce Bill. He has been very accommodative to many of the proposals that both the women parliamentarians and the women’s movement came up with. I also want to thank the committee for the report and for the support to this Bill.

This Bill is coming at a time when the statistics with the Police on domestic violence - according to the 2008 report on crime registered by the Police – reveal that close to 40 percent of the crimes are either crimes of passion or crimes related to domestic violence. This report demystifies the earlier traditional thoughts that domestic violence only affects women. On the contrary, according to the Police reports, there is increasing violence by women against men. I think many of you have seen in the papers incidences where women and children have been murdered. This Bill is not only to address the question of violence against women, but violence in the family, which affects the woman, the man and the family. That is why I think we should support this.  

Earlier it was difficult for the Police because the victims of violence would go and report and they would be referred back to the clan. Some of them would be referred back to the local council, and then the local council system would refer them back to their clans to first sort out the problem. Therefore, domestic violence has been viewed as a confine of the family and not a public matter. However, over time, it has been manifested that many people have died, are handicapped or disabled because of domestic violence and, therefore, it should now come to the forefront of the public domain. That is why the Bill talks about shelter, compensation, terms of imprisonment and moves it away from the confine of the local council, the clan and the family, to the magistrates’ court and to the Police. 

It also gives various incidences of how it should be dealt with as well as details on what constitutes violence. Earlier, it was a very confined definition, but now the definition has been broadened.

I, therefore, want to thank the committee and the minister because this is in line with the UN Convention on Elimination of Violence Against Women and many other protocols, regional and international, that Uganda is signatory to. Most importantly, it will be dealing with one of the most public problems that we are facing and that is now leading to a lot of deaths and disabilities. 

This Bill also caters for mechanisms of counselling. There is a mechanism for counselling victims and people who report. These mechanisms of mediation entrenched in the Bill can play a very important role in deterring people from reaching the limit and end up killing. In the Bill, you find mechanisms of mediation where if you feel that you can no longer stay in a marriage or relationship, there is an avenue for you to be sheltered and be counselled and so on. So, in this circumstance ,I think it would be important. 

However, the vital issue is the implementation. As we pass the Bill, I think the Ministry of Gender and the Ministry of Justice have to come up with a mechanism for sensitising the local people to understand the Bill, to know where to go and report and how they can get help from the different institutions. 

They also need to strengthen the institution that will deal with violence. In the Police now, the desk for family issues is still very weak. So, in implementation, I think it would be very important to come up with a mechanism for implementing, sensitising, creating awareness and creating strong institutions and structures to support the Bill. I thank you and I support the motion.

5.24
MS WINIFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister and the Government of Uganda for making sure that this Bill comes to the Floor of this Parliament. It is a long awaited Bill, which has taken so many years, but has been a well deserving Bill. Therefore, I would like to appreciate this time and also thank the minister for putting in a lot of effort to make sure that this Bill is tabled. I also thank the committee for their report. Its being brief shows that the preparation of the Bill was well done. 

Mr Speaker, this is in line with the Constitution of this country and it is indeed in line with the protocols and conventions, as has already been mentioned. The issues of domestic violence are human rights issues. I think the Bill has come at the right time when domestic violence issues in this country are escalating, not only in the women’s realm, but also in the men’s realm. I think this helps us to realise that it is high time we defined properly what domestic violence is. 

We are aware that the Penal Code has been in place, but to a great extent, it never addressed issues of domestic violence properly. I am very glad this Bill comes up to define what a domestic relationship is, and what domestic violence is. Many times when people talk about domestic violence, they would like to see physical violence, but I am glad this Bill goes into the depth of the -(Interruption) 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise up on a point of order. We are talking about a very passionate issue, that is, domestic violence in this country. Is it in order for an honourable colleague, hon. Kawooya, to continue reading newspapers when we are debating a very important issue which really affects her? Is she in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Well, if it is a fact that she is reading - but is it a fact? [Hon. Members: She was reading!] It is out of order for anybody in the House to be reading a newspaper when we are transacting business. But if you have not been reading it, you should not worry. 

MS KAWOOYA: I want to put it on record that I was not reading a newspaper. I was referring to a matter on the late Kazini as a matter of domestic violence as I prepare myself to debate.

THE SPEAKER: The ruling is that anybody reading a newspaper is out of order. 

MS MASIKO: I had started to appreciate the components of the Bill, especially the fact that many people literally think that domestic violence is physical. I am glad this Bill goes deeper to define what domestic violence is. The economic component is clearly stipulated and explained, and the emotional, verbal and psychological abuse is also explained properly in this Bill. 

I hope it will help all of us to understand that you do not have to physically assault somebody for you to have committed domestic violence. Verbal and psychological abuse are very common, especially among women whose culture has relegated them to a position of being quiet and not being allowed to speak about the different violent situations they go through in their domestic settings. Unless we really stop this, we shall not see a lot of development, especially in the third world countries where you find that domestic violence has led to very many negative consequences.

Domestic violence in this country has increased the rate of HIV and Aids. The prevalence has gone up because of the psychological torture women usually go through. It has also led to injury. One of the reasons why there is high maternal death in this country is because of domestic violence. The statistics have shown that when women are beaten while they are pregnant and psychologically abused, they will never produce children who will see the light of day. Many deaths have been as a result of domestic violence. If we get these things addressed, we shall reduce the death rate of mothers and children in this country. It has destabilised families. It is indeed unjust to have domestic violence of any kind.

It has also increased poverty. Many people, when they are injured, spend a lot of money looking for treatment and that treatment usually costs money. When they are injured, they do not have enough energy to be productive. So, you find that a lot of poverty has come in because of the issues of domestic violence.

I would like to thank the ministry for bringing this Bill, especially the issues of the protection order. I think this is something that is going to help the law enforcers so that they find their work easier. Indeed, the definition of domestic violence has made it easy for the law enforcement officers, but still, the protection order is one thing that is good for people in this kind of relationship, who might be experiencing domestic violence.

I would like to request that we all support this motion because as we have already seen, the Bill does not affect men only; it also affects women, children and the whole nation. I support the motion and applaud the Government for tabling the Bill at this point in time.

THE SPEAKER: The honourable member has observed that in this Bill they use things like “him” or “her”, which balances the Bill. I think formerly, people thought domestic violence only happens to “her” but this time even “him” is included. When we look at point No.3, we see that a domestic servant in the home is also affected. So, I think this is a Bill that does not need much debate; let us legislate.

5.33
MRS CECELIA ATIM OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): I thought it would be important not only to congratulate the minister and the committee, but I think it is important that we put on record that you, Mr Speaker, and some members of parliament did guide the women, particularly UWOPA, on how to deal with the Domestic Relations Bill. It was decided that the marketing of this Bill was giving the impression that it was intended to protect the interests of a woman in a family. We came to discover, however, in the process of consultation, that not only are women battered in relationships but men, children and domestic servants are also battered. In fact, we came to discover that children who are normally found in the family or those born outside wedlock have suffered and some of them have even been quietly murdered. 

I thought this background is very important. The Domestic Relations Bill has actually been unpacked and we have decided to focus more on domestic violence so that we deal with it first and then go to the other areas, which are related to marriage, relationships, and so on. Of course you will find that the Christians have one approach and the Muslims have another, so we thought that these issues should be dealt with differently.

I want to thank the minister because this matter has been put squarely and it affects all of us, men, women, children, servants and relatives of the family so that they are all catered for. This is a new event in our political history and I think we need to thank the committee and the minister. Maybe I should also thank the Government because the time is appropriate. It has taken long –(Interjection)- No, if I thank the minister, some people may think the minister is a personal friend or relative, but I think I need to thank the Cabinet and Government because I know it took so long. 

We thought the presence of a woman or female vice-president in the Government was going to make the Domestic Relations Bill come earlier, but it did not. However, the time is now and I am very happy that it has come. That is why I want it to be put on record that the Speaker played a very big role in guiding us to unpack the original Bill and to come up with these pieces of legislation. I want to thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Don’t you really think we should have the Second Reading?

5.37
MS BEATRICE BYENKYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will not go into the details of thanking, as I am with everybody who has thanked the various persons involved. There is the general impression that the Bill has come and, therefore, domestic violence is going to be at a halt or it is going to stop there and then. That is the impression I wish us not to have as legislators, not even to put in the general minds of everybody or members of the public. This is just a baby step and more steps are to follow to see that domestic violence is curbed. 

This is where I wish to call on the various stakeholders and religious organisations. I am one person that believes that the law alone will not prevent domestic violence. The Lord, the Father whom we confess, together with the law will be able to help us as far as domestic violence is concerned. I also wish to commend the Catholic Church for having come up openly to sensitise and mobilise its congregation to see that something is done as far as domestic violence is concerned. The law alone will not help.

However, the law enables us to discuss openly issues concerning violence because many people are shy. The church also says we can talk about it and there are places to talk about it, but once we come out as Government and the legislation is there, I feel that the people of the church likewise will follow suit. 

In the Bible, it says that husbands should love your wives and wives submit to your husbands. In most cases, the wives submit to the husbands but the husbands do not love the wives. I just feel that this is an opportunity –(Interjection)- It happens! People are not admitting it but that is what happens. The wives are submissive but the husbands do not love the wives. I feel that the law will now enable the women to come up, through the church, to petition the husbands that do not love them because there will already be an avenue. 

It sensitises and awakens the women because they have played their role but the men have failed. You just cannot push your neighbour, companion or spouse away but you can wake him up in one way or another. The church will have the responsibility of doing that and I am glad. However, where it says that it further provides for the protection -(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I think the honourable member should quote the scripture in the right perspective and context. When the Bible says wives should submit to their husbands, it actually implies that when the husband totally submits to God, then the wife is actually submitting to God through the husband. I am a Christian and I want us to understand. It means that a man who is totally submissive to God would not treat a woman like a second-hand person. He would treat a woman in the image of God as equals because he sees the image of God in that woman. I want this to be put in the right perspective.

Secondly, this Bill should not derail the women from upholding and appreciating the good value of culture because sometimes culture enriches our identity –(Interruption)

MS BYENKYA: Isn’t she contributing?

MRS OGWAL: I am seeking clarification and I want this clarification to go on record because as a woman and an elder, I want the men to also be appreciated for the role they are going to play in the implementation of this law when it is passed.

I also want to say that as a woman, I must protect and uphold the rich culture of my people. For example, in the Lango culture, women who have accepted to be married in accordance with the cultural rituals should not eat chicken. I do not see any big deal in that. All of you have seen that I do not taste chicken -(Applause)- not because of anything. My husband has not passed a law for me not to eat chicken, but I know that when an ordinary woman sees that Mrs Ogwal, who is a human rights activist, is not eating chicken because she values her culture, it sends a different message. I can eat chicken anytime. I have other rich dishes to eat; but that sends a very strong message that being an educated woman and a human rights activist does not mean I should abuse my culture. It is by choice. I wanted to put this in correct perspective so that this Bill is implemented. All of us must be committed to this Bill, men and women alike.

Men should not think that by passing this Bill, we are straying from some areas, which may make it difficult for them to implement it. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Motion, yes, what is the motion?

MS BYENKYA: Mr Speaker, I was just about to end.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear it - there is a motion.

MS BYENKYA: She might decide not to be heard.

5.43
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to move a motion that the Bill be allowed to be read for the second time since we can see that the Bill is in good faith for everybody. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I think you are saying that I put the question.

MS ANYWAR: Yes, put the question.

THE CHAIRMAN: The motion is that I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion carried)

Now, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Domestic Violence Bill, 2009” be read the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE DOMESTIC VIOLENCE BILL, 2009

5.44
Clause 1 agreed to.

Clause 2

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 2 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: Interpretation? 

5.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am sorry that it was moving so fast, but we had a proposal for Clause 2. In Clause 2, the committee proposes that the following should be inserted immediately after the word perpetrator, and we are proposing to add “residence”. We propose that residence in the Bill means the place of abode, principal or actual dwelling place with some degree of continuity. The justification is to provide clarity and certainty of the word “residence” as used in the Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay 

5.46

THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Chairman, I have a problem with this proposal because relating residence to continuity in all cases as according to Clause 3, a situation of domestic violence may occur in which the perpetrator and the victim do not share a residence. Continual residence is of essence in domestic violence, but need not necessarily be a factor in every situation of domestic violence. This is the same as in Clause 3(1)(c). In addition, the term used is “usual place of residence” and not place of residence, which infers that continuity is already taken into account. 

Therefore, continuous stay of residence is immaterial in terms of the victim, and the child being, for instance, granted access to the residence, may have a problem in getting redress. It is only of significance that the residence is the one in which the situation of domestic violence occurred.

Thank you. I think we may have to stay with the proposal as it is in the Bill.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, to respond to the Attorney-General’s response, one would have to look at the provision of Clause 3.  It reads as follows: “A domestic relationship means a family relationship; a relationship similar to a family relationship; a relationship in a domestic setting that existed between a victim and a perpetrator; and includes a relationship where -” 
Now we go to (c), “the perpetrator and the victim share or shared the same domestic residence,” same residence and the committee’s view is that this is too general. There should be some amount of continuity so that if some people for some reason meet in a hotel or in a place of convenience and have a disagreement, such a place like a hotel or a lodge should not constitute a residence in terms of the Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: Therefore?

MR TASHOBYA: That is why we are proposing that -   

THE CHAIRMAN: Supposing you go to Murchison Falls and stay in a hotel for a day, what happens?

MR TASHOBYA: But, Mr Chairman, the view of the committee is that the spirit of the Bill is to protect people who have a domestic relationship, otherwise there is a law -  

THE CHAIRMAN: But a wife and husband do not have domestic stay simply because they have stayed in a hotel for a day?

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, this one is not specific to wife and husband.

THE CHAIRMAN: Suppose I have moved with a domestic servant - because they are also covered under this law - does it really matter? Because this is not only restricted to wife and husband, but covers even other people within the setting.

MR TASHOBYA: Well, Mr Chairman, our view was that that was not the spirit of this law. It was meant to cover people in a domestic violence and leaving it to a residence would be too open to defeat the purpose of the Bill. 

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, if you read 3, domestic relations, and you read, for instance, (d) which talks about victims employed by the perpetrator such as a domestic worker, house servant; and the victim does not reside by the perpetrator. So, I think you are curtailing the provisions if you import in the other.  What is your view if you import in the other, Mr Chairperson? 

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, I have stated my view and that of the committee.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question on the proposed amendment. 

(Question put and negatived.)

MS NALULE: Mr Chairman, I would propose that in the interpretation section, we include the definition on disability because we said that the clause disability should be provided to provide what the different types of disability are; given the fact that all extreme cases of violence lead to disability. So, it is relevant for it to be defined in the Act so as to enable legislators to provide long-term remedies and protection to the victims. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you suggesting that the domestic violence we are talking about here is discriminative of whether you are disabled or not; I thought that it is embracing? 

MS NALULE: Mr Chairman, we just wanted to get a definition in the interpretation as I have just explained to you.
 
THE CHAIRMAN:  No, but what is the relevance because this does not discriminate; it does not give undue advantage or disadvantage to a person with a disability. But now you are importing in another category which I don’t think is good for persons with disabilities. It is rather you be under the umbrella. 

MS NALULE: Mr Chairman, I don’t know whether you are getting what I am explaining because when we read this Act, we realised that sometimes when we undergo domestic violence, you go to court and sometimes you report and they may not know whether you had domestic violence. So, that is why we thought that in the interpretation section, disability is needed, because as you go further in the body of the Act, extreme result of domestic violence is mainly disability. Not only in the form I have, but in any other form I may not, like loss of sight. So, that is why we felt that we should define it in this interpretation section. 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. I appreciate what the Member is trying to raise, but the purpose of the interpretation clause is to define some of terms used in the Bill. But I am not very sure that we have disability as used in the Bill as to warrant an interpretation. So, I don’t think that it is really necessary. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I agree with the chairperson of the committee because we cannot define an expression which does not actually feature in the context of the law or Bill generally.  But in essence, it does, like you have actually guided, because if you see the definition victim, for instance, it means a person in a domestic relationship who directly or indirectly suffers, threatened or actual domestic violence, and that of course involves a person with disability, and once it happens, there are many areas of redress. 

As you will notice, this law is without prejudice to the application of the other provisions, for instance, in the Penal Code. For instance, we made an amendment to the Penal Code in 2007 on matters of defilement and, for instance, persons with disability are categorically specified - that a victim of that nature once charged and convicted, it is for aggravated murder, which carries a maximum sentence for death. So, there are related laws which should not be read in isolation of other related laws.
 
THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, I think that is clear. So I put the question that Clause 2 stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3 agreed to.

Clause 4 agreed to.

Clause 5

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The committee proposes that Clause 5 be redrafted as follows: “Consent not a defence in domestic violence…” The justification is clarity. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I agree with the proposed amendment only with a drafting clarification instead of saying: “Consent of the victim, shall not be consent in domestic violence….” We propose that it is: “Consent of the victim shall not be a defence to a charge of the offence of domestic violence.” 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, but can you make me understand what you mean by a victim consenting to violence? 

MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, I can give an example. In Lango, there used to be a system where some women would claim that if you do not beat them, you did not love them. (Interjection) No! You are saying “No!” and you are not a Langi - you are not even a Langi woman. Why are you saying, “No” –(Laughter)- that one is an Acholi, but I am talking about the Langi. So, on this issue, a man cannot say the woman wanted it; she consented - that should not be a defence on a charge of domestic violence.

THE CHAIRMAN: But if I may ask you hon. Wacha. If there is that consent because the woman wants to test if you love her or not, who will be the complainant? 

MR WACHA: There are provisions for this in the Bill where if the local councillor notices that there is domestic violence in the homestead can take up the matter.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, Hon. Beatrice Anywar, did you want to – okay.

MS AOL: I would like to say that we have the Constitution which qualifies cultural practices, but we have also the law in the Constitution which is paramount. So, these cultural issues come after. What we take as human rights, because when we talk about beating it is about human rights. Beating is violation; it is hurting. Those issues people used to say and it is not only in Lango, but even in Acholi. We are trying to make something which must stop violation and protect everybody. All of us are equal before the laws and God. So, if men do not enjoy being violated, then it means that women cannot enjoy being beaten – 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. I think what you have is to say, “Cultural norms will not be a defence,” so that you will rule out his cultural norms in Lango – “That I beat him - I beat her to show that I am in love” – 

MR WACHA: Even the way it is provided is large enough to protect anybody because you are saying that even if the local councillors come and ask, “Why are you beating this woman?” Or, “Why are you beating this man?” You cannot say, “She consented,” or “He consented.” That is not a defence. That is what the provision is talking about.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Let us try it. What was the formulation? I think the minister – 

MR RUHINDI: “…that consent of the victim shall not be a defence to a charge of the offence of domestic violence.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Have you heard?

MR WACHA: “…shall not be a defence to a charge under this act.” 

THE CHAIRMAN: Is that okay?

MR RUHINDI: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, I put the question that Clause 5 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much. Under Clause 6(3)(a) and (b), the committee proposes that the words, “tribe and religion” should be deleted. And we are proposing that the use of tribe and religion in commission of an offence – first of all, it is not relevant and two, it also promotes sectarianism and tribalism.

MR RUHINDI: I also still have a problem with this because information and records relating to tribe and religion may be used to compile a statistical database which could assist in revealing which tribes or religions are preponderance for domestic violence and assist the government in developing programmes to curb the vice of domestic violence.

THE CHAIRMAN: Does the chairman concede?

MR TASHOBYA: I concede.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us hear – 

MS NALULE: I wanted to propose that Clause 6(3) – that in the recording of the case, the issue of disability should be put in the recording because this is very important since most of the cases of domestic violence are lost in courts. For example, if a girl was defiled and she was deaf, there is nobody at the local council court who can interpret in sign language and they just call her, “kasilu,” and the case is lost at that stage. So, we feel that in the recording of the case of the victim, among other things like name, sex, age, religion, if the type of disability is recorded, then the court will be cautious on how to hear that case. 

Under 6(5) -  

THE CHAIRMAN: So, what do you want to say? What is the formulation? 

MS NALULE: Clause 6(3)(a) – “Name, sex, age … type of disability, if any.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Is that okay? I put the question – 

MR WACHA: I would agree with the minister in respect to tribe for statistical data. But where does religion come in? Would you say that this particular religion beats the most and then, what would you do with it? Sensitise them how? 

THE CHAIRMAN: Even in the normal court process, they may require registering religion. For instance, the kind of oath you take – I think this is what is done here. But hon. Nalule was talking about recording the physical circumstances of the victim. Those should be recorded because if he or she is dumb, they can know what to do. I think that has no harm. Does it?

Now I put the question on the proposed amendment on inclusion – you see we are on 6 and I was talking about (3)(a) that says, “In recording a case of domestic violence, the local council courts shall record the following matters: Name, sex, age, tribe, religion, occupation, and marital status of both victim and perpetrator…” and he wants to add “physical disability, if any.” Is there any harm in that? We are considering her amendments. I put the question on the proposed amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, on Clause 6(5) I propose that we provide for counselling of the victim. I am not well advised on where we should fit it but probably - 

THE CHAIRMAN: Under “caution” or maybe it can come after “apology.” If somebody apologises, they can accept their apology and advise them that in future, do this and that. That is where counselling would come in.

MS ALASO: Yes, Mr Chairman, it is actually for both the perpetrator and the victim. There are quite a number of victims of domestic violence who really get traumatised. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, we shall include counselling. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS NALULE: Also in clause 6(5) I would like to propose that on top of “compensation”, we also include “rehabilitation” because sometimes when you are a victim of violence - it may be beyond certain degrees and some people may just be given compensation in terms of money - but if, for example, you become physically impaired, you may need a wheelchair and we felt that on top of compensation, you may need rehabilitation. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I see situations where you cannot order a perpetrator to buy a wheelchair, like you are saying. But anyway, there is no harm. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I think that we should really remain with the remedies that we can easily enforce rather than putting up remedies that we can hardly enforce. Rehabilitation is too broad; we are having problems of preparations and rehabilitation in matters, for instance, of offences relating to human rights. So, in my view, let us remain with compensation. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Nalule, the problem as I see is that if, for instance, you say we rehabilitate, we are going to see a real bicycle sold and that will strain the relationship. If they sell a bicycle to buy you a wheelchair, then that will strain the relationship, yet in having this law, it is not our interest to strain the relationship. So, we must really take care of that situation. But have we disposed of this? Do you insist or should we abandon it? 

MS NALULE: Let me explain more. Maybe a wheelchair may be costly but somebody may lose sight and she will never be able to see again and she may need to move with the use of a white cane; or she may need mobility orientation or she may even need to start learning Braille as a means of communication. So, I do not know whether that is going too far, as you have said. 

THE CHAIRMAN: There are different types of people and I see it as a sophisticated domestic arrangement, but the simple cases as we see – 

MS WINNIE MASIKO: Mr Chairman, I thought I should convince my colleague that when you look at Clause 6(j), any other order provided under the Local Council Courts Act will give leeway to the LCs to see appropriately how they can address this issue rather than committing it straight on this Bill. So, I really think to a greater extent, issues of rehabilitation could be left to the local council courts to determine. 

THE CHAIRMAN: If feasible.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Well, if somebody is going to go into domestic violence thinking it is a light matter, then they had better be told by law that the cost and the rewards of being violent are really high. If it means selling your bicycle in order to provide an assistive device to the person whose movement you have impaired, so be it. We have to make domestic violence as unpleasant as we want it to be so that the fellows who want to involve in it retract their steps. If we are soft with them, they may not learn. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I think that is what hon. Winnie Masiko is suggesting under sub clause (j), but you have to consider the people you are dealing with. There are certain orders you can give to an advocate but this is a peasant, or a drunkard husband or wife. We should be interested in keeping the families together, in spite of the domestic violence. But when we definitely strain them, the man will never forget it because he sold his only property – the bicycle. (Laughter)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Chairman, normally when assessing compensation, you take into account all incidental costs. So, compensation will have to be very comprehensive including rehabilitation. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I think we will leave it to the discretion of the courts. 

MR RUHINDI: Let me further amplify what hon. Okello-Okello said because Section 25 of the Local Council Courts Act, defines compensation as, “Subject to the provisions of this Act where the Local Council Court decides to award compensation, it shall order the defendant to give such property or cash as the court may consider to be the equivalent of the complainant’s property or right which was damaged, lost or injured.” So, it is very broad and this also includes restitution because restitution is also provided for and it is also defined in the Local Council Courts Act.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want clarification. I want to know how these local council courts are instituted. Is it specifically to deal with domestic violence or is the perimeter wider? Sometimes the focus is important. I hope they are not under the umbrella of the local councils that we know. Is it a special court instituted to deal with domestic violence? 

MR RUHINDI: It is broader. The powers of the Local Council Court are broad and this is under the Local Council Courts Act of 2006. We passed it here at the end of the Seventh Parliament. So, the powers are broad and it involves the local council officials. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Can we move on?

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We had two other proposals under Clause 6 and one of them is Clause 6(3)(d). “In recording a case of domestic violence, the Local Council Court shall record the following matters: The name, sex and ages of the children of the victim and the perpetrator, if any.” and Mr Chairman, we propose that the requirements of this sub clause are taken into account in Clause 6(7), which reads: “In all complaints of domestic violence, the Local Council Court shall inquire into and establish whether there are children involved in the domestic relationship.” I think that falls under that.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, Clause 6(3)(d) requires the Local Council Court recording the case to include in the record the name, sex, age and marital status of the children of the victim and perpetrator if any. On the other hand, clause 6(7) only mandates the court to inquire and establish whether there are children involved in domestic violence as a matter of examination and verification. The other one is a question of recording whether you have children and their age, and the other one is saying that even if that is not said, the court is mandated to inquire whether there are children in that domestic setting. So, the two are really different in my opinion. 

MS ALASO: And, Mr Chairman, I think the reason we want the two to be made distinct and the emphasis maintained is because of the consequences of domestic violence on children wherever it happens. We really have to emphasise that and keep it on record for purposes of rehabilitating the children. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. I put the question that Clause 6, as amended, stand part of the Bill - 

MRS OGWAL: I am sorry, Mr Chairman, for interrupting you. This Local Council Court - and I am sorry to emphasise that there are certain degrees of offences which cannot be dealt with and that differentiation has not come out and we are all under shock of what happened concerning our brother, the late Kazini. I believe it is under the umbrella of domestic violence, but can you subject that to local council courts? We should differentiate the type that should be handled by local council courts and the degree of certain offences. That is why I am really emphasising the status and the competition of these local council courts. What nature of violence – 

THE CHAIRMAN: A Local Council Court cannot deal with a murder case because, for instance, Kazini’s case is initially seen as a murder. It could be reduced to a different thing but it is a murder case. What are the jurisdictions?

MR TASHOBYA: Let me give some information to the honourable member. I think in this clause, it is provided that the jurisdiction of the local council court shall be as provided in the Local Council Courts Act and the jurisdiction of the local council courts does not include murder. Clause 17 says, “Not withstanding anything in this Act, a family and children’s court may hear and determine a matter of domestic violence under this Act whether or not it involves a child.” For avoidance of doubt, a family and children’s court may issue –(Interruption)

MS AMONGI: I think the clarification that we want to make is that our argument is that you cannot restrict the court of first instance to be the local council courts. We are saying that give the person an option to either go to the local council, the Police or directly to the court. But in this provision, you are restricting that the first court of instance is the local council court. It is only the local council court that can make referrals to the Police and magistrates court or to the High Court, where the perpetrator is a second or repeat offender; where in the opinion of the Local Council Court, taking into account all the circumstances of the case, the perpetrator is likely to inflict further harm on the victim, and so on and so forth. The issue we have raised consistently is that do not restrict victims of domestic violence to only having the court of first instance as the local council. For example, I want to introduce -

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, don’t worry because Clause 6 (a) says, “A complaint of domestic violence may be made to a local council court, where the victim or perpetrator resides.” It is permissible and the choice is yours. It does not bar you from going to other courts with jurisdiction. 

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, my problem is that this Clause 6(a) - 

THE CHAIRMAN: The local council court shall make a referral to the Police and magistrates court, and/or the High Court where the perpetrator is a second or a repeat offender if you have gone there, but it does not mean that you cannot report to the Police.

Then there is 6(12): “A victim or perpetuator who is not satisfied with the decision of the local council court may appeal against the decision in the manner provided for ….” But the thing is “may” is only permissive in that you can decide to go to a court or not. Nobody will say, “Why didn’t you go to the local council court?” They think that maybe domestic violence can be handled locally and therefore you go there.

I am referred to 7(1) and it provides that “Notwithstanding, section 6, a complaint may be made to a police officer ….” So how do we proceed with the so many amendments? Any other amendments!

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, I will conclude my proposed amendments on clause 6 at once and this would be on clause 6(3)(g) which the committee proposes to be deleted and the justification is that it should be provided under the regulations. We also propose that sub-clause 3(h) should be deleted -

THE CHAIRMAN: Why do you want to delete (g)? (g) says: “Whether it is the first time of reporting by the victim or his/her representatives or how many times the matter has been previously reported.” Do you want to delete that?

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, our view is that this is not of a substantive nature and that it should be in the regulations.

THE CHAIRMAN: It appears you have not met with the owner of the Bill to agree on this because it would serve us better if you two liaised on the issue.

MR RUHINDI: I have explanations to most of these amendments. Where I agree I have said I agree but for instance on deletion of 6(3)(g), it is not prudent to delete it because the idea is that it should be put in the regulations. This required information in my opinion is to assist the court in determining the character of the perpetuator and whether he or she is a repeat perpetuator. It is a substantive matter not appropriate for regulations. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: I think it is ok.

MR TASHOBYA: Well, I am getting overwhelmed by - I concede. Can I then propose the last proposed amendment on clause 6(6) where we are proposing to delete “the High Court?” “The local council court shall make a written referral to the police and the Magistrate’s Court or the High Court”. The committee proposes that we delete “High Court” and the justification for this is that there is a lot of work in the High Court and this will increase on the backlog.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 6 as amendment stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR TASHOBYA: Clause 6(8).

THE CHAIRMAN: No, but you said the last one is this one.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, I am sorry but I think it is important for all parties that this is taken into account. In clause 6(8), where it reads, “Where it is established that there is a child in the domestic relationship in respect of which a complaint is made, the local council court shall make a written order to the probation and social welfare officer to make an inquiry and make the necessary action.” We are proposing that “the probation and social welfare officer” should be deleted and be replaced with “community development assistants or any other officer responsible for development at the sub-county level.”

THE CHAIRMAN: No, when they used the term they used, this is an official organisation. They have junior officers and senior officers but the person responsible is called - but then the assignment can be given to a community assistant. This you should not go into; it is not your problem. It is their internal problem. You make a report to the probation officer who has many categories of officers serving with him.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, I am surprised that I am getting -

THE CHAIRMAN: You should not be really worried as to who really handles the case eventually because the probation officer himself will not be the one. Maybe he has assistants.

MR TASHOBYA: I am very much obliged, Mr Chairman, but the point you are trying to make is that domestic violence takes place in rural villages and if you are going to ask the rural women to go to the district and then he delegates to whatever officer, it may defeat the very purpose of this provision. That is why we are trying to bring it nearer to the people who are victims.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, these people even in the villages are working under their boss who is the probation and social officer. That is the office although titles keep changing.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Chairman, the original text is very appropriate. I do not see anything wrong with it.

THE CHAIRMAN: There is no problem. We know that the probation officer may be sitting far away but below him he has his officers. I put the question that clause 6 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR TASHOBYA: The committee proposes that in clause 11(1)(b) the word “significant” should be deleted. The justification is that interim protection orders should not only be issued when there is immediate significant harm but where there is immediate harm. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I see. So you do not want to classify?

MR TASHOBYA: The committee proposes that we do not classify the harm because harm is harm.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. In clause 16(4), the committee proposes that the words, “one hundred and twenty currency points or imprisonment not exceeding five years” should be deleted and replaced with the words, “forty-eight currency points or imprisonment not exceeding two years.” The justification is to provide for the penalty of breach of an order to be in tandem with that of the penalty of the offence of domestic violence.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. In clause 17(5), the committee proposes that the words “of this Act” should be inserted immediately after the words “section 11 to 16”. The proposed amendment would read as follows: “… pending the making of rules of court under this section, to regulate the exercise by the Family and Children’s Court of the jurisdiction conferred upon it by sections 11 to 16 of this Act shall, with necessary modifications, apply.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.  

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, when you look at the Interpretation Act, section 2(d)(d)(d) provides that if you see a section in the context of a law, it means the section of the Act in which the word occurs. So, you do not have to keep on saying, “… of this Act.”

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I think he is helping an ordinary person to understand. But also there are a number of other Acts like the Family and Children Court Act or something like that. So, it is for clarity. Besides, you lose nothing really.

MR RUHINDI: I lose nothing but it is redundant. Okay, I concede. Then his proposal to -

THE CHAIRMAN: No, why don’t we finish this then we deal with that?

MR RUHINDI: Let us finish that first.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: That is 17(5)? 

MR RUHINDI: He is proposing that, “…the minister may, by statutory instrument with the approval of Parliament, amend the schedules to this Act.” Oh, have I jumped the gun?

THE CHAIRMAN: No. He had only one amendment.  

MR RUHINDI: Isn’t that where we are?

THE CHAIRMAN: We are on clause 17 and we have inserted, “…of this Act.” That is the only amendment he had. So, I put the question that clause 17 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Clause 20(1) reads, “The minister may, by statutory instrument with the approval of cabinet, amend the First Schedule.” The committee proposes, “The committee may, by statutory instrument with approval of Parliament, amend the schedule to this Act.” The justification is to subject the approval of the statutory instrument to Parliament.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. 

MR RUHINDI: I already fought before I began -(Laughter)- but, Mr Chairman, you well know that most of our laws consistently have empowered ministers to amend schedules to modify the value of the currency point. This is for ease of amendment and to enable timely changes in the law to keep abreast with inflation should the need arise. 

And as far as the schedules are concerned, these are mere guiding principles, which are strictly administrative in nature and do not need to be subjected to Parliament for approval. Imagine you are amending this form and you have to come to Parliament, really.

MS WINIFRED MASIKO: Mr Chairman, I do appreciate that Parliament should participate in many cases. However, supposing you come across a Parliament which is not so much interested in issues of domestic violence and yet the population is interested, won’t you subject this to even worse consequences?

And in other pieces of legislation - I remember when I moved the Prevention of Trafficking in Persons Bill, we put a provision like this. If we make this different from other laws, what implication will that have on the legislation that we have made already?

THE CHAIRMAN: Actually, this first schedule deals with value of the currency, which may change either upwards or downwards. I think this is the situation which can be worked on by the minister, maybe consulting the Ministry of Finance. Parliament may really -

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I only want to take exception that the Member would like to trust the cabinet minister more than Parliament - 

THE CHAIRMAN: No, it is not that -

MR TASHOBYA: But I concede, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is not that because the first schedule talks about currency point; a currency point is equivalent to - this is really value. 

MR ODUMAN: Mr Chairman, some time back there was that discussion about the authority to vary those particular schedules and we made reference to a law that provides for an omnibus variation across all laws. So, I do not know how that reconciles with this. If you give a particular minister authority to vary this, where is the reconciliation across the board?

THE CHAIRMAN: You have to address this purpose of the first schedule, say when you talk about the currency point, in actual sense what do you mean? Is it about Shs 10 or Shs 5? I think these are things that change and I am in the know there is someone in charge of research. Why should Parliament fight to change that? We cannot do that.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Chairman, my concern is who should change that?

THE CHAIRMAN: The Minister of Finance would know the level of development in the country and the values of money of course in consultation with the Bank of Uganda. It is really a financial matter.

MR BYANDALA: The minister has brought this law for a purpose of trying to put in place punitive measures. Surely if the currencies are not in tandem with what he intended, let us move with his figures. I think we should trust the minister.

THE CHAIRMAN: Anyway, the amendment was abandoned by the committee, so I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS ALASO: It seems to me that when were discussing clause 10, the decision we took not to change from probation and social welfare officer to community development assistant abandoned the proposal by the committee to insert a new sub-clause. There is a proposal on page 4 that we insert a new sub-clause 10 of clause 6 to read as follows and then the clause be re-numbered that, “Without prejudice to sub-clause 9 where a person believes that there is an act of domestic violence …” all that input was abandoned and yet the only thing we had changed earlier on was the issue of a community development assistant. But we have not discussed the issue of inserting that new sub-clause as proposed by the committee.

THE CHAIRMAN: But he did not present it.

MS ALASO: But it is a good one. Mr Chairperson, I implore you that before we let go, a new clause would be inserted which would be 10(6) and it should read as follows; “Without prejudice to sub-clause 9, where a person has reason to believe that there is an act of domestic violence and a complaint has not been lodged by any person, that person shall notify the probation and social welfare officer requesting him or her to make enquiries and take further action.” I think it is a good clause even when there was a slight omission on the part of the chairperson.

MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, if you look at clause 6(9) which we have already passed, you will see that the principle which we were trying to enunciate in the proposed amendment is picked up here except that it is now to be handled by the member of the local council court or a member of the executive committee of the local government. 

THE CHAIRMAN: The thing is that it was abandoned but the honourable member thinks it is a good principle as we stated earlier that somebody could report even if the victim has kept quite. For instance, if a man is beaten by a wife, it is very rare that he will say that “I have been beaten by my wife.” But a neighbour knowing that this has happened can go and make a report.

MS ALASO: That is precisely the difference. In the first case, it is a member of the local council to pick it up and in the second instance, the committee has proposed that a neighbour who may not be a member of the executive can pick it up and report.

MR RUHINDI: I think, hon. Ben Wacha, except that he did not read through the whole provision, it does not stop at local council court or executive committee. If you read on, it says, “… has reason to believe that there is an act of domestic violence within his or her jurisdiction and a complaint has not been lodged by any person ….” That actually imports what is being proposed so it would make the proposal absolutely redundant.

MR WACHA: In other words, the provision anticipates that any other person - but if no person takes up responsibility, then a member of the local council court or of the executive committee will take it up.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, where do you place hon. Alaso’s issue? She says that it belonged to the committee and then the committee did not pursue it and she wants to pursue it because of a similar principle reflected in an earlier clause.

MR TASHOBYA: Supposing we had it like this: “Where a member of the local council court or the executive committee of a local government council or any other person has reason to believe that there is an act of domestic violence within his or her jurisdiction and a complaint has not been lodged, the member should notify the probation officer.” Does that satisfy you?

THE CHAIRMAN: So where is the home of this proposal? 

MR TASHOBYA: It would remain 9. It would remain 6(9) and it would read; “Where a member of a local council court or the executive committee of a local government council or any other person has reason to believe that there is an act of domestic violence within his or her jurisdiction and a complaint has not been lodged the -(Interruption)

MS WINIFRED MASIKO: Since we had gone over this and pronounced ourselves on this issue, is it necessary to revisit something which we think is catered for, unless we do re-committal?

THE CHAIRMAN: This 6(9) provides as follows, “Where a member of local council court or executive committee of a local government council has reason to believe that there is an act of domestic violence within his or her jurisdiction and a complaint has not been lodged by any person, the member shall notify the probation or social welfare officer requesting him or her to make inquiries and take further action.” Which other formulation do you want to make here?

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, I think it is clear. The executive member comes in when no other person has reported. I think that takes care of the concerns of the members.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us proceed. I put the question to the first schedule.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The First Schedule, agreed to.

The Second Schedule, agreed to.

The Third Schedule, agreed to.

The Title

MS NALULE: Mr Chairman, I am just proposing that the first schedule and the other schedules be consequentially amended as we provided in the main body. From one when we reached the matter of the name of the victim - that amendment we made to provide for the type of disability. That is what I wanted to request for.

MR RUHINDI: Her proposal is okay. In the event that there are any adjustments to be made consequentially and that normally happens because that is the job of the clerk, those consequential amendments will be made accordingly.

THE CHAIRMAN: So this will be addressed by a consequential amendment. I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)
The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Domestic Violence Bill, 2009” and passed it with some amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE DOMESTIC VIOLENCE BILL, 2009

6.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Domestic Violence Bill, 2009” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ACT, 2009”

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, the Bill is passed. I must say that I commend especially the lady members of Parliament. They have marketed this Bill very well and there is no back tracking. Thank you very much.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, now that this Bill has been passed, I wish to plead that the government carries out sensitisation so that the population gets to understand the issues that this Bill is addressing. This is because there are so many people who are asking questions, which are contained in this Bill, which is now going to be an Act. It is very important that the government takes it as a priority to sensitise the population so that we are all committed to implementing every sentence in this Bill. Thank you.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before I resume my seat, I would like to thank you and members for the tremendous interest expressed and showed while we were considering this Bill. I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, particularly and the Deputy Speaker for the particular interest you showed in this Bill and other Bills relating to domestic relations. 

As we promised earlier, we shall fast track Bills, particularly those relating to domestic relations. This, I think, has taken record time in our committee and we want to promise that we shall continue to give these Bills the support they deserve. We thank everybody: the civic society, Uganda Joint Christian Council and other stakeholders that have helped and supported us in having this Bill done. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. With this we have come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. to continue with the business as listed.

(The House rose at 7.02 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 12 November 2009 at 2.00 p.m.) 


