Thursday, 18 November 2010 

Parliament met at 11.36 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you. I regret that we could not start on time as planned yesterday; we were supposed to have started at 10.00 a.m. This is because there was an emergency Cabinet meeting which interrupted our programme. But I think we can now start. We intend to sit up to maybe half past one, and then you go for lunch, and we resume at 3.00 p.m. It is my wish that this report should be completed this week.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING (CHOGM)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister of Foreign Affairs.

11.37
THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Sam Kutesa): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I welcome the opportunity to address this august House on the PAC Report. When PAC called ministers to appear before it, I was the first minister to appear before them because I believed that it was an opportunity for me to put the record straight. It is in the same spirit that I address you today. 

First of all, I congratulate the Government of Uganda for having hosted CHOGM, which was an important and prestigious event. As honourable members know, CHOGM is held once every two years and more often than not, hosting it rotates in its 53 member countries. Having hosted CHOGM in November 2007, Uganda may not be able to host it again for another 106 years. (Laughter)

I am immensely proud as Minister of Foreign Affairs to have successfully lobbied Commonwealth countries to accept Uganda’s bid to host CHOGM. Of course, I thank His Excellency the President, Cabinet colleagues, Members of Parliament, the private sector, the media and all those, who in different ways supported and organised this event. 

CHOGM was a resounding success and enhanced Uganda’s standing in the community of nations. Locally, the country benefited economically; infrastructure was improved; the tourism sector has been greatly boosted; hotel accommodation has grown by 70 percent; employment and new businesses grew and the economy that year grew by 9.4 percent partly due to the hosting of CHOGM.

Like all big events of this nature, I know that everything was not perfect. If we are to do such a big event again, having benefited from the experience, we would do many things differently. Indeed, we have since hosted OIC, the AU Summit, the tripartite COMESA, SADC, and the East African Community Summit, and other functions much better. This is because infrastructure that was created during CHOGM was in place. Where we members of the Cabinet committee may have erred or did not meet the expectations of Ugandans or our guests; we will certainly do better in future.

There could have been errors of commission or omission, given the magnitude of the work that needed to be done within the limited time and resources. Sometimes money was not released in time and sometimes it was insufficient. I am not apportioning blame or even trying to put up a defence for anything that could have been done without following the laid down procedures. I am just saying that in analysing any errors, there are facts that should be taken into consideration.

Having said that, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I wish to thank PAC and the Auditor-General for having pointed out wrongdoings during the execution of activities prior to and during CHOGM. I want to be on record that personally, I do not condon misappropriation of public funds or misuse thereof for personal gain. Every action of corruption denies the government resources to deliver on its commitments to its citizens.

In the fight against corruption, it is important to tell the truth and to be factual. I, like my other Cabinet colleagues and other officials said to be implicated in wrongdoing, appeared before PAC. The report of PAC as tabled, missed out on key information which we furnished PAC with. Therefore, distorting the facts could have contributed to reaching inaccurate conclusions and, therefore, unfair recommendations.

In my submission, I will correct some of these distortions, so that this august House as well as the general public are given an opportunity to make a more informed judgment.

While it is true that Uganda made its intentions to host CHOGM in 2003 in Abuja, the decision was not finally reached until November 2005 in Malta. At the Malta CHOGM, I had to personally appear before the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group (CMAG) to defend Uganda’s bid against a hostile offer by Canada to host CHOGM 2007.  If it was not for the strong support we received from Tanzania, which chaired CMAG, and Pakistan, things could have turned out differently. This delayed decision led to starting late in the preparations for CHOGM 2007 in Kampala.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I would now like to turn to areas where my name appears in the PAC Report. Page 22 of the report in the section entitled, “CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS,” bullet No.5; it says, “The Minister of Foreign Affairs, Hon. Sam Kutesa and the Minister of Works and Transport, bent procurement procedures to favour BMW. The committee holds them liable for their actions and they should be dealt with according to the laws.” A similar recommendation is repeated on page 109, bullet 4 of the report.

My response to this recommendation is that I did not bend procurement procedures to favour BMW or any other company; neither did I get involved in the procurement. When a policy decision was made at the highest level in Government to the effect that the Government of Uganda would not purchase a fleet of cars, but would lease them for a period of one month and not four days as being mentioned in the report. 

I want to make sure that people understand that the leasing was a complete month and not four days as it appears in the report. The cars had to arrive a month before and be here for that function that took place in the four days. But it has been portrayed as if the leasing was for four days only. I communicated that policy decision to three companies which had shown interest in the supply of CHOGM vehicles.

This was simply to tell them that the Government of Uganda was not going for outright purchase of cars, as they had proposed, and to inquire from them if they would be interested in the leasing option. One company replied and I reported that to the Cabinet Committee. 

The committee directed that I send the report to the Ministry of Works and Transport. That is all I did in this regard. The question, therefore, is, does this amount to interfering with the procurement processes as it is alleged in the report? In my view the answer is no and I submit. 

Secondly, on page 107, there is a section called conflict of interest. In that section, the committee states that they decided to ask CID to establish the ownership of EuroCar and Motorcare. PAC says that they established that EuroCar Ltd had been incorporated on 29 April 2005 and that my family company SECI Company Ltd owned 20 percent of its shares. PAC also established that SECI Ltd relinquished its shareholdings on 19 August 2005. 

In the first instance, PAC may not have asked CID to verify the shareholding of EuroCar. The Auditor General himself realised this query in his initial report. He was informed that my family company had withdrawn from EuroCar long before Malta CHOGM made a decision to host CHOGM and two years before the decision to lease the cars was made. In fact, I must have been a magician to know that at one stage, they will be leasing cars. There was no such a thing. 

Therefore, even the Auditor General, in his final report to Parliament had dropped this query because he was satisfied that there was no conflict of interest both in fact and in law. Fortunately, PAC makes no recommendation on this matter and I pray that it be expunged from this report as it was in the Auditor General’s report. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I have read this PAC report many times. I am at a loss as to why, when one has appeared before PAC and explained one’s position, PAC’s recommendations are at best unfair and at worst incomprehensible. I invite the House to read this report as I have done. I am sure that if you do so, you will reach the same conclusion as I have done. 

On page 108 of their report, there is a section entitled recommendations, and in bullet three of page 109, PAC makes the following recommendations. “The procurement was fraudulent and marred with many irregularities. The Minister of Foreign Affairs, Sam Kutesa and John Nasasira the one for Works and Transport, bent procurement procedures to favour BMW”. 

It is possible that there may have been irregularities in the procurement process, but where is the fraud, for any self-respecting committee to say that the procedure was fraudulent? Fraud, as you may know is a criminal offence. In the entire PAC report, there is no iota of evidence to support such a statement. I, therefore, Mr Speaker, submit that that recommendation where they state that the procedure was fraudulent be expunged from the report, because there is no evidence whatsoever to support it.

Thirdly, this is the third area in which my name appears in this report. On page 54 of the PAC report, under the heading, “Sponsorship”, there are a number of allegations which are based on a mix-up of facts. There were three forums that met prior to CHOGM summit. These were the business forum, the people’s forum and the youth forum; except for the US$ 100,000 which Government contributed to the business forum, the financing of that forum was purely by the business community. There are other forums that were financed by Government. 

The government through the Ministry of Information and the Prime Minister’s Office contracted M/S Saatchi and Saatchi to carry out advertising for CHOGM and paid them. PAC report has acknowledged this in its report on pages 26 and 28. 

The Cabinet committee decided that the private sector be approached to see if they could also participate in popularising CHOGM. We, therefore, set up a corporate sponsorship committee, which I chaired. At its first meeting, the sub-committee was set up and was chaired by hon. Musumba to explore the best way to approach the private sector. 

At the second meeting of the sponsorship committee, the Musumba sub-committee, on 29th May, reported and recommended M/S Saatchi and Saatchi to carry out the work as they were already doing it on behalf of Government. The meeting also decided that the chairman and myself should write to M/S Saatchi and Saatchi giving them the mandate to approach the private sector. I did this, and the letter is annexed to the report of PAC as annex 27. I have minutes of that sponsorship committee directing me to write this letter.

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, is this date correct – 29th May 2008?

MR KUTESA: No, sorry; it is 29 May 2007 not 2008. Mr Speaker, I have attached the minutes. But I would like to read them so that everyone is clear on how I acted. These are the minutes of the second meeting of the Corporate Sponsorship Committee held on 29 May 2007 in Mweya Lodge Foreign Affairs Building. “Present: Hon. Sam Kutesa as Chairman; hon. Oryem; hon. Musumba; Hilda Musubira; Ambassador James Mugume; Mr C.R. Nsubuga, Director Hardware Deals; Mr M.M Kiwanuka, Chairman Oscar Industries; Ms Ann Babinaga, British Council; Ms Sylvia Awori, African Woman Publisher; Brian Rwehabura, M/S Saatchi and Saatchi; Moses Zikusoka, M/S Saatchi and Saatchi; Onek, Kiwanuka and Kyasiimire from CHOGM Secretariat. 

If you turn to page 2, the communication from the chair; he welcomed members to the meeting and took them through the previous minutes. He reminded the meetings of the sub-committee that was constituted to work out details of the sponsorship campaign under the chairmanship of hon. Musumba, and this meeting was to consider their report. He requested hon. Musumba to report to the committee their findings. (Presentation of the report of the sub-committee by hon. Musumba) 

The sub-committee was mandated to do the following: 

i)	Find the best method, approaches, sponsorship; identify who is interested in sponsoring CHOGM. What are their expectations and the expectations of the sponsorship committee? 

ii)	Compile information on potential sponsors already approached by the various CHOGM forums, for example, CBF, CYF and CPF.

iii)	The sub-committee identified two approaches: Advertising through the print media and website, but carried out by M/S Saatchi and Saatchi. Use of individuals who could approach potential sponsors on behalf of Government, i.e. M/S Saatchi and Saatchi and other individuals to be identified. 

If you go to page 3, on minute 7, recommendations:

1.	The sub-committee recommended that the appointment of M/S Saatchi and Saatchi – that is the Musumba sub-committee - by the sub-committee as the lead agency to carry out the sponsorship campaign, since it is one of their mandate and because of their strategic conditions.

2.	That an account be opened for private sponsorship with signatories representing Government and the private sector to create transparency. 

3.	He informed the committee that the sub-committee had invited M/S Saatchi and Saatchi to be part of the meeting and that they were impressed by their presentation on corporate sponsorship. 

But if you can look at the said minutes, down the line: “The meeting agreed that Saatchi & Saatchi should be given the mandate as the lead agency and that an official letter should be written to them by the chairman of the committee,” meaning me; so, the committee directed me to write to them.

“They will be given 10 percent commission of what will have been raised. They were also asked to report their progress after two weeks.” I want to point out that when I wrote this letter, I was not procuring; I was just transmitting the decision of the committee.

I have gone to great lengths to explain this matter for two main reasons: 

i) 	To inform this august House that by writing to Saatchi & Saatchi, I did not procure their services. Their services were procured by the sponsorship committee and I only communicated the decision as the minutes testify.

ii) The private corporate sponsorship can in no way be regarded as public funds. PAC’s mandate is to examine public funds that have been appropriated by Parliament and how they have been spent. These were private companies willing to advertise and were raising money on their own. It is, therefore, not under the mandate of the Auditor General or PAC. This does not mean that if there was impropriety in the use of funds collected from private people, it should not be accounted for. But that is a matter for the sponsors and Saatchi & Saatchi not PAC or this Parliament. This is a very important point to make a distinction.

If I take money from you, Mr Speaker, on a private matter and -(Interjection)-  then I do not pay you or I use it for a purpose we had not agreed; the Auditor-General does not come to audit me and you -(Interjections)-  it is you who can take me to court for not paying you. So, PAC had no mandate at all, neither did the Auditor-General raise it.

Mr Speaker, these are the three areas where PAC has mentioned my name in the whole report. These are the only three areas. I did not, while organising CHOGM, do anything for my personal benefit. As we struggle to make Uganda a better country, we should do so without maligning each other. We should treat each other with respect and not distort facts to make other people look really bad. Mr Speaker, I thank you. Those are the areas where I am mentioned and I hope the House understands my response. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Next.

11.58
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko):  Rt hon. Speaker, we were supposed to have hon. Nasasira next on the list because all the others who are mentioned in the report have been able to make submissions. Hon. Nasasira had to call on a doctor this morning. He says he will be in position to report to the House later in the day. I beg to report.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker that means this is the end of submission of the ministers. I think it is now good for us to start making a response and it will be very good to start with hon. Kutesa who has said we had no mandate on some issues and we misinformed the public on the issues. If it is allowed, we can proceed with hon. Kutesa who is around.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, I reported on the fact that hon. Nasasira is not here this morning and he would like to be given an opportunity to make a submission later. So, your guidance on the matter would come in handy.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you Mr Speaker. I can see the frontbench putting you in a rather difficult situation. Because a position was made to let ministers present and in the communication of the Speaker, just a while ago, you had indicated full preparedness to finish the submissions and maybe if at 3.00 p.m. we come back, that would have meant that we shall be in full debate. Now, in view of the fact that it is the frontbench that has reneged on its promise to this House, would it be –

THE SPEAKER: No, when hon. Nasasira comes in the afternoon, he will make his statement. Now we can deal with the materials we have. When he comes, he will also make his statement if he has any, but we can now use the materials we have received. That is the material in the report and the material received from hon. Members and ministers who have made contributions on recommendations made against them. That will not prejudice hon. Nasasira’s response if he has any.

MR SSEKIKUBO: On procedure, I remember we said that we allow ministers to submit and at the end of the day, we go one by one. I think if it is still with your guidance, can we proceed in that way –

THE SPEAKER: Okay, no, there is nothing wrong. You know, for instance, he has now finished; hon. Amama finished; Omach for over-zealousness finished -(Laughter)-  Byabagambi did. I think maybe we can start dealing with each of these cases without prejudice to Nasasira’s response honourable.

12.02
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Minister of Foreign Affairs, first of all, for accepting that there were errors and they will do better in future. That is my starting point. Having said that, I think it would be logical to go through the sequence of all these items to see what really took place. 

I will start with the issue of vehicles. You recall yesterday –(Interruption)-

MR NYOMBI: I think yesterday, Mr Speaker, you ruled that the report belongs to Parliament. It would appear like the chairman is taking it personal. I think he should allow us to debate the report. If we are handling minister by minister, we are ready to do that; but for him to come back having carried out these investigations -(Interjections)- no, even if he is the chairman, he had all the time -(Interjections)- he had all the time. 

Yesterday, the Speaker ruled that this is not personal; the report belongs to Parliament and, therefore, Mr Speaker, I think he should allow us to debate if we are handling minister by minister. We could go ahead and do that.  So, Mr Speaker, is he really in order to –

THE SPEAKER: But I have said this many, many, times. Yes, the report was processed by PAC. PAC finished its work and presented the report to the House for consideration and adoption. I have said many times that members of PAC are not in the dock. They are not being tried. We are only considering the report, which they made and tabled here. This I have said. There is no blame on individuals on that PAC committee; we are looking at the material. We are scanning the report; we are doing an X-ray of the report to be able to make our own conclusions. We could use anaesthesia in dealing with itm but we are not killing it. So, let whoever has a comment, including Members – but in their individual capacity - do so. 

MRS MUGYENYI: Mr Speaker, you need to guide us considering the usual procedures that we normally follow in this House. First of all, when a report by a committee is presented, the members of that committee do not participate in the debatem but the chair of the committee responds at the end. So, I thought this was now our opportunity as Members of the House who were not members of PAC, to respond to this report; it is an opportunity for us to debate and then the chair of the committee will respond at the end. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: This is what I said yesterday. I would prefer, say where a person moves a motion and having moved a motion, you listen and at the end of the day you come up to correct whatever misunderstanding that might have been caused. I would come in at the end after having listened. Otherwise, if you come in before others have contributed, it will mean that you will always be standing up to comment. That is not good. You would rather listen to all of them; jot down the points which you think you should comment on and you can come in and comment. That was my advice. 

But I insist that members of the committee should not think they are on trial. You are not on trial; you have finished your work and we are now considering the report. They are not attacking you, as individuals, but they are attacking the contents of the report, justly or unjustly. 

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, we have taken some time trying to find our level and how we are going to proceed on this and we had understood very well earlier that other than as proposed by the committee that because the case is being built afresh by those who were heard in the committee, so, it was like some form of mini-hearing was taking place. 

Therefore, if those who were already heard by the committee are being heard afresh here, it is only right and proper that the committee makes a few clarifications, asks a few questions, and the committee had asked that we deal with each person as they finish their presentation, and you ruled wisely that let all of them present and finish and then the committee comes and responds to them. But the only way of disposing them would be to deal with each one at a time. So, this is now the time for the committee to respond and ask a few questions, and deal with the new evidence. 

Mr Speaker, there is new evidence that has been introduced by the honourable minister. Some documents that have been presented were not presented before the committee. There is no way this House can proceed to debate that unless the committee guides you, as Members of the House, that yes, this took place; this is a new introduction; this one, we never heard; this one is not telling us what he told the committee. 

We thought, as we had understood, that this is the time and space for the committee now to make comments on each one of them. And if you so wish, we finish one minister; we discharge that one and move to the next. So, really, Mr Speaker, my big problem now is that we are changing the way we had agreed to proceed. I think we need to be guided, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Even if we are going to deal with one at a time, I think other Members of the House are entitled to make their comments. And then depending on the comments that they have made, at the end of the day, you would come in to clear the misunderstanding that has developed, rather than you starting now. Because you can start now and later a Member who is not affected by the recommendation, starts making a contribution and then you will be forced again to come up. This is my fear.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker, but as you might have realised, Members have been with this report for quite a while and I agree with you, this is a report of Parliament; but there between, once new information has been adduced, it is proper for the chairperson of the committee for that matter to shade light on it so that we, as the entire House, can debate from a balanced and informed point of view rather than debating in a one-sided manner, then at the end of the day the chairman rises to correct the impression created and then we open up debate again. I do seek your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, can we start with Omach? What do you say about Omach’s response?

MR SSEKIKUBO: But look here -

THE SPEAKER: Yes, can we start with Omach?

MR SSEKIKUBO: But the rules, Mr Speaker, require that the person is in the House for him to be given a hearing. 

THE SPEAKER: You are insisting that the report is yours. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: If Omach is not here then that is another matter.

THE SPEAKER: The report was accepted by the House and it is being considered by the House. Do not fight tooth and nail as if the report is still yours. The report belongs to the House and Members are entitled to make their contribution to support or not support the recommendations. But the report is no longer yours. It now belongs to us.

MR BIREKERAAWO: Mr Speaker, the guidance we are seeking from you is that new evidence has been added –

THE SPEAKER: No, you see, even the evidence which you call new could have been raised by a person who is not implicated in the report because one would come and say, I have read this report and I have seen the recommendations, but I wonder whether they considered this merit. Anybody who is not affected could say so; so what would happen? Anybody when contributing to the report could say, they have made this recommendation, but in the record, I do not see this and I think it was essential to have looked at this and the other. Would that be introducing a new case? He would be criticising the approach you took.

MR BIREKERAAWO: Mr Speaker, the guidance we are seeking from you – for example, hon. Sam Kutesa has just given his defence and the onus is on us members of the committee to say, according to our report, what he has given is right or not nearer to what he said in our committee. But if you just say that we, the PAC members, are not bound to look at fresh evidence -

THE SPEAKER: In the first place you are not in the dock.

MR BIREKERAAWO: Yeah, we are not in the dock.

MRS MUGYENYI: Mr Speaker, we should go according to the rules. If we go according to what is on the Table, we will not move. We will just keep moving around. I think the best thing to do, as you have guided, is to follow the rules. What is happening now is not different from what normally happens. 

Normally a committee chair presents a report, say on a sector that a minister is supposed to respond to and the same procedures are followed. So, why are we bending the rules now? There is nothing different. This is a report of the committee; if there are issues that the committee members are not satisfied with, they should go back to the committee. Otherwise, we should amend the rules. If they do not want to go back to the committee then let the members debate the report as usual and then the chair of the committee will come back and clarify everything that he thinks has gone wrong. That is the procedure, Mr Speaker. I thank you.

12.15
MR TOM KAZIBWE (NRM, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When the committee presented a report where the ministers were heard in the committee, Mr Speaker, you allowed ministers to offer a second defence because they said that some facts were distorted in the report. We feel that while presenting, they have also distorted some facts. Now, to allow members to debate, they will not be debating with a balanced mind. 

We also want to point out where they have distorted facts and then we rest our case and then Members can debate with a balanced mind. To allow one party to present and to another one you say, “Do not present” will be like tying our hands and allowing another boxer to box. 

12.15
MR PETER NYOMBI (Independent, Buruli County, Nakasongola): Mr Speaker, I remember when I was coming to Parliament, one of the things I had to produce was evidence of my educational background. This Parliament has educated people. If there was new evidence that was produced, we have the capacity to evaluate that evidence and then discuss it. Otherwise, if they respond and they come up with new matter, it will mean that the ministers will also have to come back and respond. We have the necessary brains and the necessary capacity to respond even if there was new evidence. 

12.17
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Now that you have told us to debate, I am going to start with hon. Omach. Hon. Omach was here and -(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker -(Interjections)– do not be overzealous. (Laughter) We are aware of why you are overzealous. (Interjections)  He is a good man. Mr Speaker, hon. Sam Kutesa, a good friend, has made his presentation. The facts are still fresh and we only want to make some corrections on this and we proceed. Let us make the first corrections on hon. Sam Kutesa and then for the rest, we can see because we have information. We want to tell you how the process went. 

When did we know about CHOGM? If you remember yesterday, hon. Byabagambi in his opening statement said, “After Uganda was notified as the venue to host CHOGM 2007, a Cabinet meeting of 16 June 2004 approved the organisational framework.” This is 2004. That is why he should read this. He is saying Malta; but a former Cabinet minister has said they knew about it and formed the organisational structure in June 2004. We must correct such distortions.

THE SPEAKER: I am asking you, honourable, do you agree that your report is watertight? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, that is not what we are saying - 

THE SPEAKER: Do you agree that as far as you are concerned, you did your work to your satisfaction?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I did it. We did it. What we are trying to do here is that since they are saying that it is not the right thing, we want to put it in perspective so that the people who are going to debate - the Members, the public - know where the gap is. That is - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, don’t you think that Members are capable of comparing what has been said and what is in the report and reaching a conclusion? Don’t you think they have the capacity? You are the affected people; don’t you think Members have the capacity to compare what is in the report and what has been given and be able to make a conclusion?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Mr Speaker. All Members of Parliament have the capacity. However, we wanted to tell you that if hon. Sam Kutesa was making the presentation, for example, he would have started by asking, “When did we want to procure cars and what happened?” You should have detailed everything. 

You will discover in the minutes we presented here, and even in the attachments, that hon. Kutesa has not referred to them and that is why we are saying, maybe we could refer hon. Kutesa to the page and maybe correct the impression before we proceed. That is what we are trying to do.

THE SPEAKER: Don’t you think Members are capable of scrutinising your records and comparing them with what has been given and make a conclusion? Don’t you think they are capable?

12.20
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Mr Speaker, I think if that was the case, Members of Parliament would have had no need for committees. That is why there are specific committees to handle the various matters so that they can pick out the nitty-gritty and put us in perspective. For that matter, I would seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker.

The ball is rolling. We have attentively, with your guidance by the way, Mr Speaker, patiently waited for this opportunity. Now, when it arises, there are some issues that were maybe misconceived. Now that there is new information available to all of us, let the committee tie it up with the report and after it finishes -(Interruptions)- Mr Speaker, you roll the ball for us to have a balanced picture. It would not do any harm, and I do really request my colleagues because some of them have been chairing committees and they know the usefulness and the vital role the committee plays in such reports. 

This is not an ordinary matter. It is in a sense, hon. Mary Mugyenyi should know, that a report was compiled, but on its presentation, ministers have come up to present their side of the story. I do not know whether it would bother honourable members to realise that the report is not even about ministers only, but there are some other people who are mentioned in the report. Fortunately, their names and their appearances have not been made here. Now, would you say that we absolve the ministers, but the rest of the people who are mentioned in the report and have had no opportunity to appear here are condemned?

For that matter, hon. Members, let us all get on board. Let us allow it in a free and fair manner and then we proceed. This is not entirely for the ministers by the way, although they are attempting to hijack the report and to jump to their defences; the report is wide in spectrum. Can they allow us to proceed in the normal way and allow the chairman to make a response to their comments? We can then proceed and give due justice to all the members mentioned and the public officers who are the rightful citizens of this country, including but not limited to the ministers? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KAZIBWE: In your wisdom, Sir, you have allowed one party to give additional information. We would like also to give chance to the committee to give additional information on the additional information given so that Members - 

THE SPEAKER: You see, this is what I asked some days ago. I said to the members of the committee that, “in view of what has been stated in the House here, is it your view that you want to adjust your report?” 

HON. MEMBERS: No!

THE SPEAKER: If you do not want to adjust, let us proceed with the record we have. Please, let us debate the report and conclude it. However, if you think you want to adjust the report, say so and I give you time to go and write an additional report - a supplementary. What you presented was not an interim report; it was a final report. 

MAJ. (RTD) GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Mr Speaker, you are the chief custodian of our rules and I have no doubt in my mind that you know all the rules. You know all of them. You have given latitude of democracy for all sides to discuss new evidence - what we should do, what we should not do, the new evidence notwithstanding, cannot be more than 60 percent of what originally appeared in the report.

My view is that you do rule in your capacity as Speaker, which way to go. As hon. Peter Nyombi said, this House has the capacity to debate in light of the new evidence that has been tabled by the affected ministers. In wrapping up, the chairperson of PAC will then give their take and a decision will be made.

THE SPEAKER: But this is what I have been saying. The report is ours; let us debate it and come to our own conclusion. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: As a committee, we are not going for a retreat. We have the capacity to deal with each of these persons present according to their responses. We are saying that we can proceed if you allowed us. Why do you want us to do it in bulk? We should do it one by one.

THE SPEAKER: Let us start with hon. Omach and then we shall move from him to hon. Musumba, but do not take this personal.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We respect you and we believe the best way to move forward is to deal with each case. What is your interest to say that we should go omnibus? 

THE SPEAKER: Be sober; it is still morning.

12.28
MAJ. GEN. JIM MUHWEZI (NRM, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): My comment is about the expectations of the people of Uganda regarding a matter which is very important to them. It is important that justice is given, especially to the honourable Members of Parliament. I know how much it hurts for injustice to be done to a person, especially accused of misappropriaing public funds, whether it is in hundreds of shillings or billions.

The committee of Parliament made a report and made recommendations. Honourable ministers requested that they should be given an opportunity to respond and they responded. The issues are well known, the recommendations are well known. I would like this Parliament to show justice so that the matter is settled once and for all, since the ministers have been lucky to explain their case in Parliament, which is not always the rule. I think whoever is arguing should not lose sight of the fact that the people out there would like to see justice being done.

MR DAVID BAHATI: I am rising following your ruling that we can move one by one. I want to suggest that as much as the ministers have presented, the report deals with sector by sector and it is much bigger and tackles issues bigger than the ministers themselves. I want to propose that we move sector by sector and then we proceed because we are wasting a lot of time in procedural matters, yet the public is expecting us to take action on this report.

MR KAZIBWE: We heard ministers and civil servants in our committee. You have given a second chance to ministers to present their defence. What shall we do to other civil servants mentioned in the report, who cannot present their defence here?

THE SPEAKER: What do you want us to do?

MR KAZIBWE: I am asking for your guidance as to whether we should allow them to come here and give their defence. 

THE SPEAKER: I advise you to read the rules. Let us not be charged. You can go out and shout, but when you are in the House you must behave, hon. Nandala. 

MR ROBERT KASULE SSEBUNYA: We should start with the ministers who are here. The other side is ready to cross-examine. Let us start the debate with the people who have spared time to be here.

12.33
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): I think we are running one risk; this Auditor-General’s report and the Public Accounts Committee report are really not a charge sheet of our colleagues. The way we are proceeding is like this report is about our colleagues who are here. It is certainly wider than these individuals who are here. We are losing out on the issues themselves; the issues originally raised in the Auditor-General’s report. We are concentrating on our colleagues here. 

The point, which I think hon. Kazibwe is raising, will cause us problems. For some who were mentioned and they do not have the opportunity to be here, they will be looking at us as if we are doing an injustice to them. We are more concerned about our friends; some want to hang them while some want to get the noose from them. This is the challenge that we have as a House, honourable members. 

It takes us back to the point which hon. Ben Wacha raised last time, which I have been grappling with in my mind. Where are we headed to with this sort of debate? We do not seem to be clear as to where we are headed. I thought we should be looking at the policy matters because I am looking at an instance where we shall say, “Hon. X is guilty of causing financial loss.” Aren’t we tying the hands of any other organ outside, if it comes up with a contrary outcome? We need to handle this in a very calm way or as you say, in a sober way such that we do not appear to be meting out injustice to anybody, whether in this House or outside.

We also need our own integrity as a House because the whole country and world are looking at us. The Auditor-General’s report has caused a lot of anxiety amongst the population. If we do not move in such a way that we come to a logical conclusion, we shall be doing a disservice to the population.

That brings me to the question I asked the Prime Minister as Leader of Government Business; if you answered that question, maybe we would have found a way forward - was there anything wrong with CHOGM? If it was there according to Government, what has it done? Have you taken any steps such that we know what you have done on this and that; it would narrow our debate. Otherwise, the way we are going on, it looks like an academic debate, which is taking us nowhere. We are offering no solution to the problem and instead we are losing the point.

I would pray that maybe we need some consultations between the committee leadership, – now that the Prime Minister has been leading the other side – and maybe your office so we are guided on how to proceed. Otherwise, I think we are not proceeding properly. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: First of all, there was a ridiculous question as to whether we are going to allow public officers who are named in the report to come into the House. I think that is not a question that should have been asked. Every sector of Government has a minister who is answerable for what is happening in that ministry. Therefore, if that person cannot come to the House, the respective minister concerned, if he has any answer, is the one to do it. So, do not ask me whether the civil servant will come and address the House. It is such a rudimentary thing that ought not to have been raised on the Floor. 

When hon. Katuntu says he did not give the way forward, we have to consider because what this rule says: “When the committee has finished its assignment, it tables it...” One member moved that the report be adopted and we are now trying to adopt it, but only after a thorough debate. 

I said if members of the committee want to make a response, it is better they listen to the submissions made by other Members and then they can come in at the end. Apparently, they do not want that. They want to speak immediately without listening to other Members. I do not think it is necessary; they can wait before coming in. That is how we do things.

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much. I think hon. Katuntu is asking a very important question; namely, what we should be doing with this report. However, I think the question can be answered at the beginning of the next Parliament. This is because within our procedures, we agreed that with any accountability report of a committee, a committee brings it to the House with recommendations and then we look at them and adopt. The adopted recommendations are then looked at by the Auditor-General who will write, through treasury memoranda, back to the House within three months. This is stated in the National Audit Act. Parliament made recommendations; what has Government done with them? So, the Auditor-General will go back and look at the treasury memoranda and then make some suggestions to the House. 

Mr Speaker, I think we can proceed with looking at the recommendations. We can move to adopt either the whole report or sector by sector, draw up recommendations, adjust them and we move on. We have done this before and we cannot change it just two months to the end of the Parliament. Thank you.

MR JOHN ODIT: Mr Speaker, I find that we are in a very ridiculous position because, as you said, the ministers should be addressing issues that would have arisen from the debate. In one way or another, they would also represent their accounting officers. Unfortunately, we changed the way of approaching this report and the ministers have decided to explain their own positions. In one way or another, it will be clear that none of them will be willing to stand in for their accounting officers. So, I do not know how we are going to proceed and whether or not after debating this report, the affected ministers and their accounting officers will be handled. 

That is exactly why I feel that we should have first debated the report and then the ministers take notes. If they or their accounting officers are implicated, they will handle those parts that affect their sectors. I do not know if they will carry their accounting officers along with them when we take the final position.

THE SPEAKER: Let me tell you, hon. Odit; in standing to debate the report, you can defend yourself by saying, “This is not justified because of this and that.” So, it is nothing strange that the ministers made their contributions by defending themselves. After the ministers have defended themselves, other Members are free to make contributions on what has been presented both by the committee and the ministers.

MR STEPHEN KAGWERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not see any reason why we cannot debate because we have the report as a basis; the ministers have responded and many of the accounting officers wrote. 

My view is that for those that are here, if we are to move sector by sector, we debate sector by sector basing on the report and the responses of both the accounting officers and the ministers present and then we make conclusions. I do not see what is difficult. We have the information and the moment we have the information, we can go on to debate. If there is anything further that we need to know, the committee is here with us in Parliament, the ministers concerned are here; we can move on and debate. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me give you a specific example. Yesterday we listened to the statement from the Minister in charge of Security. To summarise it all, he was saying, “Look here, my ministry and I were not responsible. If there was anything wrong, it was the Ministry of ICT and the permanent secretary, who was the contract manager.” 

What do we have to do now? Here is one minister saying, “Actually, you look for your faults.” He was also quite detailed as to how the contract was managed, but then he said that the problem, if it is there, is the ministry or officer responsible. So, even if you are looking at ministries, we shall have a problem of accusations within the ministries - Ministry of Security accusing Ministry of ICT. 

There isn’t what you would really call a harmonised response from the national task force of CHOGM to say this is what really happened. That is why I think we missed that one out.  We should have had a response, first of all from the CHOGM organisers, to say, “Look here, this is what exactly happened. On this we did not have any problem and so on.” Instead, we have just heard these divided responses and the people accused are just coming here, not to explain what happened, but to defend themselves because they are the ones in the dock. 

We have not had an explanation from Government that this is what happened during CHOGM; we do not have it. Instead, what we are having are people trying to defend themselves. So, really -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, to be fair to these, it is the report itself which singled out Ssekandi, Katuntu and so on, and made recommendations on persons rather than on organisations. This is what is in the report. The report singled out and made recommendations on individuals. That is why there was that reaction. But how many times are we really going to talk about this? 

12.48
MR ALBERT OKELLO ODUMAN (FDC, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Mr Speaker, witnessing what is going on, I have a suggestion and that suggestion is premised on the following: One, this House is not a court and we are not about to sentence someone and pass a judgement; no. We are not about to do that because we are not a court. 

Mr Speaker, I am saying this because the direction in which we are moving indicates that there is a spirited defence so that one is not found guilty –(Interjection)- or is found guilty.  So, that is the premise I am coming from. It is like there is an accusation, an accused and then there is a prosecutor. This is not a court. 

Now, the other premise is that we are aware that Government is already carrying out investigations. We are aware that Government moved and the IGG is carrying out investigations. DPP is in action, CID is doing their work. The question from hon. Katuntu was to probe that out, from the way I understood him, from the Rt hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business - What is Government doing so far - as of now - about the report of the Auditor-General that was asked for and then the report of the committee? What has Government done so far? Is it doing anything? 

The answer – Rt Hon. Prime Minister you need to help us - in my view is, yes, you are doing something. The IGG is doing something, DPP is doing something and CID is doing something. Now, what is in this? In this report we have recommendations, we have findings and we have suggestions. The suggestions are to be forwarded to Government to look at –(Interjections)– yes, they are proposals to look at and they say, “Since we do not have as much machinery as you have as Government, this is what we found and from the findings, we recommend as follows...and the House should now help us and pass these suggestions to Government.”

Now, if we suggest that hon. Minister X should be held responsible for committing the following crimes, according to us the appointing authority and Government have the machinery to go and delve into that. In my view, they are not going to say, “Okay, PAC said this, therefore, you are dismissed.” No; they have the machinery and they are going to investigate.  

Mr Speaker, my suggestion now is, let us adopt these proposals in the committee report. (Interjections) The final outcome of this debate is supposed to be whether or not we adopt the report; but what is the report? The report is proposals and it is about suggestions. What is the problem with suggestions? The moment suggestions have been forwarded, the government is going to look at the suggestions and investigate. What are you fearing, hon. Members?  (Laughter)

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, PAC does work on behalf of this House. That report belongs to this House and it is this House to decide whether to adopt, amend or do anything to the report. Is hon. Oduman, the Shadow Minister of Finance, in order to start directing this House in the wrong direction, that we adopt because the committee did work? This is the work of this House and not that of the committee. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think you are clarifying to him that we are here to consider our report, adopt it and either adjust it or reject it. So, what is your proposal? Is it that we adopt the report? 

MR ODUMAN: Yes. My proposal, Mr Speaker, comes after witnessing the going around over this. We have done it in the past where a Public Accounts Committee report was tabled here for one financial year and we said, “Members, since this is really containing suggestions and proposals by the committee, let us forward it to Government to look at, consider, investigate and pass them.” (Laughter) 

So, the President is there. The only way - the shortcut to this, hon. Leader of Government Business, I wish you would agree with me, is to let us give you as Government this report to look at. They are suggestions; it is not about hanging anyone. It is saying that from the little evidence we have, it points to this direction. It is now you, to go and investigate before you take action. We respect Government. You are not going to say, “Okay, PAC has said this, therefore, deal with this one this way.” No. You have instruments like DPP, CID - Why do you fear to do that? So, Mr Speaker, my suggestion is a middle suggestion; it is a humble suggestion -(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, your recommendations are injurious to the honourable ministers. How can we adopt them, unless we hear their responses and then make amendments? We cannot just adopt injurious recommendations; we must listen to the ministers and I am happy you have listened to 90 percent of them. That is how we proceed and my view is that by now we should have done a lot if you made it possible for Members to make their comments and you also make your comments. 

It comes to the same - I mean, we have done justice to the debate. I am sure colleagues over there and colleagues on this side have some comments. By now, if they had made their comments, you would have the right of reply and by now, we would have ended a long time ago.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is consideration and adoption of the report of Public Accounts Committee on the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. Please proceed considering the report. Anyone who has a contribution could make it.

MR KASAIJA KAGWERA: Mr Speaker, as I had earlier on told this House, I do not see any reason we cannot debate this. We have the information with us so -

THE SPEAKER: If you have a contribution, make it.

12.58
MR JAMES BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I hope your ruling that we start with hon. Omach is still on as my contribution is going to be limited there.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, it is still on. 

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Omach came here basically on the monies which were decided by State House to give to this hotel; J&M Airport Road Hotel. Hon. Omach told us here that after getting the directive, he went in action to see that this thing is implemented. So, when the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs put in a request, the Ministry of Finance requested the Auditor-General to grant them a warrant of getting this money. 

Subsequently, the Auditor-General refused saying that he cannot offer this because he thought we were giving money to a private entity. The Ministry of Finance then asked for information from the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to give advice on what the Auditor-General had said and the green light was given by the Ministry of Justice that he should go ahead. On that advice, money was released and the contract was made. 

In my view, I do not see anything wrong with what hon. Omach did because whatever he did, he got advice from the Attorney-General. So, we should let hon. Omach go free as he has nothing to answer. He acted on the advice of the Attorney-General. Thank you very much.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, J&M was not the first company. There were shares we invested in Munyonyo first and those were about Shs 15 billion and the money was approved by Parliament plus the addition of Shs 13.9 billion, which is over Shs 30 billion.

If they could come to Parliament to buy shares for Munyonyo Resort, why did Hon. Omach decide on this one three days to CHOGM, and not come to Parliament and ask for the money; because basically, drawing money from the Consolidated Fund is supposed to be by approval of Parliament. It is by induction; it was not the first one. So, in this case, you can see that for the other one you come to Parliament; and for this one you use the Attorney-General’s Chambers. What was the motive of hon. Omach in not coming to Parliament if he is not overzealous in his act?

MR TOM KAZIBWE: Mr Speaker, the Finance Regulations, 2003 require that all monies in the Consolidated Fund must be appropriated by Parliament. This is what the Auditor-General pointed out. So, hon. Omach looked for another short-cut, thereby bypassing and ignoring Parliament. As Parliament, we should be very angry today for having been bypassed and for such a huge amount of money to be spent on a hotel three days to CHOGM. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On page two, point No.5, the minister states that a letter dated 26th October 2007 from His Excellency the President directed the release of US$ 1.3 million with immediate effect. I think this was meant to go towards J&M barely three days to CHOGM.

I know the President can direct, but it is upon the responsible officer or minister for this matter, to see how the presidential directive can be handled in a manner that does not break the law. For one to put the President’s letter as a caveat with the implication of heaping blame onto the President, must not be accepted by this House. I know there are many times when the President has been directing, but it is incumbent upon the person being directed or the officer to see how he handles that directive in a manner that does not break the law.

So, I find that the committee was a bit soft handed -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, it will be fair to you that when you look at this written response, you consider paragraphs six, seven and eight, because paragraph six says, “On November 12th, the hon. Attorney-General advised that Government could provide equity financing to a private company subject to the usual requirements other than the parliamentary requirement.” That is the principal legal officer.

Seven, “…following which, Dr Suruma on November 12th requested the Auditor-General for supplementary funding...”

Eight, the Auditor-General then gave his approval.

These are matters that you ought to consider when handling this matter. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I seek clarification and some guidance. If I told somebody or my son to go and kill and it is against the law, should he kill? We are giving circumstantial evidence. The same money was given out, but they came for parliamentary approval. I seek this clarification because under Article 8(a), which the Attorney-General claims, “Uganda shall be governed based on principles of national interest and common good enshrined in the national objectives and directive principles of state policy. 

ii) Parliament shall make relevant laws for purposes of giving full effect to clause (1) of this Article.” and that is the article he quoted to Minister Omach, to be applied, and as far as I know and have been in Parliament, I have never seen this law operationalised. So, should hon. Omach have killed against the law?

THE SPEAKER: No. hon. Members, the learned Attorney-General was here and even addressed this issue. It is not good to ask a lay person like hon. Omach about the intricacies of the law when the Attorney-General advised on how to proceed. He is the Principal Legal Advisor to Government and actually, the Attorney-General was here and took an hour to make his case. So, these are things that you did with the Attorney-General rather than a lay person like hon. Omach. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, the point I am belabouring to put across is that given the circumstances and the practicality of the whole matter - because it was him to originate the process – a directive was received from the President for them to originate a process and it was futile from the word go. 

THE SPEAKER: Was it out of order for a lay minister to seek legal advice from the Principal Legal Advisor of Government?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Yes, because the notion of collusion comes in when he says he willingly proceeds, and I seek your guidance on this, Mr Speaker. The minister is here, but the way in which you are attempting to answer on his behalf is really –(Interruptions)- you are labouring while he laughs and sits back and you are doing his job. 

I do not think this is the best way forward. This is why they are here; to give us what was at the back of their minds and I think it is really proper that the minister should not hide behind the Speaker. They are here; they should be able to comment on themselves. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sekikubo, you can make a convincing submission without quarrelling. 

MR KAZIBWE: Mr Speaker, you are right in guiding us that the Attorney-General quoted a non-existent law to allow hon. Omach go ahead and withdraw money from the Consolidated Fund. I totally agree with your guidance that the Attorney-General should carry the cross because he quoted a non-existing law. 

Secondly, if we take it to be correct that the Attorney-General gave proper advice, then there is no way the Executive will ever come back to Parliament to ask for money because we are setting a second window - just write to the Attorney-General; he quotes a wrong law and you go ahead and withdraw the money. We are abrogating our responsibility today, if we allow a second window, because this will be the precedent. It is only Parliament that appropriates money, but – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kazibwe, I vividly remember the Attorney-General’s responses. He even attached the Supreme Court judgement supporting his position. Who are we to oppose an interpretation by the Supreme Court? I think the blame, if any, should be on the Attorney-General who advised. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Furthermore, Mr Speaker, if Members disagree with the interpretation of the Attorney-General under Article 137 of the Constitution, they can go to the Constitutional Court. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I am once again perturbed. A few days ago, the Leader of Government Business came and washed his hands and said the honourable ministers being mentioned will come here and present their cases. I have suddenly noticed sublimation in a way that now that matters are hitting a deadlock, he then comes up and takes charge of these matters. Is the Leader of Government Business doing it as a whip to colleagues, or is this the government position? And this is why you shied away when a question was raised seeking clarification about what Government has so far done about this report. And now that Parliament is being forced to do the surgery, you come in. Mr Speaker, can you really guide this House so that we know how to proceed; whether it is taken over by Government or allow the ministers – (Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, when hon. Katuntu asked me what the position of Government was, I made it clear that a number of their submissions were ignored by the PAC. That was my submission. Thereafter, I did request that His Excellency the Vice-President and ministers should articulate these issues and already they have done so. So, that is how I am proceeding. Am I the type that shies away? Was I shying away when I interpreted the Constitution? Is the honourable Member of Parliament in order to suggest that I shied away?

THE SPEAKER: Maybe he was not around when you stated so. 

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Now that we are going submission by submission, we are on hon. Omach’s. In my view, hon. Omach has no wrong because there was a directive from the President and then he had to seek advice from the Attorney-General. He should not be held responsible for whatever came out, but then when we come to the Attorney-General, my argument will be different. Thank you. (Mr Sekikubo rose_)

THE SPEAKER: How many times are you going to make contributions? 

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, the recommendation of the committee is very clear on page 69 of the report. It says hon. Omach should be cautioned for his overzealousness on quickly releasing US$ 1.3 million to J&M, knowing very well that there were only three days to CHOGM. Mr Speaker, the issues of the Attorney-General – we are going to deal with under him – about how he cited the wrong Act – we shall deal with that because we have a substantive presentation. But for Hon. Omach - he is the chief of money. He was the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development at some point when his senior was not around. So, at the time of the release of the money, he was there. 

About the initiation of the idea of giving J&M Hotel money, we will deal with that under Ministry of Trade and Tourism. And about how the wrong law was used, will be dealt with under the Attorney-General’s response.

And I know Members need to know something about the agreement because whereas the President directed that you release US$ 1.3 million, in the agreement to award, US$ 1.5million was instead indicated. The directive of the President was for US$ 1.3million, but the agreement signed was for US$ 1.5million. And the minister who was there overseeing the signing and the release of that money was hon. Omach. Now, because the bigger project was being driven by others, the issues we attached to him were only in regard to overseeing the signing of that agreement, which provided for US$ 200,000 in extra and which up to day, has not been paid because that is not what the President directed.

Secondly, releasing that money when only three days had been left to CHOGM – as the overseer of money, how could he expect 200 hotel rooms to be completed with that money in just three days? And that is why we are saying that his things are limited to those. Let us caution him for that overzealousness by signing an agreement in excess of what he had been directed to do and for releasing money knowing very well it could not construct 200 hotel rooms in just three days –(Interruptions)

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, we have been reminded by hon. Okello Oduman of the committee’s recommendation, which he read. I would like to move that a question be put in regard to that recommendation. Otherwise, how are we going to get out of this?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, Hon. Members, there is a motion and I now put the question to it. I put the question that the question be put.
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to expunge the recommendation on hon. Omach. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAHATI: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to suggest that we move to the report’s portion on hon. Amama Mbabazi.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR BAHATI: That is another one because we are moving one by one.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance on the way we are proceeding. As I said earlier, and as Government knows very well, other investigative organs are already in action. But if we are going to continue the way we have started by exonerating and expunging parts of the report, how about later on if IGG, CID and DPP drag these people to court and they are found guilty –(Mr Banyenzaki rose_)

THE SPEAKER: No, please, let him develop his point. Please continue.

MR ODUMAN: I would like to be helped understand what will happen if court finds for example, hon. Kutesa guilty –(Interjections)– no, hon. Minister X is guilty?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I get what you are saying - what will happen to the activities of other agencies when we expunge some of the recommendations in this report? I would like to say that nothing will happen because we are not acquitting anybody, neither are we convicting anybody. So, no one will stop for example, the CID to carry out its independent investigations in matters that Parliament has handled. Parliament is not a court of law that when it acquits someone, no other court can try them. Nothing prejudicial will happen to the investigations by IGG and CID.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, in that case, it takes me back to where we started from. As I said, these are suggestions – those investigations have commenced based on the work of the Auditor General and the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament.

Now, of what consequence – 

THE SPEAKER: Make your motion or proposal formally.

MR ODUMAN: I had made it already, but I can restate it. My proposal – because if we go this way it means –

THE SPEAKER: Make the proposal. 

MR ODUMAN: My proposal is that we just pass these suggestions –(Interjections)– yes. The Speaker has given me the opportunity to restate my suggestions – if we proceed this way –(Interruptions)

MR BANYENZAKI: I would like to thank the honourable member for giving way. I would like to say that there is a precedent on a matter similar to this situation. When sometime back we had a motion on the Floor of this House relating to the court siege, only a few of us stood and condemned what had been done in court. Otherwise, Parliament said what had been done was right through the voting system of “the ayes have it.” But when that matter was taken to the Constitutional Court, it ruled that what had taken place in court was wrong.

Hon. Members, the information I want to give is to urge you to stand by what you think is right. If any matter of this nature is taken to those courts, they will be on our side; history will be on our side.

And what I would like to request is that let us vote by show of hands. This will help us to know who voted for what. This is because I would not like to be bundled into “the ayes have it” when I am not part of that. My suggestion is that we vote on these issues by show of hands. If necessary let us make it a division lobby –

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to quote the rule under which you are making that suggestion?

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, as the presiding officer to this House, you can guide me on that.

MR ODUMAN: Thank you, hon. Member, for the information. Mr Speaker, I am thinking with a heart for this House and for your position as the leader of this House - this is an oversight institution. In fact, we are the ones that should be strong on checking Government out. The suggestion is, if we end up –(Mrs Mugyenyi rose_)

THE SPEAKER: No, you see, there is a motion by the hon. Member that we adopt the recommendations of the report.

MR ODUMAN: My motion, which I have been trying to move is that we salvage the image of this institution because if we proceed the way -(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, as you have already ruled, I am on a motion and the motion is that we adopt the report as suggestions of this House for Government to consider for implementation. Why? Because we shall be in a very difficult position as Parliament -(Interjections)- yes. The institutions that are investigating -

THE SPEAKER: But I think when you are suggesting, do not blackmail the House. The image of the House is not - which image? Of course, image will be dented if things are not properly done; if the committees do not conduct their proceedings properly; if the House here does not conduct - the image will - so, you cannot blackmail the House to force them to support something simply because the image is going to be dented. You justify your motion then proceed.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, my justification for the proposal is that – [Mrs Mwesigye: “Who seconded?”] Where is the seconder? (Ms Aol rose_) It is seconded.

My justification is that because institutions and Government are already in action on this, we do not want to be any parallel with these actions and come upfront and say, we do not have a case against these people, and we do not have these recommendations as Parliament that suggest that there was any wrongdoing. We do not have any findings as far as the committee is concerned that there was any wrongdoing. We as the apex institution of Parliament need to identify with these institutions in what they are already doing. So, my humble appeal is that we become the champions at this stage of saying, if there is an accusation as raised by the Auditor-General and if there is an accusation based on additional findings of the committee, we agree. Let further investigations be carried out. That will be our statement.

It will be a big statement by this House so that we allow space for those institutions to proceed with the investigation. Therefore, I beg to move that Members support my view, which is meant to be in good faith, so that we pass this report and allow the institutions to investigate the report of the Auditor-General and the report of PAC.

MR ROBERT KASULE SEBUNYA: I would like to seek clarification on his motion that we put a question that we adopt the whole report with amendments and that their recommendations are not considered. Are you saying so because you want Government to work on these recommendations? Can we expunge or remove your recommendations then adopt the report? The fear is you have individually recommended that individuals be held responsible either politically or for criminal proceedings. So, if your recommendations do not stand then as a House, we can recommend that your Motion is adopted, but with an amendment that your recommendations are expunged.

MR ODUMAN: The report of the committee is based on the report of the Auditor-General. It made findings and made recommendations based on those findings. The body of the report is action-driven; it is the action point. Those are the recommendations. If you remove the recommendations, what will you be left with? You will be left with nothing and moreso, the recommendations we are dealing with now are about expunging recommendations of those who are among us only. No one here is going to help expunge anything that points at someone who is not in this House. How can we be seen to be covering one of our own here by expunging what points at them in the report only, and leave the rest? So, really, I think that to answer you, you cannot expunge a recommendation from a report and purport to still remain with a report. You will have actually thrown out the entire report.

MR DAUDI MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, can I move that the question be put on this very important Motion by hon. Oduman?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg that we first debate this motion before a question is put and I would like to make my submission. We are faced with a report arising from -

THE SPEAKER: But the guidance I want to give having been in prosecutions in many areas is that our action here whether we expunge or not, does not prejudice the work of CID and does not prejudice the work of IGG. So, do not - [Mr Nandala-Mafabi: “It does.”] Well, I have been in charge of prosecutions. Okay, you can please yourself.

DR BARYOMUNSI: This report arose from work which was directed by the President of this country to undertake a value-for-money audit of the CHOGM activities, and PAC has done work on our behalf; cross-examined witnesses, studied the documents and evidence and has come up with the report. We have also been guided that the President has already instructed the investigative machinery of the state to continue further investigations and I think the point being made is that, we do not want to be misunderstood as Parliament as showing that we are not committed to the fight against corruption.

The report mentions people who are not in this House, but also mentions people who are in this House. The report makes recommendations on political action largely by the President who commissioned this report, and I am sure, he has the machinery to undertake further investigations, but also, the report recommends that actually IGG, CID and other bodies of Government undertake further recommendations.

In my view, the motion by hon. Oduman is reasonable because if you are innocent, the investigative bodies will find you innocent or the courts will find you innocent. I just wanted to urge my colleagues that we support the motion and further investigations be carried out. We recommend and agree with the President that the investigative bodies of Government undertake further investigations and find out where offences were committed. I want to believe that if -

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me; did you clearly appreciate the motion? The motion is that we adopt the report as it is. Did you take into account that? Because he says we adopt to save the programmes of CID and IGG. That is his intention.

MRS MUGYENYI: This motion is premature. First of all, not all ministers have presented and we know that there is still a minister to present.

Secondly, I doubt that we will have done justice - that we are competent enough to be able to agree objectively with the contents of this report, because I believe, there are very strong recommendations and if we adopt it, it becomes a permanent record of this Parliament. So, in order to do justice, and given the fact that we have doubted our capacity to confirm and to be able to investigate properly and do justice, I do not think that we are in a position to say that if we adopt this  report, then we would have done justice to the cause against corruption. 

Corruption is dangerous to this country and there is no doubt that many of us would be committed to the cause of fighting corruption. Corruption must be fought objectively because it is dangerous, and I know one of the members this morning said, “It is dangerous to be accused wrongly and you have no way of defending yourself.” 

Therefore, I would like to suggest – and the question has been put very well, “What has Government done?” and I think that is important. What is Government doing about issues that have been raised in the public by the Auditor-General’s Office? About issues that have been raised by the Public Accounts Committee? Government cannot afford to just sit down and not take action on that.

Government has the right institutions that have the capacity to investigate and do a thorough job. I, therefore, doubt our capacity and given my doubts, I cannot be part of trying to judge what I am not capable of doing. I thank you.

MR BANYENZAKI: Guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Yes please.

MR BANYENZAKI: I thank you very much. I had earlier on requested that in voting, we vote by show of hands or division lobby. The alternative could even be by roll call and tally. I had requested under which rule this would –

THE SPEAKER: But we have been debating and that can come after.

MR BANYENZAKI: But, Mr Speaker, what I will need to be guided about, and the procedural interpretation I would want from you is that when we reach the voting stage on this matter, will it be voice voting, roll call and tallying, or division lobby? I want to move and I want to be backed by the Rules of Procedure, which you requested for, and I am ready and armed with the relevant rule to move for that.

THE SPEAKER: I think we shall deal with that when we come to that, but let us exhaust these arguments.

1.38
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to contribute to the motion and I want to say that the timing for the motion is not right. 

Yesterday, you guided us and allowed all the ministers implicated in the PAC report to give their explanations, and the Rt hon. Prime Minister read the sequence of how they would be responding. 

Today, we have just received one minister and there is one minister yet to present. So, if we proceed with the motion, it will imply that other ministers will not get the opportunity. You even said the debate will come thereafter. 

So, I would love that Members are given opportunity to debate because this morning. We have just cleared one honourable minister –(Interjections)- okay, somehow hon. Omach was cleared. 

I would love that we go on pronouncing minister after minister and then at the end of the day, we shall wrap up and adopt our report with a few amendments, rather than putting a question now, because I have observed that if you are to put a question now, we are going to lose the motion and the PAC report will be in the dustbin, which will create a very bad image for Parliament.

There are some good recommendations that need to be adopted or retained. I would love that we debate case by case and then thereafter, you put a question and we adopt it.

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. Member, there is a motion to save the programmes of CID/IGG. Let us simply adopt the report.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: I just want to kindly request my colleague to withdraw the motion. 

1.40
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): The motion has overtaken your concern because right now, there is a motion on the Floor and we cannot continue to wait for these ministers who cannot bring and give their presentations. We have been waiting and so we now know that this corruption issue –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, the ministers have already made their submissions and so there is no one you are waiting for.

MS AOL: If they have finished, then why was the honourable member complaining that we still have to wait for other ministers, because they have already made their presentations, and right now we have to move ahead. 

We know that corruption is a very big problem in the country and we are not just going to bury our faces in the sand and say there is nothing wrong. 

If we try to remove the recommendations by PAC, then we are completely watering down the report and, therefore, we are as good as throwing the report out. So, we cannot remove the recommendations. 

The recommendations stand and the motion should stand so that those who will be proved innocent by the investigating institutions will be exonerated. My view is that we take this motion and we take the report of PAC wholesale. 

We have been discussing that one of hon. Omach and we have all seen that there is a big problem there; that anybody with a responsible office and position needed to go –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the motion on the Order Paper is to consider and adopt. Now you are saying that we adopt. Should we not consider before we adopt? (Laughter) The motion is here: Consideration and Adoption.

MS AOL: Yes, Mr Speaker, that is exactly what I was coming to, because there was already a suggestion on the Floor that the recommendations must not be taken, but I am up to say we consider and adopt the report wholesale. I thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I am now going to put the question on the motion by hon. Oduman, the Shadow Minister of Finance, that we adopt the report of the committee on CHOGM. I now put the question.

(Question put and negatived.)

Let us continue to consider the report and then eventually, we shall adopt it.

MR BANYENZAKI: I was on the Floor before the motion came in -  

THE SPEAKER: On what?

MR BANYENZAKI: I had earlier on moved and requested that voting be by show of hands and I wanted to justify and you had promised me that when we come to voting, we shall consider it. But I have seen that as you were asking for the “Ayes” some ex-officios also – I do not know whether they were yawning or voting. This procedure is very irrelevant because I do not want to be bundled in that category.

THE SPEAKER: I have already put the question, but what is your point?

MR BANYENZAKI: My point is that voting on this matter be by roll call and tally, and I want to justify this. If you want the rule I based on, I am armed to the teeth – 

THE SPEAKER: Don’t you think you will bring it later when we are voting? Because now we have finished voting; when we come to voting next time, you will raise it and then we shall consider it. We have rejected the motion; we are now considering the motion – Banange, we are wasting a lot of time; let us proceed! 

MR MATHIAS BIREKERAAWO: We wanted to bring this before and you said let us finish this – 

THE SPEAKER: We have finished voting.

MR MATHIAS BIREKERAAWO: But we have voted wrongly.

THE SPEAKER: We have finished voting; next time when we come to voting and he wants it, he will raise it. 

1.46
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for giving me an opportunity to make a contribution to this report. I want to make a general observation before I proceed to a specific sector which is security – the ICT sector where hon. Amama Mbabazi made a response. 

First, it is very difficult to make an omelette without breaking the egg. And also, as leaders, we are entrusted with these public resources to protect them; these are public resources and we should at all costs work hard to make sure that we are above suspicion. If we are going to have the confidence of the people that we lead, we must be beyond suspicion. That is why I want to thank PAC for raising some serious issues in this report and to thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing us to move sector by sector so that the Members who have been mentioned in the report can defend themselves, cleared or not cleared, to gain the confidence of the public. 

Mr Speaker, on page 25 of the response of the Minister of Security – I read his response and thought about it very deeply. On page 25, he says, no.5: “Was there a loss in the purchase of Tetra Communication Equipment?” And he goes no to explain. So, where does PAC get its story from.

I want to explore this story further about a company that was paid US$ 5 million against a contract of US$ 4.5 million. One, in the PAC report, I did not get where the Minister of Security was connected to this US$ 500,000. On page 39, it does not indicate that the Minister of Security is responsible for this US$ 500,000. So, my assumption is that he is doing it because he is the line minister and he is speaking on behalf of people who are not here. But PAC does not mention anywhere that hon. Amama Mbabazi was responsible for the US$ 500,000 and this will require his comment.

In 2006, Government signed a contract with a company that I cannot pronounce very well, “Huawei”, and it gave a breakdown of what this company was going to do. And the breakdown totalled to US$ 4.5 million. The letter the minister is giving us as evidence of accountability of US$ 500,000 just came in January this year – this letter that the minister has attached. Government signed the contract to procure this equipment for US$ 4.5 million, but the technical people went ahead and paid US$ 5 million with a difference of US$ 500,000. 

When PAC asked, “Why did you pay for this; what happened to the US$ 500,000?” The Ministry of ICT came back with a letter in January to suggest that this was actually management fees of ten percent, which we had negotiated in 2007. And I think PAC questioned this because if there had been a negotiation, then there should have been an addendum to the agreement so that Government can know how much is negotiated and the purpose of the extra US$ 500,000.

Mr Speaker, I think when we come to the adoption stage, we should insist that this company, Huawei, refunds this US$ 500,000  because the explanation given that it was the ten percent management fee does not arise. We do not have a contract for this US$ 500,000 and that is a lot of money; it is Ugshs 1.0 billion. Therefore, it is not true for the minister to state that there was no fact in the report; hon. Amama Mbabazi, this is a fact and I do not know why you are defending it. I have read your report; it is well presented, but I think that this part needs to be explored further and this recommendation needs to be maintained that Huawei should refund the US$ 500,000. 

“What happened?” This is the point that threads through this whole report; all companies that did the work of CHOGM did not pay six percent withholding tax. Mr Speaker, our businessmen are struggling here to pay the six percent taxes. But look at this US$ 4.5 million. I do not see why they should not pay the six percent. And this runs across all these companies; Global Cast, US$ 4.5 million - that is close to 600,000 withholding tax and I think the Prime Minister needs to tell us – it is now three years down the road, what has Government done to recover the six percent? I computed all the withholding tax that these companies should have paid; it comes to US$ 3.5 million. This is a lot of money lost in taxes! No one is above the law. We struggle a lot to pay taxes, we cannot have companies like Global Cast come here, do business and be forgiven of the withholding tax. 

So, Mr Speaker, as we already stated, this report is wider than the minister’s response given here, and I think Members, we should look at the bigger picture. Let us not focus on the ministers alone; there are important points that are being mentioned in this report that deserve the merit and debate of this House, and I want to thank you, hon. Amama Mbabazi, that you were able to make this presentation. I am sure that if this presentation was made in the committee, maybe many of the recommendations that PAC gave would not be appearing. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether we should have a break and you go for your lunch and then come back after 30 minutes or an hour? 

HON MEMBERS: An hour.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, so I think we suspend the procedure up to 3.00 p.m. prompt to continue with the debate.

(The House was suspended at 1.55 p.m.) 

(On resumption at 3.33 p.m. the Speaker presiding_)

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING (CHOGM)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this afternoon before we suspended the proceedings, we were dealing with the security sector on a debate that had been started by hon. Bahati. Are there more contributions on this?

3.36
MR PETER NYOMBI (Independent, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Mr Speaker, I carefully studied the Auditor-General’s report. I also carefully studied the report prepared by PAC and I studied the report prepared by hon. Amama Mbabazi. I want to thank the chairman and his committee; they must have put a lot of effort in the preparation of this report. However, in my view, on studying these reports, it appears that the committee may have, whether inadvertently or otherwise, lacked proper legal advice on how to handle the issues that they were investigating. And as a result, the committee made some errors which hopefully can be corrected; errors in law and errors in fact. 

As a result of this lack of advice, the committee made errors in law and I want to give an example. Section 148 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament provides for the mandate of PAC. It restricts that mandate to examination not investigation. But it would appear like they attempted to investigate and yet they did not have the capacity. As a result, Mr Speaker, you heard many ministers who came to make statements here saying that when they looked at the Auditor-General’s report, there was indeed no query. I also looked at the Auditor-General’s report and there was no query at all in respect to a number of ministers. I looked for hon. Amama Mbabazi with regard to security equipment and I never saw any query. I looked for hon. Kutesa and there were no queries. 

Had they properly directed themselves - maybe the point hon. Katuntu is making that probably we should have concentrated on policy rather than individuals - their report maybe could have been written differently. But now that it was written the way it was written, whereby they find certain ministers liable, then that complicates the situation. So, I would have gone with hon. Katuntu’s suggestion that look, in a report like this one, we should have been looking at the policy and not the individuals. But now it looks like it is the individuals.

Mr Speaker, since these rules are going to be considered for amendment, that would probably be the opportunity for this section to be revisited in order to see whether examination does mean and include investigation. In my view, what PAC did went beyond their mandate, and they delved into territory probably that they should not have gone into, and as a result, certain evidence was not collected. 

MR KAZIBWE: The honourable Member of Parliament holding the Floor is saying that the committee examined and investigated. What is at stake now is whether what they went beyond examination and investigated is the truth. That is the catchword. 

You are telling us that you should have dug little dirt, but you dug a lot of dirt and that was bad. I think that is what you want to mean. You say, you investigated and came out with a wrong fact. For example, No.1 is a wrong fact; No.2 is a wrong fact. Thank you.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Mr Speaker, if the honourable member was patient enough – I am going to show you certain areas where errors were made as a result of taking a wrong procedure.

Vital evidence was not collected and hon. Mbabazi in his statement raised a number of pertinent issues and we must remember that when you come out with a recommendation saying that so and so is liable, you bear the responsibility of bringing the evidence to prove the allegation you are making. But certain evidence was not collected, and being the good lawyer that he is, hon. Mbabazi raised a number of pertinent issues which remained hanging. This, therefore, brings doubt to my mind as to whether what is being alleged is correct. 

Thirdly, even evidence that was collected was not properly evaluated and I will move to show this. Evidence is collected, but then it is not properly evaluated to come to the right conclusions and as a result, some wrong conclusions were made. But I really commend the committee because they tried their best. 

When you hold somebody liable, Mr Speaker, you are in effect saying, I have investigated and I have found evidence A, B, C, D and as a result –(Interruption)  

MR SEKIKUBO: I have been trying to understand the flow of the honourable member’s argument on the Floor and he, to my best understanding, appears to give flaws and loopholes without specifically pointing out issues. Can the honourable member through you, Mr Speaker, help this House to tell us where he finds the report inadequate and what in his opinion should be the case? If he finds any merit or demerit, then he should be able to debate that and we proceed without necessarily delving into the loopholes or the inadequacies, saying the minister was right without citing specific issues and yet they are in the report.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, when I listened to my Learned Friend, he tends to create an impression that Parliament, or a committee of Parliament, sits as a court that looks at evidence and evaluates the evidence and does everything like court does. Good enough when he was speaking, he alluded to the fact that there is some evidence in the report alluding to particular matters that would maybe require further investigation by relevant arms of Government. 

In my view, Parliament can only make observations, but it cannot make a finding like a court of law. So, may I suggest, maybe, to the Member of Parliament on the Floor, to guide us on whether he wants us to send the report to relevant bodies of Government like CID or IGG, other than trying to make a suggestion and an impression that we are sitting like a court of law.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Mr Speaker, I am one of the lucky Ugandans who were taught law by eminent jurists including the Speaker. What I am doing is to lay the ground. I am making general statements and eventually I am going to go into the various aspects of the report that I found wanting.

Mr Speaker, as we fight corruption, in my view, we must balance that struggle with a sense of justice. Throwing generalized statements to members of the public saying, “So and so has taken such and such an amount of money,” without evidence, Mr Speaker, is most unfortunate. Now, I will go to the specifics.

I think I have already touched one. I have looked at the Auditor-General’s report, the one that gave rise to this PAC report. Mr Speaker, nowhere did I find the Auditor-General raising a query against hon. Mbabazi in the matter regarding the security equipment, and the same is true for hon. Kutesa; the same is true for hon. Hope Mwesigye. The same is true -(Interruption) 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you hon. Member for giving way. I rise on a point of clarification. As a doctor, a patient might come to you with abdominal pain, but when you examine you find the problem is in the head; so you also examine it. 

I just wanted to seek clarification from you that if the Auditor-General raises a query on Dr Chris Baryomunsi, but as the committee examines the audited accounts, they find hon. Sekikubo was related to what I was doing, is it your view that the committee had nothing to do with hon. Sekikubo in that examination? Is that what you are telling us in Parliament? 

MR PETER NYOMBI: Mr Speaker, Section 148 of the Rules of Procedure says that when the Auditor-General prepares a report, it comes here, and it is submitted to PAC for examination and not for investigation. Now, when you look at that report and you think some action should be taken, either you refer it back to the Auditor-General or you call in Police -(Interjections)- yes, you will have to look at Section 148 when we are considering the amendment of the rules. If you want it to read “investigation,” you can come out and say so. But for the time being, the section talks about examination. Examination is different from investigation.

THE SPEAKER: I think it is also necessary to look at Rule 171.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Mr Speaker, secondly, the report recommends that hon. Amama Mbabazi and hon. Ham Mulira be held liable for alleged flaws in the purchase of the equipment. According to the evidence gathered by PAC from security staff, contact was made with 15 companies - potential suppliers, and the evidence is unchallenged; fifteen potential suppliers for the required equipment. Eventually, the sub-committee zeroed in on five which included Messrs Balton Ltd. Hence, the choice of Balton Ltd, Mr Speaker, was not made single-handedly. I think this is the point even the Vice-President was making that quite often they sat as a sub-committee and took a decision as a sub-committee. You see, if PAC had been properly advised, in Administrative Law there is collective responsibility. You cannot apportion blame to one individual when people sit as a committee and you say, “So and so is liable for a, b, c, d.” That is why I say, they were not properly advised. I am sure they did not intend it. (Laughter) They could have been advised, but they were not advised.

Three, Mr Speaker; there is also innuendo raised in the report that because Susan Katono is alleged to be related to hon. Amama Mbabazi, he must have had interest in the deal with Messrs Balton and, therefore, a conflict of interest. There is no evidence to show, as hon. Mbabazi pointed out, that PAC went to Susan Katono and inquired from her whether she was related to hon. Mbabazi. She was not summoned to establish whether she was related to hon. Amama Mbabazi, but even if she were, hon. Amama Mbabazi was not handling the negotiations personally; he was handling the negotiations as a committee. Therefore, it is wrong, administratively, to hold one individual responsible for an action that is taken by a committee.

Number four, Mr Speaker; the report states that the minister could also prove that he was not in any way associated - I think that he failed to prove that he was not in any way associated with Balton, which supplied the equipment for its executive staff. As such, the committee could not rule out conflict of interest. So, they concluded on the part of the minister. Hon. Amama Mbabazi had no obligation to prove that he was not related to Balton (U) Ltd. One is innocent until - if you allege something against somebody it is you to prove it. In any case, what PAC should have done was to carry out research at the registry - it is a simple process - find out who the shareholders of Balton (U) Ltd were? Who are the directors of Balton (U) Ltd? But for them to make an allegation which is a criminal offence without even carrying out this simple investigation, which they did in the case of hon. Sam Kutesa - which was right although the evaluation of the evidence eventually faltered somewhere. So, they should have carried out a research. 

Section 10 of the Leadership Code Act provides that a leader shall not put himself or herself in a position in which his or her personal interest conflicts with his or her duties and responsibilities. Sub-section(2), “Where a leader deals with a matter in the course of his or her duties in which he or she has a personal interest, the leader shall inform the person or public body concerned of the nature and extent of his or her interest before dealing with the matter.”

Mr Speaker, there is no evidence here of conflict of interest. Conflict of interest is provided for in law. It is defined and, therefore, it should have been important for PAC to bring the essential ingredients of that offence for them to - I do agree again with hon. Katuntu, who said that we should have dealt with matters of policy, but because you come out and you indict somebody, then we must go into the merits of the allegations that are being made. So, Mr Speaker, I find no evidence of conflict of interest.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, there is no evidence to show that PAC made any effort to verify the existence of the equipment and, therefore, assess the value of the equipment. It is alleged inflation of prices, probably equipment, may not have been delivered. In fact, this should have been a very simple exercise if they went to the venue where the equipment is, and first of all, verify, is the equipment there? Secondly, get an expert to find out whether the equipment matches the price at which it was bought?

MR NIWAGABA: I want to get it from you, hon. Nyombi, on what the Auditor General’s observation was in respect of that particular item. You talked about the committee being restricted to examination; I want you to tell us what examination of accounts includes and excludes.

I want you to refer to Rule 172 of our Rules of Procedure and see whether a committee examining accounts cannot invite witnesses and listen to any matter that is incidental or connected to that particular issue of accounts.

MR NYOMBI: I am confining myself to the section in the rules of procedure that defines the mandate of PAC. The responsibility they carry out is under Section 148. This section talks about examination. I have already said that the rules of procedure are going to be subject to debate if the Parliament thinks that examination is insufficient; it incapacitates the committee from carrying out its duties. Parliament is going to have the opportunity of examining whether that section should be amended. It is not about to define what examination means, but examination is narrower than investigation.

THE SPEAKER: In the public gallery this afternoon, we have members from Belief and Hope Development Cooperative Savings Society Ltd; it is in Makindye West, represented by hon. Hussein Kyanjo. 

We also have Ntuma Primary School, Bujenje County. They are represented by Princess Kabakumba.

MR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order. Hon. Peter Nyombi has clearly told us that he is a very competent lawyer taught by you and we respect him for that, but he has failed to guide Parliament on what examination is.

THE SPEAKER: I drew your attention to Rule 171, “Scope of deliberation: Subject to any instructions by the House, the deliberations of every committee shall be confined to the matter referred to it by the House”. This one should be internalised.

MR NYOMBI: Besides having been taught by the Speaker, I was also taught by the Chief Justice.  I worked in the DPP’s office for 10 years; I worked in the IGG’s office for 15 years. The yardstick we have always used before you make an allegation against an individual is evidence. You do not allege something against an individual unless you can prove it. In this report, many people are being held liable, but I do not see the evidence. I am not going to be persuaded by opinions unless there is evidence.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I have been trying to follow the submission by hon. Nyombi, and it touches on the core of this debate, which I think he should clarify or give more information on. He is saying that under Administrative Law, ministers have a collective responsibility, which is one of the pillars under that law. When you read Article 117 of the Constitution, it shows that whereas they are collectively responsible, when it comes to accountability, one stands out. You can see that ministers shall individually be accountable to the President for the administration of their ministries and collectively be responsible for any decision made by the Cabinet.

When you look further in Article 164(2), “Any person holding a political or public office who directs or concurs in the use of public funds contrary to the existing instructions shall be accountable for any loss arising from that use and shall be required to make good of the loss even if he/she ceased to hold that office.” 

Hon. Nyombi is asking why we are pointing out individuals. I know that these matters were not shared by the entire Cabinet. From the start we asked whether we can take it as a Cabinet responsibility or on individual basis. 

The President asked the ministers to follow the PPDA regulations. He gave guidance that they should follow the regulations of procurement even the CHOGM procurements. Is, therefore, hon. Nyombi’s argument tenable to continue bringing the issue of collective responsibility in this? When we trace the footprints, they lead us to some individuals not the entire Cabinet.

MR KATUNTU: I have listened to the submissions of my learned friend who says that he happens to be your student.

THE SPEAKER: I think he was a good student. Proceed.

MR KATUNTU: I think this is the time you need to come in as the chair because his submissions actually touch the fabric of the entire report. He does raise the issue of the mandate of the committee. He says that the committee exceeded its mandate, according to the rules. The custodian of the Rules of Parliament is the Speaker, your law teacher. And this is the time we should hear from the horse’s own mouth. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: My understanding of his contribution on that point is that the issue was in not doing an audit query as far as the people he has mentioned in his submission are concerned. To him, they were supposed to deal with the audit query. The material that the committee had to use was the Auditor General’s report and he says, having examined it, it does not make any audit query against hon. Amama Mbabazi or Kutesa.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, at the end of the day we shall need direction from you. If in your opinion the committee exceeded its mandate, then we shall be wasting time to continue debating a matter, where the committee had exceeded its mandate. That is my problem. We really need your guidance on this because for us –

THE SPEAKER: No, I entirely agree that we have Rule 171 and this matter was referred by the House to the Public Accounts Committee to deal with the Auditor General’s report on the subject. And under that rule you do not go beyond the mandate given to you by the House. [Mr Nandala-Mafabi: “Ooooh!”] Yes, you may say, “Ooooh” but this is the point. (Laughter) And should you find that maybe that would have been an audit query, you may have to be assisted by the professionals. I think that is what he is saying. I am just guiding you to interpret what he was saying; it is not my making. For instance, the committee cannot become auditors because you are not competent in that area.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, based on what you are guiding us –[The Speaker: “I am interpreting his contribution.”]– Yes, but what we are seeking is the Speaker’s guidance, aware that we are constrained by time. Secondly, if it is the view of the Speaker that the committee overstepped its mandate – 

THE SPEAKER: It is not the view of the Speaker. I am only listening and somebody has said that he has found out - It is his contribution that he had found out that actually the two people he mentioned were not part of the audit query. So, it is not me.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, what we are looking for is your guidance, but not the guidance of the honourable member.

THE SPEAKER: And I have guided you in that when a committee is handling any business, it must also take care of Rule 171. You do not expand your mandate beyond that which was given to you by the House.

MR NYOMBI: Mr Speaker, I am sorry that hon. Ssekikubo is finding problems in following my arguments. It takes almost 20 years to train a lawyer. I suspect hon. Ssekikubo is having problems in differentiating Articles 164 and 172, but I think he can go and study the Constitution on his own.

THE SPEAKER: I think Article 164(2) is where you bring in a political leader to account. But initially, the accountability is by the technical person - the accounting officer. However, should a political leader use his or her muscle to force the accounting officer to do things that are contrary to the law, then the political leader becomes accountable. Therefore, when you make him accountable, the evidence must be laid down, that he did this to the accounting officer and forced him to go contrary to the law.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think that was the politest way I could have been telling hon. Nyombi that he was dancing Attoti on the Floor. I just gave him that modicum, not necessarily that I was completely lost. (Laughter) But even then, in Administrative Law, the political head of a department is a minister, under whom there are accounting officers. That is a fact that I do not think he can deny. Once a minister directs the accounting officer – and in this case we have witnessed it – I think some of the accounting officers have been wise to tell ministers to put their communications in writing. And in some other aspects, ministers have come out themselves to direct and even write agreements, thereby usurping the powers of the accounting officers.

Now, if that is not personal liability – and I invite hon. Nyombi to look at it again – if that is not usurpation of the powers and roles of the accounting officer; where the ministers themselves write contracts, even the percentages to be shared from the revenue –[Mr Kutesa: “Where is the evidence?”]– There is evidence when we come to that. Can we delineate, therefore, the functions of the accounting officer and circumstances where ministers went overboard, forming and directing consortiums and they are here laughing. 

I am afraid, Mr Speaker, if the submissions of honourable members are given as a beacon for the culprits to smile all the way home, then what is the focus of this debate? Can we, therefore, be guided; we might know much, but can that knowledge be of use to this country. Can hon. Nyombi open his ears to the outcry to which he can apply his intellect and training to help this country, other than using them to stifle issues of accountability.

MR NYOMBI: Unfortunately, Mr Speaker, the public outcry we are talking about - we propel unresearched information to the public. I want to reiterate that if I am going to say that hon. Nandala-Mafabi is liable for A, B, C, D, I must be the one to bring the evidence to prove. The best yardstick is the evidence. I think it is hon. Amama Mbabazi who alluded to a lot of rumours being circulated about members of PAC. I have also heard them, but I have refused to believe those allegations unless there is evidence against members of PAC.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, let us take this thing very seriously. The Public Accounts Committee – there are very many ways in which you can achieve what we want to do. But I think that we should follow the generally acceptable principles. In accounting we have a principle of substance and form -(Interjections)- and materiality if you want. What is material at this time is that we have a report of PAC. The technicalities can come later.  PAC carried out investigations and brought this report. We have a whole attachment of this report as evidence of PAC. I think the whole House should now say, “This evidence is not sufficient to incriminate somebody.” But you cannot say that there is no evidence, Mr Speaker; there is evidence. Whether it is fake, we should be able to say, “The evidence you brought is fake.” 

THE SPEAKER: No, when one says, “There is no evidence,” he is talking about “relevant evidence.” 

MR BAHATI: Then he should qualify that. He should say, “There is no relevant evidence.” But he cannot say, “There is no evidence.” I think this is Parliament. We have lawyers; we have accountants; we have auditors; we have teachers. We cannot turn this Parliament into a court and get everybody to go into legal terminology.  

4.17
MR TOM KAZIBWE (NRM, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Mr Speaker, Article 164(2) reads as follows: “Any person holding a political or public office who directs or concurs in the use of public funds contrary to existing instructions shall be accountable for any loss...” What are the catchwords in this Article? “Political office;” that is obvious. “Directs or concurs;” we have evidence in our report that political officers directed –

THE SPEAKER: Directing - you know the law. You in spite of that law, do this contrary to the law.

MR KAZIBWE: Yes, the committee is also proving that these directions or concurrences were done contrary to existing instructions and they are laid in the book. Now, I want someone to challenge us and say that so and so never directed; produce evidence. We shall lay it. You ask, which law was violated, and we shall state it. But if you go as if you are reading a law book, “What is evidence? Evidence can be this...; what is a liability? A liability can be this...” No, we have our report. You ask us who directed and where the evidence is and we shall show it. What law was violated; we shall show the law and then you say it is not a correct law. But if you go on telling us what a law book is - as if we are reading textbooks, no -

THE SPEAKER: No, I think what you do is to contradict him by opening the book and saying that on such and such a page, this is the evidence. Yes, you will have helped us, because the evidence must be contained in the report which you submitted. 

4.17 
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Member has raised fundamental issues that can derail the debate. I would like to refer to Article 90 of the Constitution, which is “Committees of Parliament.” Article 90 states: 
“(1) Parliament shall appoint committees necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions.
(2) Parliament shall, by its rules of procedure, prescribe the powers, composition and functions of its committees.
 (3) In the exercise of their functions under this article, committees of Parliament -
(a) may call any minister or any person holding office and private individuals to submit memoranda or appear before them to give evidence;
(b) may co-opt any Member of Parliament or employ qualified persons  to assist them in the discharge of their functions;
(C) shall have the powers of the High Court for –
(i) enforcing the attendance of witnesses and examining them on oath, affirmation or otherwise;
(ii) compelling the production of documents; and
(iii) issuing a commission or request to examine witnesses abroad.”

I do think that in tandem with this Constitution, and rules 171 and 172, the report is within the constitutional mandate and within the mandate of the Rules of Procedure.  Let us proceed and debate it. 

4.20
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Mr Speaker, hon. Nyombi said there was no evidence or relevant evidence as such. I would like to refer Parliament to Annex 22 of the report of the Public Accounts Committee. A letter written on the 22 November 2007, addressed to Ms Hilda Musubira, Deputy Head of Public Service/Executive Director, CHOGM, 2007, Secretariat, Kampala. It reads: 

“Dear Hilda, 

RE: Decoration of key CHOGM venues

The above subject refers. 

Following the Inspection of the International Conference Centre, Serena, where the CHOGM opening ceremony is to take place, the CHOGM Activities Inspection team has observed that the place is not yet appropriately decorated. 

We have been informed that the problem is with the procurement process. Given the importance and urgency of the matter, we strongly recommend that you ensure that the decoration is done immediately and then explore the possibility of retrospective procurement undertaking. 

Sincerely yours,
Amama Mbabazi SC, MP, 
MINISTER IN CHARGE OF SECURITY/
CHAIRPERSON, CHOGM ACTIVITIES INSPECTION TEAM”

I think that is evidence and it is evidence against the procurement regulations that are in place.

THE SPEAKER: No, that letter was dealt with yesterday. 

MS ALASO: Yes, but it is evidence, Mr Speaker. We are looking for evidence; this House is looking for evidence; we are providing the evidence. (Laughter) 

MR NYOMBI: Mr Speaker, hon. Bahati said we apply general principles here in Parliament. But when we were swearing in, Mr Speaker, you gave us the Rules of Procedure in here.  It is the Rules of Procedure -[MEMBERS: “And the Constitution.”]-  I am coming to the Constitution you are quoting. Mr Speaker, it is the Rules of Procedure and not general principles that we apply here -(Interjections)- I am coming to that; be patient. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, she quoted the Constitution. I know that in these rules there are committees that may be set up and inviting witnesses and taking evidence. But in the case of PAC, it is Section 148 that provides for the mandate. In these rules, there is a section that provides for this Parliament setting up committees to investigate, collect evidence and all that; it is different. In this case we are talking about PAC. 

I want to retaliate, Mr Speaker, that in indicting somebody the best yardstick we can use is evidence. It takes somebody -(Interjections)– I don’t want your information - it takes time to build one’s reputation. And it takes just a minute to destroy it. If we are going to allege something against anybody, we must have the evidence. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I would like to draw the attention of hon. Nyombi to rule 133 of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament, which talks about general functions of parliamentary committees. And I assume that PAC is a parliamentary committee like any other. 

“The functions of parliamentary committees in addition to their specific functions under this rule shall include the following:
(a) to discuss and make recommendations on Bills laid before Parliament;
(b) to initiate any Bill within their respective areas of competence.” This is what I would like him to note. 
“(c) to assess and evaluate activities of Government and other bodies.” I think this applies to PAC as well. Mr Speaker, let me complete this. 
“(d) to carry out relevant research in their respective fields.
(e) to report to Parliament on their functions.”

These are general guidelines for all committees, including PAC. (Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to seek your guidance. I know that some of you are saying you are lawyers, but we are also professionals. In light of the provisions read from the Constitution and also our rules, I would like the Chair to guide me on rule 148(2), which is being quoted and I read, “The Public Accounts Committee shall be assigned the examination of the audited accounts, showing the appropriation of the sums granted by Parliament to meet the public expenditure of the Central Government and the Judiciary”.

I think the issue is interpreting the word “examination”. When we say the Public Accounts Committee shall examine the accounts of the Auditor-General, what is our understanding of what they should be doing? Are we saying that they cannot summon witnesses? And if we are saying they exceeded their powers then are we saying that this report is dead on arrival and we should just consider it dead?

I think this is very fundamental. The House needs to be guided because it touches on the core function of Parliament and also the various committees. So, I rise to seek your guidance on the interpretation of “examination” in light of the work of PAC and other committees.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think I need not say much about that.  It is clear in that each committee works under a mandate. In this particular case, without being general, the mandate of the committee was to examine the Auditor-General’s report on CHOGM activities. It was a special mandate and the report it is touching - it is not a general report talking about expenditure, but it is a report on the Auditor General’s report on the activities of CHOGM.

They can definitely call witnesses to help them examine that. Nobody says you should not call them. So, I do not see the point of contention here, because we all agree that these committees were set up because of Article 90 and it is Article 90 that helped us make these rules to guide the committees; so what are the issues? There are no issues.

Hon. Members, I think this arose from a contribution by hon. Nyombi. It does not mean that all of us must agree with hon. Nyombi’s contribution. So, you stand up and make your contribution on the security sector and then we shall see how to proceed. You can make your contribution; you are free. You can disagree with hon. Nyombi in your contribution.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, hon. Nyombi is a lawyer -

THE SPEAKER: No, I think his contribution was that he was dealing with the security issue and when he came to hon. Amama Mbabazi, he said that as far as he is concerned, it is in evidence that you justified your conclusion to make the recommendation against him. You can stand and say, “No, there was justification for this recommendation because of this and this” and then later we shall decide, instead of wasting time challenging him on procedure. Make your contribution.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, hon. Nyombi referred to you as his teacher and he is saying that you taught him that when you see such a mistake - what he is referring to is that the moment your teacher tells you that when you see an error and it is pointed out, it must be dealt with.

The Auditor-General was mandated to do a special audit on CHOGM and the special audit carried out what we call a value-for-money audit. Under the National Audit Act, if you do not declare anything to the Auditor General, you commit a crime, and hon. Nyombi is right on that issue of security; the US$ 5 million was never in the Auditor General’s report. It was brought out later and that was already an error. Now, having found out that it was missing, would it have been better for PAC to keep quiet? That is number one.

I am a professional accountant and auditor as hon. Bahati said. It is true that when you are doing the audit, you can audit what we call 100 percent, do sampling of 10 percent, and 20 percent. When this audit came up, many issues pointed to some areas and that is why you can see some people being brought up. For example, hon. Mwesigye and how she directed the issue of decoration. You can see for sure that the Auditor General even queried that this was not through normal procedures and when you go behind, you discover that the person who did it, who concurred is hon. Mwesigye, and she is saying, we should not have brought it up.

So, I think hon. Nyombi, as a professional, you should dwell in the law where you are more comfortable, but on issues of auditing, you should not tamper there and we should always respect one another in our professional fields as hon. Chris said.

Mr Speaker, if you believe that the committee overstepped, I think it is at this time that we stop. We should not waste our valuable time because you have read the rules; you are saying we overstepped and I think it is ideal now that we stop here.

THE SPEAKER: I have just read the rules; you will decide whether to continue or not; it is not me. I just pointed out the rules, which state that the scope of a mandate of any committee, not only yours, should not go beyond the mandate given to it by the House. This is the rule; simple. It does not require interpretation.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, I am just seeking clarification. I am not a lawyer and I need guidance. If you have an allegation, a report by the Auditor-General saying that, “From what I have found, this man ate.” When you sit down and carry out investigations and call witnesses to testify and then people say the person who is accused says I ate with (y); (y) was also there and he is the one who led me here; I did not know where the goat was and he is the one who showed me; what do you do as the IGG?

Hon. Nyombi, you said you were in the IGG’s office. You were investigating and following leaders. If you get additional evidence suggesting that neighbours x, y and z were together with the man accused, A, what do you do with the accused persons, X, Y and Z, yet you have found them with the goat skin of the stolen goat in their house? (Laughter) Yes. The colour of the stolen goat was black – the intestines have been found in another person’s house on the same night. Now, if the main person accused is A, what happens to the others? Are you saying that as a committee, we went beyond our mandate by staying away from the main suspect A to another suspect X, Y and Z connected to the crime by investigation? Is that what you are saying?

MR NYOMBI: Mr Speaker, I am not prepared to speculate on those stories. The scenario he is raising is very simple; he has actually answered himself. If somebody is accused of stealing a goat, there must be a head, legs, the skin – when you have that, you are already collecting evidence. So, in this case, please show us the skin, the legs, heads because they are not there.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, why don’t you make your independent contribution? I am saying this because the other one is taking a lot of our time when we have useful contributions to make.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, thank you and thank you, hon. Nyombi for helping me. Hon. Nyombi says that if there was a goat’s skin, that would be very good. I would like to inform you that the bigger portion of this report is evidence. The report itself is just this volume; the rest is evidence and that is where it ends. What you need to do is to just point out which evidence you would like us to show – what we attached here is all evidence and under the table here and in the office, we have tonnes of more evidence. Under rules of PAC, we had the opportunity to extract additional evidence, some of it oral, including what is in the verbatim report. 

The evidence of the representations is also there in that verbatim report. There was a reason why we tabled that here – because ministers accused were saying that not everything they said in the committee meetings had been considered in the report. But that verbatim report of this size is also here for one purpose – to show everyone that the allegations that ministers’ representations in the committee were not included is well laid in here. We are prepared with the extracts. So, to say there is no evidence is to miss a point. Just ask for the evidence you want us to adduce and we will do that for you.

Ministers here signed contracts – they signed appointment letters offering contracts to service providers and suppliers of goods and they are here – ask us to give you evidence on this and that; we are ready to produce it.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure because the trend of the debate now is about general allegations, which were made before with big statements. I thought we had gone beyond that stage because we have responded and we were at a stage where we were considering case by case. I came in at a time when I thought my case was on table for consideration.

Wouldn’t it really serve this House and the debate well if we restricted ourselves to the specific cases? For example, the honourable member is talking of ministers signing contracts, but I cannot tell whether that is in respect of the others and I. This is just a general statement that obviously has no meaning. Could we be specific and talk about the individuals by adducing evidence? It is not enough to just say that we have piles of evidence in our houses. You may, but that is not useful. The evidence that is useful is that which is in the report, what is here, and what you have prepared to give to us. I am just seeking your guidance, Mr Speaker, as to whether we should not go to specifics by looking at each case and conclude it that way. Thank you.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think we are doing what the committee ought to have done. Our decision to allow hon. Mwesigye present her case was because she had not been able to face the committee. So, after her presentation, we were able to go through it with Members responding and seeking clarification. That is why her response has been accepted as part of the PAC report. But all the other ministers implicated in this report had the chance to meet the committee; their cases were examined and documented.

So, if there were any other ministers who had not been able to face the committee, this is the time we should hear them; to give them chance to respond to the PAC report. However, it appears that most of them had the chance to meet the committee. So, should Parliament be bogged down into trying to do what PAC was supposed to do a couple of weeks ago? 

Mr Speaker, the whole nation is looking at you and this institution – we have to do things with fairness. There are people who have been accused, but they cannot come here because they are not Members of Parliament neither are they ministers. We can only use the information they have provided to make a final decision. I think the report is complete. The idea of saying we go one by one – we are not a court. How are you going to handle it one by one? How can I say we should exonerate so and so when actually criminal investigations could establish that such a person has a case to answer? 

What we need to do is to examine the matter as presented to us by PAC so as to move forward as an institution. Otherwise, we are just talking in circles.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Member, I quite appreciate you had a good cause not to be here in the morning. Otherwise, if you had been here, you would have known that all the ministers made their submissions before we decided to debate. We also decided that we handle sector by sector and that is why as far as hon. Omach is concerned, the PAC recommendation was expunged from the record before we got into a break.

When we returned, we got into dealing with security – we had earlier on started debating the report sector by sector and this is exactly what we are doing now. But because you were not here in the morning, that is why you are saying what you are saying; we already decided on the way forward. What we are doing now is to debate a sector called security. That is it and after that we go we shall proceed with Foreign Affairs, like that -(Mr Kazibwe rose_)- Let me exhaust Madam Cecilia Ogwal.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am still on the Floor. It is just that you did not see me, but I was here in the morning. I followed the debate, so I am speaking from an informed position.

THE SPEAKER: If you are, then you are repeating what we had said in the morning, but it is okay, Mama.

MR KAZIBWE: Mr Speaker, in the morning, we had wanted to hear from hon. Nasasira, but you said that if he comes back in the afternoon, he will be able to give his defence so that we can start handling -

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Do we, therefore, suggest that we postpone the debate on security?

MR KAZIBWE: Yes, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR KAZIBWE: And then we hear from hon. Nasasira.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to be guided. I have listened to the contribution of hon. Peter Nyombi and your guidance as far as rules 148 and 171 are concern. I want to be guided; if the committee really surpassed their mandate, why should Parliament again take more time debating a report which is not within our rules? I think the Speaker should really guide the House. Yes, guide the House such that we —

THE SPEAKER: Do you want me to decide for you? You decide for yourself. (Laughter) I have told you the rule; it is up to you to decide. 

MRS MUGYENYI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the morning you ruled that we go one by one and indeed we dealt with the case of hon. Omach and we got rid of that. Right now, we are debating the case of hon. Amama Mbabazi -

THE SPEAKER: Security.

MRS MUGYENYI: So, we should then deal with that and finish before we give an opportunity to hon. Nasasira to defend.

THE SPEAKER: I thought so. We would finish with security and then we hear from him.

MRS MUGYENYI: Yes, thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Please, make your contributions on this issue and then we see how we proceed.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Mr Speaker, I had not concluded. I was saying that in these matters, the best yardstick of determining whether one is culpable is evidence. In the case of hon. Amama Mbabazi, I found no evidence and I move that the allegations and the recommendations in the report be dropped.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, to begin with, it is true the US$ 5 million was not in the Auditor-General’s report. We have a letter which is written to you, Mr Speaker, dated 2 November 2010 from Balton. On page 4 of the letter - it is a letter that they wrote to you and copied to Members of Parliament - it says, “We were paid by Huawei and the cost of Tetra is, therefore, reflected in Huawei E-backbone project. The cost cannot be in ICT Ministry’s CHOGM budget books. Therefore, it is not true that the ICT Ministry hid the cost from the auditors”. You can imagine how Balton, an outsider, is telling us which account books will hold this money. You see -(Interjections)- you wanted evidence, so I want to drive the point home.

Mr Speaker, when we approved the loan, we approved US$ 5 million for CHOGM. That meant that it was specifically for CHOGM and the need for audit should be under CHOGM, but what are the evidences? We went and met the President and he said, Government is run on minutes and letters, and not telephones. 

Now here we go; hon. Amama Mbabazi states that the evaluation report which is here is for 2004. I think let me get the page -(Interjections)- You are my brother; I must tell you the truth. He said it is of 2004 -(Interjections)- No, we are going to get it. Wait; do not worry. Hon. Amama Mbabazi says the figure in the report was the value of expression in 2004. I will get it. Page 21, paragraph 2, “It is not true that the Minister of Security raised the value of the system from US$ 3.2 million to US$ 5 million - Note that the US$ 3.2 million was a figure presented at the time of expression of interest in 2004. At that time, the Minister of Security was a different entity”.

Mr Speaker, the evaluation we have, took place on 26 August 2006 and it is attached. Now, that contradicts the minister’s statement of 2004.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I always find it pleasant to help my brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, and it is quite often that I do so. I have said here, what he has written, that the US$ 3.2 million was a figure presented at the time of expression of interest in 2004. This is what you read and this is what is here. Why do you import into this that expression of evaluation of whatever? Where do you get it from?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we have attached the evaluation report, but it is also good to see the one of the minister. It is easier.

On page 1, he mentioned the CHOGM technical evaluation committee meeting held at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on 28 August 2006 at 10.00 hrs. I think they have said 10,000. The chairperson was Kalisa and the other names are there. This evaluation was done on 28th and if you go through it, it clearly shows how they evaluated. You have Balton, Harris, Huawei, ZTE and the estimated cost is, as you can see, for Balton US$ 3 to US$ 4 million; Harris, US$ 4 to US$ 5 million; Huawei, US$ 4 to US$ 7 million and ZTE, US$ 4 to US$ 7 million.

Even in the evaluation report, it states clearly why we should go for a certain company which was installing, and they said they wanted CDMA. The company which was doing CDMA at that time was the company which was going to lay the fibre optic. 

Now, of interest is the following: On 12 June 2006, there was a Cabinet meeting which was chaired by his Excellency the President of Uganda. It is attached, by the way. You wanted attachments. Check your books; it is attached. It is Annex X. I hope you have seen it, and we have photocopied the comments by his Excellency. Security and accreditation: His Excellency the President questioned the expenditure on the following items:

Communication equipment budget –(Interjection)- Annex 10, 2.7. He instructed that the Army communication equipment should be used by the Police and others instead of purchasing new communication equipment.

Operations equipment - His Excellency asked for further information regarding the equipment and he indicated that the available ones should be used. So, they expected that should bring down the budget of security and accreditation sub-committee to Shs 7.1 billion.

On 29 August 2006 - remember there was an evaluation committee on 28 August 2006. Now, this is on 29 August 2006 - hon. Amama Mbabazi is now writing to the President as the Minister of Security - Annex 10(a); it is attached there. His letter is also attached there and he is saying that the services do not have adequate, reliable and modern communication equipment. He condemns Harris and says, “The Harris radio system that is used in UPDF is designed and appropriate for security military operations and command. This system in UPDF does not have adequate handsets. It is expensive to expand and does not easily enable cross-communication within and from groups.”

Security services –(Interjections)- he is writing now. He goes further on page 2 - I am just running but of course -[MR AMAMA MBABAZI: “That is irrelevant.”]– Listen, I want to derive my relevance now. Are you writing? You wanted evidence.

Cost and financing: All providers are within the ranges of US$ 3 million to US$ 7 million to cover the CHOGM corridor. In the second point he says, “…well as Motorola vendors Balton can provide a short-term repayment period; the two Chinese suppliers are eligible to the long-term China Exim Bank financing and can easily access the concessional loan to Uganda…” He said these are the implementers to the backbone. He said the system requires a scheduled time of eight months to enable the system to be used adequately. 

Mr Speaker, I am bringing those up to show that hon. Amama Mbabazi took this thing to the President and told him what? On 12 September, now in the meeting of 2006, listen to what hon. Amama Mbabazi says - Annex 17; I gave those letters, but you can read them fully; I am just making a few quotations. This is now on 12 September 2006, Annex 17; where again the President was part of the meeting and you were there; hon. John Nasasira was there; hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana was there; and also in attendance were the civil servants.

Minute 505/08 is consideration of the request for communication equipment. Now, hon. Amama-Mbabazi informed His Excellency the President as follows: “The existing communication system was inadequate for CHOGM 2007 and the Army equipment proposed for use during CHOGM would not capably handle the required nature of communication. There was a need to guard against terrorism and the task required reliable and efficient communication systems. The UPDF communication system handsets were inadequate in number and had limited applications. There was need for US$ 5 million - I want you to be careful – there was need for US$ 5 million to acquire a communications system that was compatible with other communications gadget systems and capable for digital transfer of voice, video and data at secure, independent and minimised costs.” 

“The equipment of Police and intelligence services were obsolete.” You can imagine even telling us that our equipment for Police is obsolete. “The Chinese company known as Huawei would construct a National Transmission Backbone for the whole country by CHOGM time and priority would be for Kampala and Entebbe areas. This transmission would be used for communication during CHOGM.” 

“It had been proposed that Huawei and Motorola would work…” - he is now introducing the company – “…would work on arrangements for the supply of equipment to be financed under the Chinese concessional loan…” - he is now taking the supplier to the President. Of course, what I am trying to derive here is that the US$ 5 million is known; it is taken to the President, the supplier is now Motorola –(Interjections)- I think you are not aware. 

It has been proposed that Huawei and Motorola would work out arrangements for the supply of equipment to be financed under the Chinese concessional loan. You listen to why I read Motorola here on page 2. Motorola vendors are Balton and the company we are talking about is the Chinese who wanted to supply the same equipment. If you read, the evaluation committee said that if that company supplied the equipment, we would have a saving of US$ 2 million, in the evaluation report. It is attached and says that if this applied, we would have a saving of US$ 2 million. 

They said we wanted a CDMA, which that company was going to do. So, now here, Motorola comes in, which is Balton. Now, because Balton was aware of US$ 5 million, on 20 August it brings a proforma invoice because it is aware of the money –(Interjection)- Listen, you wanted evidence. How did Balton know? On 14 November 2006 –(Interjection)– You wanted the annex; you are right. It is Annex 11 –(Interruption)- Yes, I like hon. Nasasira; he is good. Annex 11 is clearly saying - that is now 14 November 2006 - a proforma is sent of US$ 4,986,500 because hon. Amama Mbabazi has said we have US$ 5 million -[HON. AMAMA MBABAZI: How do you say, “Because”?]-

In your report you state –(Interjection)– but how did Balton know?  That is where we are coming and that is why we should ask him –(Interjection)– Yes, now you know, so relax. When you get it touching –(Interjection)– I never run out of circumcision!

Yesterday, when the Minister was talking, he said the US$ 5 million was the mean. I am now looking for the page for the mean. The “mean” means the average – that is page 7. He says the US$ 5 million was the mean. He added the three and seven and divided by two and got five. That is why he said he took five as the mean. “Mean” means average in mathematics. Now, when he went to the President, he took the mean of five million; he took the supplier Balton because for Motorola, the vendor is Balton. Balton brought in an invoice of – it lacked only US$ 1,500 to make five million because he told them, “Do not go above; be slightly within the range.” (Interruptions)

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, considering the importance of the submissions before this august House; considering the seriousness of the matter under debate; considering what has transpired and how the public is inflamed by reckless statements - and with such statements emanating from Members of this House - is it in order for the honourable member to stand here and just throw words around; casting his suspicions which are unfounded on matters he cannot substantiate, and allow it to be on the record of this august House?

THE SPEAKER: If you cannot substantiate it then do not say it. So, can you substantiate that?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am attaching the minutes so that we can know where it came from. The minute says that there was need for US$ 5 million to acquire a communication system that was compatible with other communication gadget systems and capable. The supplier is Motorola and the agent is Bolton. We have attached the evaluation report which says that Motorola is between this and this, but we would prefer Huawei because of X and Y, and saving of US$ 2 million. 

Yesterday the minister said that we could not go to PPDA again because it had been approved. In this same report –(Interjections)– You said it; let me look for it –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order and citing rule 70. Rule 70(c): “During a sitting, while a Member is speaking, all other Members shall be silent and shall not make unseemly interruption”. Is the hon. Minister, Amama Mbabazi, in order to continuously heckle, interrupt and perhaps with intent to cause interruption of the orderly flow of information from the honourable member holding the Floor?

THE SPEAKER: Well, it is not in order to interrupt. However, what I have realised is that when hon. Mbabazi is submitting – these Members have a relationship which I do not understand; they keep interrupting each other. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, on page 13 the minister said that the procurement method of the National Transmission Backbone of E-Governance as earlier indicated was approved by PPDA, and there was no need to go back to PPDA –(Interruption) 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I think my brother has a problem of language, so I happily give him information. I will happily interpret for him the language that I used here. First, in my response I made reference to PPDA on page 6 and it reads as follows: “Approval of the procurement method for the National Transmission Backbone and E-Governance was granted by PPDA on 5 October 2006”, and it is annex 5. 

On page 13, I am simply giving a summary of the chronology of events, and here I am saying the procurement method for the National Transmission Backbone of E-Governance was, as earlier indicated, approved by PPDA on 5 October 2005. So, where do you read what you are saying, that I said it was not necessary? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, that is what we are saying; PPDA never cleared TETRA. If TETRA was one of them and was supposed to be advertised, then they would have been the people to tender. You should read from page 12. If you read the attachment, it clears the Huawei E-Governance Project not TETRA. If it is not clearing TETRA, then we wonder, how then does TETRA come in?

Mr Speaker, this was 5 October 2006. He met the President to take on Motorola on 12 September 2006, even before PPDA had cleared the National Transmission Backbone and E-Governance. The money we are talking about was cleared on 5 October 2006, and nobody can say that there is nothing wrong there. 

Mr Speaker –(Interjections)– you wanted evidence; the minutes are there. Eventually, we get an invoice dated 28 August 2007 –(Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, hon. Nandala is trying to divert us. There was a point of order which was raised and you asked him either to substantiate or withdraw his allegations. The allegation was that hon. Amama Mbabazi told Balton to raise a quotation which was below US$ 5 million. All he is saying is that there is no evidence. Actually, he is quoting irrelevant appendices and invoices that are not connected with hon. Mbabazi telling Balton to bring a quotation which is below US$ 5 million. 

So, Mr Speaker, if he cannot substantiate, let that record be expunged and he should withdraw. I need your guidance, Sir. 

5.13
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County Nakapiripirit): Mr Speaker, I think it is very important to link the whole internal process of Government. Whatever was going on in Cabinet, I think, was an informed process of examining the technology that should be acquired for the purposes of security in the country. I understand they could have used many other experts to come to the conclusion of what technology was needed. However, the allegation here is, there is a clear point of departure from the internal assessment to directly say that hon. Amama Mbabazi instructed Motorola or Balton to bring a quotation of that amount. I think we need that evidence because we cannot say just because there was this internal process, therefore, it is Amama Mbabazi who called Balton to bring that quotation. 

THE SPEAKER: This is what I told him to substantiate - 

MR REMIGIO: With some evidence set before us.

THE SPEAKER: Instead of being general, substantiate to relate it to hon. Amama Mbabazi.

5.14
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker, to begin with, let me go slow -(Interjections)– relax; even circumstantial evidence will be seen. It is very important.

THE SPEAKER: But if you people are tired, I can adjourn. It seems you are tired; because we are working in circles; we are not moving.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Mr Speaker, I think for the days we have sat here and listened, you had rightly asked before even today that, “Can the Public Accounts Committee, after all the ministers have presented, ask for some time, to go back and profile your defences, well given the limited time we have?” Because rebuking and counter-rebuking; where shall we end? Please, Mr Speaker, we are asking for your indulgence because we are sitting back to wait for a minister to defend himself and then he is countered. I mean, the debate shall not end. You also said PAC is not in the dock neither are we a court; so can you kindly advise us!

5.16
MR CHARLES ODUMAN (FDC, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Mr Speaker, the principal question on the issue of the US$ 5 million -(Interjections)- that what? No, what the chairman said in reference to the US$ 5 million was the source of the figure.

Mr Speaker, Members need to listen to us. Who originated the figure of US$ 5 million? Where did it come from? We talked about US$ 3.2 million and the honourable minister said, “It was a quote that was received earlier back.” Okay, if that is the case and the prices have gone up, where did the US$ 5 million come from? The minister said that at the time he met the President, the basis of his introduction of the figure of US$ 5 million was a mean - mean is in his presentation. It was a mean of the proposals. That means an average.

Now, who calculated the mean? (Laughter) Mr Speaker, we need to get to the bottom of this. Who calculated the mean? The minutes are very clear. Mean means an average. Whoever calculated it, we also need to know? But if you are talking about an average, that is an estimate and you can say, it might cost around or about this. That is okay for an estimate; but you go to the authority and speak with authority that we need US$ 5 million. Coincidentally, the price and the amount that was paid for the system TETRA, was US$ 5 million, including US$ 500,000 for nothing. Later, that came to be called commission for Huawei, yet they had a global contract for the national data transmission. Now, what is the commission for? So, Mr Speaker, the point the honourable minister needs to satisfy this House with is, where did the US$ 5 million come from? That is where the whole gist is -

THE SPEAKER: In other words, are you seeking clarification from him?

MR ODUMAN: Yes, if he clarifies that, it is finished.

5.18
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Mr Amama Mbabazi):  Mr Speaker, first of all, I can understand why hon. Oduman Okello -(Interjections)- I do not know Albert, I know Okello - is trying hard to help his chairman. 

Can I refer you to page 7 of my report?  

THE SPEAKER: I think you are tired.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: For my response.

THE SPEAKER: We are just working in circles.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I responded to this and I thought that maybe the chairman’s response would be to what I said here. So, I want to make two points:

One; the PAC report, as hon. Nandala is saying here, supported by hon. Okello, is that, “Amama Mbabazi, introduced for the first ever the idea of US$ 5 million to the President at the meeting held on 12 September 2006.” Although he quotes June now, it is okay. “He claimed that he was communicating the result of a procurement process. This is not true, because he was contradicted by Mr Ochieng who stated that there was no procurement process by that time.”

My answer is clear. First, that PAC contradicts itself because in its own report on page 34, in the first paragraph and I quote what PAC says: “Indeed, the committee has seen a technical evaluation committee report dated 28 August 2006, where the committee chaired by one, Kalisa Ibrahim, evaluated expressions of interest in which Balton was evaluated with a quote of US$ 3 to US$ 4 million against Harris US$ 4 to US$ 5 million, Huawei US$ 4 to US$ 7 million and ZTE US$ 4 to US$ 7 million. In this report, there was no mention of US$ 5 million at all.”

That is what they were saying; but I said, in all of those in that report, in their own report, US$ 5 million, is in every figure except that one of Balton. These are your own figures. I did not tell PAC that the procurement process had been concluded. The expression of interest is part of the process. So, that is point number one. That is exactly what happened. That is what I am saying.

Point number two; hon. Nandala stood here and said that I told Balton to quote the US$ 5 million having introduced US$ 5 million to the President. That is what he was asked to substantiate. Whatever hon. Okello is saying has no relevance to what hon. Nandala-Mafabi has been asked to substantiate. I thought that was the main point. Can he substantiate it or if he can’t, simply withdraw it and we move on?

5.22
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Mr Speaker, this US$ 4.986500 million should not worry my colleagues because when it was submitted, the issue of the invoice from Huawei Technology Limited was brought to the attention of the Security Sub-committee of CHOGM meeting on 20 December 2006 and it tasked the security technical team to re-scrutinise the costs forwarded and also cross-check with the Tanzanian Police which had earlier procured a similar system. You know there were safeguards and they even go on that the acting permanent secretary, Ministry of ICT, wrote on 16 January, 2007, to the executive director of PPDA, attaching two ministry officials to assist the security technical team in the negotiation process between Huawei Technology Limited, the contractor and Balton. So, even if in the unlikely event that the hon. Mbabazi had done something, it was going to be blocked by the technical people cross-checking with Tanzania. So, I do not think this can really put us in a situation where we can condemn hon. Mbabazi. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There is no evidence that hon. Amama had written to Balton. It is not there. Only circumstantial evidence is here –(Interjection)- please be careful. There was need for US$ 5 million and the company is Motorola; and Motorola is being supplied by Balton; and Balton in its wisdom on 14 November 2006, barely one and a half months after, submits an invoice nearing US$ 5 million. Who is that who told them that we have a budget of that much? Mr Speaker, we have the attachment of what was supposed to be supplied. It is in annex 18(a). The items that were supposed to be supplied are there. These items were quoted for between US$ 3 million to US$ 4 million. Now, the items which are being supplied at US$ 5 million are less than the items which were quoted for, less that amount.

THE SPEAKER: So, honourable, your position is that you have no direct evidence to connect hon. Amama Mbabazi to Balton to pay US$ 5 million. Can we conclude that way? Let me deal with him. I think the statement was made by him. We are tying to find out whether he has direct evidence or he is just suspecting.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, let me take the information and then I will tell you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. He has given you the Floor.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, it is known the world over that when an international company is giving a quote, before they do that, there is a very elaborate investigation, on what they sometimes call “looking for worms in the wood” in order to go into the depth of the nature of work they are supposed to do. So, before the company comes up with US$ 3.2 million or whatever amount, they would have known the component that is involved in that quote. Therefore, where I feel my conscience telling me that we need an explanation is the meeting of the top officials of Government to speculate on the figure of US$ 5 million. And then the technical team is tasked to do re-evaluation after the proforma is given. This creates a problem. That is what is written here. Because by the time the quotation was given – 

THE SPEAKER: I think what is happening is that we just suspect. It is a question of suspecting.

MR MBABAZI: The order is this. I have quoted and I hope my sister has a copy of the report of the committee. 

THE SPEAKER: I think the answer is that we have no direct evidence.

MS AMONGI: Mr Speaker, I want some further clarification from the committee because reading from the committee, there are certain linkages that come out. For example, the committee indicates that hon. Amama Mbabazi in most of the dealings was linking with a one Susan Katono, General Manager Communications. One of the letters is written by Susan Katono, who is the General Manager Communications; she copied it to hon. Amama Mbabazi, on the same subject matter. But when the Managing Director of Balton writes, he copies only to the Minister of State for Information, the Inspector General of Police and the Director of Huawei Technologies.

The committee observes that in their examination - and there was an issue that came from witnesses that the link person in Balton between Amama Mbabazi was Susan Katono, who is a blood relative of Amama Mbabazi. It is page 38 of the report. The letter copied to you by the said Susan is annex 18(c) and then after that annex (d) is the letter written by the Managing Director, but not copied to you; annex 18(d).

The committee in analysing those two communications makes conclusions that certain people who appeared before them said the link person in Balton for Amama Mbabazi was Susan Katono, who is a blood relative of Amama Mbabazi. I am raising this, corroborating it with the report of the committee.

MR MBABAZI: This honourable lady is telling lies. What is written here is not what she is saying and she wants to persuade the whole world that this report is saying that the link person between me and Balton is Susan Katono. It is not here. She did not read it, not because she cannot read –

THE SPEAKER: I thought we dealt with this issue yesterday. In the explanation of hon. Amama Mbabazi didn’t we talk about it? And according to the honourable chairman, he says there is no direct evidence. And I said they are suspecting. He talked about circumstantial evidence. It is not direct evidence. He said from circumstantial evidence; he made that conclusion. That is from the author himself.

MS AMONGI: Mr Speaker, I have read this report and I first want to read for hon. Amama Mbabazi, on page 38, because he is saying that I am lying. Page 38 says: “The evaluation committee had evaluated five firms on 28 August 2006 and came up with a cost of TETRA systems at US$ 3.2 million.” (Annexes 18 and 18(a)). “Supplies at US$ 5 million, which are less.” (Annex 18(b)). “On 29 August 2006, hon. Amama Mbabazi instead wrote to the President giving the cost of the equipment as ranging from US$ 3 million to US$ 7 million.” He also recommended Balton because of favourable terms. The security sub-committee members also informed the committee that the responsible executive sales person at Balton at the time of this procurement was a one Ms Susan Katono, who was responsible for processing and issuing of price quotes etc. The committee, however, separately established that the said Ms Susan Katono is related by blood to Minister Amama Mbabazi, and that whenever Susan Katono wrote about this procurement, she copied to hon. Amama Mbabazi and yet Zeev Shiff, the Managing Director of Balton never did so. Annexes 18(c) and 18(d). 

Now, Mr Speaker, I am raising this in corroboration with annexes 18(c) and 18(d), because as we debate this matter, it is not only about evidence cast in stone. We also have international rating of what corruption is. If I am to quote for you, in 2006, the Freedom House Report - you can access it on www.freedomhouse.org. - in its country assessment, stated that political patronage and favouritism is one of the worst political forms of corruption in Uganda, and it went ahead to say that in Uganda, the most affected sector in relation to political corruption is corruption in public procurement; and this even goes on, and it was corroborated by the African Peer Review Mechanism Report of 2007, which stated that Uganda loses US$ 258.6 million annually through corruption in procurement. 

So, for me the issue here is that when we look at assessment indices worldwide, reports related to - either released by the World Bank, World Economic Forum or the Global Integrity Report, the question of political corruption is No.1. Bureaucratic corruption is there. Nepotism is there. 

So, when we talk about hard evidence, we are also negating the fact that worldwide there are other mechanisms within which corruption is measured and I have made it clear in reports which are published. The African Peer Review Mechanism was appointed by His Excellency the President.

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, thank you. I have listened with a lot of interest to the submission from my sister there and I am somehow at a loss because we are handling a specific case arising out of the submissions of hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Can you assist us to reinforce what hon. Nandala-Mafabi has said or to disprove it? Otherwise, we are now moving in the wilderness and may never conclude and time is running out. Mr Speaker, next week we have nominations for parliamentary candidates. I think we are not moving.

MS AMONGI: What I am trying to say is that arising from what I have read in the report, unless hon. Amama Mbabazi denies that the one Susan Katono is not related to him by blood, then that is nepotism where inside trading took place, gave information to this woman on the US$ 5 million, and that is how they ate the money -(Interjections)- that is what I am saying. Unless he can prove that Susan Katono is not his relative, the report is very clear. The report says that even in writing, while the managing director writes and does not copy to hon. Amama Mbabazi, this particular woman copies to hon. Amama Mbabazi. Why? She is only the communications marketing officer and the other one is a director. What is the link and the connection? 

MR PETER NYOMBI: Mr Speaker, on page 38 from which she is quoting - the text actually begins on page 36, and these are opinions of the committee. It is not evidence. And if you read in the middle of what she quoted, she says, “The committee, however, separately established….” The committee does not tell us how they established that. Susan Katono was not invited. Hon. Amama Mbabazi was not questioned. This is an opinion of the committee; this is not evidence.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I really feel sad that our levels of debate can sink so low. These bullets read on page 38 do not directly or indirectly support her assertion that Susan Katono was the link person between me and Balton. The question she is asking is a question she should answer because you are the one who is alleging. I would like to know why you make those allegations.

You know, I am surprised that a responsible person can stand in Parliament and say that because this general manager of a company wrote and gave a copy to the minister who was in charge of the sector that was going to be the end-user of the equipment that we were trying to purchase, is evidence of corruption. It is amazing. It is truly amazing. 

But ultimately, Mr Speaker, I really do not think those who spoke have helped my brother. Ultimately, it is him who will have to come back and tell us what evidence he has in the allegation he has made on this Floor that I told Balton to quote US$ 5 million. 

THE SPEAKER: I think hon. Member -(Mr Oduman rose_)- no, the point was to substantiate the statement he had made in respect of the US$ 5 million, connecting hon. Mbabazi. When I asked him he said, on record, that he does not have direct evidence in form of a letter, but circumstantial evidence and, therefore, this is the person who was asked to substantiate. What we can ask you, what circumstantial evidence can you get so that we can move? No, let him answer he has the record. The question was directed at him. Please resume your seat. Let hon. Nandala answer or he does not answer and then we see.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want to show you. To start with, let us look at the evaluation report of 28 August 2006. It brought a quotation of Balton. It is between three to four; Harris four to five; Huawei, four to seven; ZTE, four to seven. That is annex 18. The evaluation committee put notice that they preferred CDMA. If it was Balton which we wanted, we would have quoted the average of three to four, and the mean of 3 to 4 is 3.5. 

On September 12, the minister for security told the President that we need five million dollars to buy equipment, and the company which is going to provide this is Motorola. It had been proposed that Huawei and Motorola would work out arrangements for the supply of equipment. Huawei was the one which had a loan from Exim Bank. It was providing the E-governance backbone.

If you look at the letter he wrote to the President, he clearly states and says what type of company runs Motorola. Balton is the agent for Motorola and this is very clear in the minute. From there an invoice of almost US$ 5 million comes, yet their quotation which was evaluated was between US$ 3 and 4 million.

On August 20, 2007 they tried to bring a detailed invoice. This is annex 12. They are giving a discount of 56 percent; they continue to give a discount of 44 percent on the second point. Which business can give a discount of over 60 percent; what would be the cost price of that item?  This company is new and it can afford a 60 percent discount, which gives us an interesting situation.

The purpose of this discount and the invoice was to take away the public money. This Motorola Company had an advantage over others; it was not evaluated with others. If it had been evaluated with others, we would have got value for money. The issue of transparency is the one which brings money down. The moment it is single sourcing, the company can give you any price. The issue is that if we wanted a TETRA system and there was transparency, we would have got value for money. We believe that the minister of security was involved in this process and led to Ugandans to not getting value for money.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I must say that I have kept quiet while some unpalatable things were being said. I think we are simply compounding a problem. Nandala-Mafabi was asked to substantiate the circumstantial evidence he has linking me to what he alleged that I am the one who told Balton to quote US$ 5 million. Obviously, he is cleverly trying to steer away from it because the things he is repeating here are in the report and I have responded to them.
I have stated very clearly that the five million dollars is in his report. This is in a report of an evaluation committee where I am not a member. For him to repeatedly repeat the obvious is to underestimate the intelligence of the Members of this House. 

I am rising on a point of order. Is it in order for hon. Nandala-Mafabi to continue simply going around and not adducing the evidence to prove his assertion that I asked Balton to quote US$ 5 million?

In the PAC report itself on page 34, it says that there was a technical committee which evaluated the quotations of several companies, including Balton.  Is he in order to continuously insist that I am the one that introduced Balton when indeed the committee findings are that a technical team had evaluated a quotation from Balton. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala- Mafabi was asked to substantiate; he admitted that he had no direct evidence and his was mere circumstantial evidence. According to him, that is the circumstantial evidence that he has. 

I think in order to save on time – because I see this is going to be repeated – let the Members consider whether this is really enough circumstantial evidence to back-up the statement which he made that you had connected with Balton; otherwise, we will never end.

MR NYOMBI: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi is still insisting after I have moved a motion on the basis that there was no evidence and that the allegations be dropped against hon. Amama Mbabazi – 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, that is the motion you brought when you opened up; that to you, the recommendations against hon. Amama Mbabazi be dropped. Let us continue debating that and then we see how to move on.

MR NYOMBI: And, therefore, Mr Speaker, I propose that you put a question as to whether – 

THE SPEAKER: Let it first be debated; let other people make their submissions.

5.55
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Earlier on I had indicated that I wanted to ask a question for the Chairman of PAC to answer. Unfortunately, in his reply, he has not addressed my concern. My concern is on page 34, Annex 10: “His Excellency the President, earlier on 12th June questioned why there should be expenditure on communication equipment when the military had adequate communication equipment”. I want to know the point of departure; how did the security ministry justify and, therefore, nullify the President’s plea. I believe the President knows the communication facilities that the military had. Therefore – 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Ogwal, yesterday when hon. Amama Mbabazi made his statement, he explained that in detail. If you read the Hansard, he answers it.

MRS OGWAL: The reason why I am saying this - the origin of the US$ 5 million defeats me. Because the President was convinced that there was no need – 

THE SPEAKER: But Maama, hon. Amama Mbabazi explained that when you were not here. It is here in writing.

MRS OGWAL: I was here, hon. Speaker. But are we going to go by hon. Amama Mbabazi’s statement?

THE SPEAKER: No, I am telling you that the explanation was given.

MR BYARUGABA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the honourable member for giving way. The information I want to give is that this committee had an opportunity to meet the President for over four hours. We interacted with him and discussed all these details. He agreed that he later found – although he at first didn’t agree - but the technical team from the security organisation convinced him that it was necessary to have a separate system and the amount involved as well. He agreed.

MRS OGWAL: It is not contained here. If he agreed, on what basis did he agree? And where is the report of the technical team that convinced him to agree? – 

MR BYARUGABA: Now, that is the crux of the matter. If the President agreed and talked about it, and asked us and we agreed, why is it not there? Thank you very much.

MRS OGWAL: That is what - can you repeat yourself? (Laughter) Mr Speaker, I think this is a serious matter. This Parliament can decide we deal with individuals and we remove them. But we will not remove the stain from the state and that is why I am digging deeper into the President. Because the President was more concerned about the cost and PAC has also mentioned this particular section on cost; that okay, the equipment could have been there, but the cost at which it was acquired was very high.
And I think that is the President’s concern. So, we can exonerate the minister, but the stain will still remain on the state. And this is where we have to be humble and protect the image of the state; allowing the individual to take the blame. This is my concern; because at the end of the day –

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Ogwal, you asked the question about why they did not use the military. Now, who is going to answer? Do we postpone this so that they go to the President, ask him and then report back? I have told you that this matter was yesterday dealt with and the explanation given. Now, when you ask us, definitely the chairman does not have the answer; he has to seek it from the President.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, there is a minute where the President questioned it; we have attached it there.

THE SPEAKER: And the answer given, as hon. Byarugaba has told us?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Which one?

THE SPEAKER: The issue which hon. Ogwal is asking that why they did not use the military equipment. Did you ask the President about that?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, what we are saying is that the President was insisting on military for the Police, but the security committee headed by hon. Amama Mbabazi told the President that the equipment was incompatible and obsolete. Let me summarise the statement: “We need US$ 5 million and we would get it from the loan...” – the loan was under the company that was executing the – 

THE SPEAKER: No, the pricing can come after, but in principle, why did they not use the military equipment and instead went to purchase? Apparently the chairman is saying the President was convinced and, therefore, it was not done behind his back. This is what he is saying. (Laughter)

MRS MUGYENYI: The committee says that it asked why military equipment was not used and hon. Amama Mbabazi answered; and you heard this information while conducting inquiry in the PAC. So, hon. Alex Byarugaba asked the question, but it has not been answered. Why is that piece of information missing in the report? To me, the reporting in the committee was selective. Even hon. Ogwal has asked the same question. Was the committee selecting what they wanted to report, leaving out what they did not want? Mr Speaker, that is why some of us are having a problem; we are questioning the objectivity of this report. Some information seems to have been left out while some seems to have been included. This is why I think we have taken a lot of time on this report and wasted valuable time. I do not think that we have the capacity to deliver justice on this issue. 

I would like to move, Mr Speaker, that we move as hon. Nyombi has suggested and we consider the motion that he put to us so that we move forward. (Interjections) I thank you. Unfortunately, you have not listened to me – but we need to move, Mr Speaker.
  
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, when we were doing the work - we have the minutes - and in the minutes, it is very clearly stated. The justification for Motorola is attached -(Interjections)– you have not read. Even if you read our minutes, we are quoting the minutes verbatim - as it was recorded. If you read, it will clearly show you. 

Page 37 – this is now hon. Amama Mbabazi: “The existing communication system was inadequate for CHOGM...” (Interjections) We have quoted on page 37, get your book and check there. “... and the Army equipment proposed for the use of CHOGM would not be capable of handling the required nature of communication;” -(Interjections)- I am answering her question because you are saying that it is not in the report; it is here. We are reading the report. 

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Mr Speaker, we are really moving in circles and hon. Nandala is not adding value to this debate. The information we want, and we are wondering why it was left out, was the meeting between the President and PAC where the President agreed that after getting information, he was convinced that we needed more equipment apart from the UPDF and security equipment. Why is that information missing from the report? That is the question on the Floor for hon. Nandala to answer.

MR KAZIBWE: Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give is that what Members are asking is true. I am a member of PAC - when we went to the President, he agreed that we were supposed to buy a new system and his conviction was on the premise that what he had earlier on suggested in the letter was shallow - it could not be put in the exhibit; that UPDF and Police machinery would not be able to interface with the Queen’s machinery and other Heads of State’s machinery. 

So, the new system was supposed to interface with new ones. Therefore, he agreed that we should buy a new system. That is what he told us. But if we have our minutes when we were in State House, then we can produce them. But that is exactly when the President agreed that we should go ahead and buy a new system. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, one of the things the committee has not questioned is why you bought the new equipment. The argument of the committee is that this new equipment was not procured in a transparent manner and it was very expensive for Ugandans.

The President told us -(Interjections)– yes, it was okay; that is not a problem. If you read our report, we were not questioning the purchase of the new equipment. We went to the President with these minutes -(Interjections)– no, the President accepted – please, it is here, that is why we accepted. 

MR MBABAZI: I am seeking clarification from hon. Nandala-Mafabi and the Public Accounts Committee members because in this report, they are making the point repeatedly that on 12th September 2006, the President instructed that we use UPDF communication equipment and we do not buy a new one. This is the dominant presentation as far as security is concerned and yet PAC met with the President; PAC raised these issues with the President and the President indeed responded to them. The question is; why does your report not have the response of the President on that issue and what more did you receive that you have hidden? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think that this is convenient time to -(Interjections)– you want to vote? 

6.09
MRS MUGYENYI: Mr Speaker, we need to consider the motion that hon. Nyombi put on the Floor of this House. And I do not think that we are adding value by going around and saying the same thing. So, I would like to repeat and move the same – I do not think that procedurally I am right to move the same motion, but I would like to request, that we consider the motion that hon. Nyombi moved. I wish to move.

THE SPEAKER: So, the motion is that I put the question? 

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I have raised this concern and I am not satisfied with what has been given to me. So, it is my considered view that when we are dealing with sensitive matters like this, it would be more dangerous for this institution which you yourself -

THE SPEAKER: Do not blackmail; just put your point.

MRS OGWAL: Okay, let me go to the point. The problem in Lango is that we do not know how to summarise; we have to explain. (Interjections)
 
THE SPEAKER: So, what is the point?

MRS OGWAL: You did not create me to be Langi; it is God who created me to be Langi, so you have to listen to me. Mr Speaker, I am trying to say that we have observed that there are certain gaps in the report and we have knowledge that there are gaps in the report. Therefore, it will be very dangerous, and I want the hon. Minister of Information, Kabakumba Masiko to listen, because you doubt that I am a Langi. 

I want her to listen to this; it will be dangerous for us to expunge any name or to exonerate anybody when there are very many gaps. I would rather that we push this report to another institution that will give - preferably to IGG – that will make a thorough analysis of some of the information that we already have at hand. Because this is the stage at which we are; this is stage two. Stage one was the Auditor-General’s report. Stage two is PAC. Let us go to stage three. Why are you in a hurry? You are in a hurry because you know you are going to your constituencies and if you are found guilty, it will be difficult.  

But that is not the issue; Uganda is bigger and that is why I am saying that this is only stage two of these investigations where we have discovered that there are gaps. So, we cannot exonerate anybody unless the entire process has been concluded. And I would rather that Parliament pushes this report to IGG to give it a more thorough analysis and then we will be able to know the end result of this report. Otherwise, it will be premature to exonerate anybody when we know very well that there are many gaps; there are many errors and we cannot base our judgement on what - So, I want to move a motion –(Interjections)- I was giving a preamble to a motion. (Laughter) I am giving the preamble to my motion that this report be sent to IGG and the DPP for more investigations before we can exonerate anybody, because Parliament is not capable of exonerating anybody. 

THE SPEAKER: Otherwise, I think what hon. Ogwal is saying is that this report was submitted here for consideration and adoption, but she says we do not continue consideration and we do not adopt it, but we send it to another agency –(Interjections) 

Well, I am just explaining my understanding of what she proposed; that we do not pronounce ourselves one way or the other, but we submit the report to another agency of Government, and she is suggesting IGG, to deal with it so that we do not prejudice anything; we do not prejudice the recommendation and we do not prejudice the persons named in the report. I am just explaining. What is your -

MR JOHN NASASIRA: Thank you. I want your guidance, Mr Speaker. We seem to be moving goal posts since this report came here. I think the first time it was that there was a delay by Government to discuss this report. Now, when we start discussing the report, we want to send it back and yet where we have reached - I understand this morning - I am sorry I was not here for reasons, Mr Speaker, you know as well as the Leader of Government Business.

We had reached a stage where even parts of the report had been expunged and we hear from Hon. Cecilia Ogwal that there are actually gaps in the report. Why don’t we deal with these gaps here and finish? For my part, all my colleagues who have been accused in this report - the ministers - have made their statements and I came here this afternoon to make mine. I think I deserve to be in the Hansard and be heard before we move with hon. Cecilia Ogwal’s motion if we have to go with it at all. So, I want your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, what I am saying is that there is a motion and I was only explaining it to you, that we stay the consideration of this matter; we do not adopt, but refer it to an agency of Government, namely, IGG or CID.

MR MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I understand what hon. Cecilia Ogwal is saying. She is saying that the report has gaps; it has problems and maybe it is not worth the consideration of this House. I do understand that and I share that sentiment fully -(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I did not in any way say -(Interjections)- Can the honourable Minister of Security, who should have keener ears to what is being said, listen to me? I did not in any way say that this report is not worthy. Never! This report is very useful, but this report and that of accounts, are dealing more with figures and financial laws, but we have stumbled over some criminal activities and, therefore, we cannot pass judgement on criminal activities. 

My conscience tells me that I can adequately, efficiently and professionally pass my opinion on figure work, accounting work or financial matters, but when we stumble over criminal matters, I think we need another institution to deal with this and help us. So, we have handled the second stage of this investigation. Let us now go to the root of the matter; let the agencies that adequately deal with criminal matters, also have a chance of looking at the report. Is it, therefore, in order for the Secretary General of the Movement, who is also my relative - Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Many times, I have heard honourable members misusing this point of order, but the point is that hon. Cecila Ogwal thinks that we should not pronounce ourselves on this report, but send it to another -

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, we have received this report as a House and we have given the opportunity to a number of colleagues who were implicated in the report. Some of the matters that have been raised in the report - surely, we cannot hurriedly exonerate or expunge, because even the manner in which we are having debates here is not exhaustive. Figures are being quoted, annexes are being quoted, yet some Members do not even follow. (Interjections) 

Mr Speaker, we are proud that we have a number of institutions, and I want to guide and inform the honourable Minister of Information to try to be orderly. It is not good to be a heckler in the House - an honourable Minister for Information and Guidance? Let us listen to each other. We are proud as a country to have a number of accountability institutions who can - We are not alpha and omega as Parliament, in the investigation. The proposal moved by hon. Cecila Ogwal, in my opinion, will give us even more critical issues and really if there is anything to do with exoneration, we will have rested our case and continue looking at value for money, because it may not end with CHOGM. 

So, Mr Speaker, I implore Members that we adopt that proposal and have another arm support us in this investigation. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, may I also make an appeal to you? Be courteous to each other. Please try to be; it is a respectable culture of being courteous.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, I oppose the motion. Why do I oppose hon. Cecilia Ogwal’s motion? It is going to dilute the role of Parliament. Parliament has the capacity to listen to all the groups and make its position. I would like to add that in any case, the IGG and CID are investigating. I oppose the motion.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, I rise to support the motion of hon. Cecila Ogwal because that motion has similar intentions as the one I had initiated in the morning. That is, the intention is cognisant of the fact that investigations by other competent investigative organs are already going on. It would do us well as Parliament that we support what is already going on in terms of investigation and at this stage, give these institutions raw material. It is a beautiful modification of the earlier proposal. So, let us give them raw material. We have the report -(Interruption)

MR KUTESA: Mr Speaker, this morning, the honourable member holding the Floor moved a motion that we adopt this report. That motion was voted upon and defeated. What has suddenly changed his mind to realise that this House has no capacity to deal with this motion and that it must be moved on to the IGG? He is the one who moved the motion this morning that we adopt the report without any amendments. I now do not know what has befallen him this afternoon. I would like to know what exactly has happened for him to change positions today. Thank you.

MR ODUMAN: I can explain that, Mr Speaker. The honourable minister has pointed out that I said that we adopt this report without any amendments. Yes, I said it, and I also added that we send it to Government as proposals for it to consider what to implement and with what reasons –(Interjections)– yes! 

Now, what I am saying is that this modification is very beautiful. Rather than first adopt the report, the Speaker has guided well by clarifying that before adopting the motion and without changing anything, we just send it to the IGG. That is a beautiful modification! (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, this is the way to go because it is middle ground. One of the founding reasons I can see in this is that some of those who are accused in this report are here. They have been given opportunity to defend themselves, except one. 

Unfortunately, why we are doing rope-pulling is because there is a conflict. We, who are supposed to decide on this matter, have among us those who are implicated by this report. Therefore, we cannot be seen to be passing decisions on this report objectively. This is because at the time of voting on a motion, if they say that there is a proposal to exonerate minister X, for example - there is a way the Speaker puts it: those in favour say “aye” to the contrary “no” - those who are implicated also participate in that decision. (Laughter) That is exactly why, Mr Speaker and Members of Parliament, this matter will drag on and on in this House. 

My suggestion is that we support this humble motion to send this report as raw material and then we add on, if you so wish, the presentations by the ministers that have been laid here. Let us send this material to the IGG as a report together with the presentations of the ministers. I hope that will make us move. 

I am saying this because we need to move beyond CHOGM and the accused persons also need to move beyond CHOGM. However, I do not see us move to that point because we have failed to agree. We are pulling ropes - the accused persons are here and so we can never take an objective decision on this report from here. That is why –(Interjections)– I suggest and Members should support this, that we send this report to the IGG as proposed by hon. Cecilia Ogwal.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear from hon. Mevenjina.

MS MAVENJINA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to oppose the motion as moved by hon. Cecilia Ogwal. First of all, we have done our duty as Parliament; we have been debating this issue over and over. Now, instead of us taking a decision, hon. Cecilia Ogwal is moving a motion for this matter to be taken to another institution. If that is the case, then what is our duty as parliamentarians? 

I think we are here to do our part; we have already listened to the presentation by the chairperson of PAC as well as the defences of the ministers implicated. Hon. Peter Nyombi made a beautiful presentation and I am fully convinced by what he said. I would like to request that we take a decision as Parliament without referring this matter to any other institution. Otherwise, we will be running away from our own duties. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am sure you realise this has been a very difficult debate right from the beginning. I was looking at the recommendations of the report and I have also been following the trends. We have expunged parts of this report, but if we follow that trend, there is actually going to be no report. (Laughter) Yes, there is actually going to be no report. We should not lie to ourselves. 

True, a report of this magnitude will always have gaps. Indeed, like in this one, we must admit there are gaps. The one that you can easily talk about is the one where hon. Rukutana and hon. Musumba, at the beginning of handling it, said that some of the people mentioned in it had not been given opportunity to be heard.

The essence of hon. Cecilia Ogwal’s motion is really to save us from working with a prolonged debate. It also serves the interests of our colleagues who are implicated, in my view. It will not be seen like we just exonerated our friends, those we sit with here, and left those who did not have opportunity to defend themselves from here.

I am saying this because, Mr Speaker, look at those many letters that have been coming to you. I notice one from Balton Ltd. Although obviously there are some allegations made against Balton, they said that they wrote to PAC to be heard, but they never got an opportunity to do so, and they do not have the opportunity to come here and convince us to expunge some record because nobody here might have that interest.

It is also good for the integrity of this House, Mr Speaker, for us not to be seen like we are hashing up to exonerate. By the way, I do believe that some of our colleagues could be innocent. I sincerely believe that. However, to quote hon. Peter Nyombi, justice must not only be done, but must be seen to be done.

To the person outside, looking at the trend Parliament is taking, it is like Members of Parliament are exonerating their friends or themselves. (Interjections) The only problem with hon. Kabakumba - you see, the people of Bujenje did not send you here to shout at us. You will get an opportunity to speak for yourself. You are shouting at each and every person, something that irritates us – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, let us restrain ourselves. We are about to get done with this matter.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, you have really implored us to be courteous to each other. Being courteous to each other shows how you were brought up. What we want is to let everybody give their views and if anybody has a contrary view, give it and people will judge. It is as simple as that, hon. Kabakumba Matsiko.

Anyway, the point I am trying to make, Mr Speaker, and I really implore all of us, both sides -(Ms Kabakumba rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Please let him finish. Restrain yourself, please.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, the truth is, I have seen almost all recommendations regarding each sector from each ministry, it sort of relates to the political head of that ministry and then other recommendations come in. Once the political head is somehow expunged from this report, actually, the entire report goes. It becomes totally irrelevant. If we proceed like this, there is nothing after we have expunged our colleagues, who have already made their defence. 

Obviously, I sympathise with hon. Nasasira because this debate should have come when he had actually put his case on record. His case really should be on record such that if somebody is reading the Hansard, he knows this is the case of hon. Nasasira, because the other colleagues have put up what poses as some arguable case, in my view, speaking as a lawyer.

From the explanations that have been given, you know there is now something arguable about the recommendations, something debatable. Once you have that sort of balance, then maybe we do not have time and we do not have the capacity to conclusively say - like now, I am at a loss to say that hon. Amama Mbabazi is actually -

THE SPEAKER: Sorry, would you like to wind up?

MR KATUNTU: Can I make my -

THE SPEAKER: Wind up.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am at a loss having listened to hon. Amama Mbabazi, for example, and read his statement to actually say, “Oh my God, maybe he is right or maybe he is wrong”. That is what is on my mind. When you read his response, he actually sort of answers what he has been accused about. Now, the committee is seeking to even produce further evidence including that which may necessitate us to read the minutes. So, really, it is not about condemning our colleagues, no; and it is not about exonerating them either; it is that a person who is actually innocent should certainly walk out of this whole mess without being tainted, having been properly cleared.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is that we refer the report without pronouncing ourselves to a government agency. I put the question.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR NYOMBI: Mr Speaker, I raised the first motion.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I put the question to the motion.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I am raising a procedural question on our Rules of Procedure, rule 80(3), and I take the opportunity to read:

“At the time of voting, a Member who has declared his or her interests under this rule shall absent himself or herself from the meeting until voting is over”.

Since this is concerning particular Members and there is a matter concerning one -

THE SPEAKER: So, you want the members of PAC to go out? Do you need the members of PAC and the Members implicated to go away?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Depending on the motion, can those who are involved in this give way so that we can vote with a clear mind, without any bias?

THE SPEAKER: So, hon. Mbabazi, because he is the one interested. How about members of PAC?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, those members were involved in the report, but a Member who is directly affected and it is part of our rules to give us audience –

THE SPEAKER: Okay, since this vote is on hon. Mbabazi he can. I put the question on the motion by hon. Peter Nyombi.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, we have sat here since morning. I think this is the convenient time to adjourn. However, my attention has been drawn to a serious problem in the country, namely, oil running the generators and that we may really shut down because of what is happening. However, it can be salvaged by considering item No.4 on the Order Paper, but I think we cannot do it now. Can we come tomorrow between 9.00 a.m. and 10.00 a.m. and deal with this matter?

HON. MEMBERS: 10.00 a.m.

THE SPEAKER: We shall consider it at 10 O’clock, hon. Members.

MR KASSIANO WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have just taken a ruling and I am still at a loss -(Interjections)- Yes, I am at a loss and I do not think I am the only one at a loss.

So, I would like to seek guidance from the Speaker -(Interjections)- Hon. Hope Mwesigye, I will take you to Lyomoki’s village later on, not here.(Laughter) 

The point I am trying to seek clarification on is that a motion was moved and a decision has been taken that the matter of CHOGM be decided upon in this House instead of referring it to other investigative arms of Government. As we adjourn to tomorrow, you have made mention and drawn our attention to one item which you will wish us to start on at 10.00 a.m. Where is the fate of this report and my friend, hon. Hope Mwesigye, whom I am going to take to Lyomoki’s village? Where is the fate of this report?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, the fate is this: We have decided that we continue considering the CHOGM report rather than sending it to a government agency, and we have decided that the recommendation against hon. Amama Mbabazi be expunged. The others remain. 

The Minister of Finance has indicated that there is a crisis with the generators giving us power because they are running short on diesel or whatever, I do not know. This can only be saved by us considering the item of a loan which is going to be used to bring in the oil so that the generation of power can continue. Tomorrow is a Friday and I thought we could come tomorrow to consider this very urgent matter and then we shall continue next week to deal with CHOGM.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Sorry to take you back, but I just had opportunity to read the entire report. If we go by hon. Nyombi’s motion, which has just been carried, relating to the hon. Amama Mbabazi there should certainly be consequential - I do not know what you call them - maybe motions. Once all the recommendations referring to hon. Amama Mbabazi are expunged, there should be consequential expungement. (Interjections)  Almost the entire recommendation from page 185 to 186 should really go.

THE SPEAKER: I appeal to you that you study these consequential ones and when we meet again next week, and you point them out. (Laughter)

So, hon. Members, we have agreed that tomorrow we shall meet at 10.0 a.m. to consider this very urgent item and we see what happens. I really thank you very much for your contributions and time. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. for business.

(The House rose at 6.44 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 19 November 2010 at 10.00 a.m.) 

