Wednesday, 25 November 2009

Parliament met at 2.35 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you and thank you for the diligence you have exhibited in the last four days since we started debating this Bill before us. Please continue the good work.

2.37
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. There is a matter of national concern to us as Parliament and particularly so to us the Opposition and this regards issues to do with the Electoral Commission. In today’s media, particularly, Daily Monitor, it was reported that there have been some acts of fraud in the procurement of voting machines and the compilation of national Ids. For us who have represented this Parliament on the APRM governing council, we feel discomforted with the events taking place at the Electoral Commission at the moment.

There is a letter to the Secretary Electoral Commission dated 6 November 2009 which has been signed by Cornelia K. Sabiti, the Executive Director Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority. Herein, are contents and recommendations that are very disturbing given the fact that the Electoral Commission had issued a roadmap to the 2011 elections. 

In this letter, Cornelia is asking the Electoral Commission to do certain things. And I would wish to ask the responsible minister to respond to the issues that are raised herein. For example, I beg to read verbatim. On page two of this letter –

THE SPEAKER: If it is a letter read it.

MS BAKO: It is a lengthy letter, Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence. It is dated, “6 November 2009: The Secretary Electoral Commission, Plot 53/56 Jinja Road, P.O. Box 22678, Kampala. Re: Investigation report on the procurement for supply, installation and commissioning of voter registration and biometric identification system for the Electoral Commission of Uganda, EC CRVC 0809000267. 

Reference is made to the above subject. In accordance with section 8(c) of the PPDA Act and PPDA Regulation 12(1), the authority conducted an investigation in the procurement process on the above procurement with the objective of ascertaining the validity of the allegations of omissions, collusion and suspected fraud as per the complaint from a whistleblower dated 1 October 2009. 

The authority has produced an investigation report detailing its findings and recommendations in accordance with section 9 of the PPDA Act and PPDA Regulation 12(2).

The main findings of the authority were that the procurement process was marred with fundamental procedural irregularities which cannot be corrected by a re-evaluation. 

The board of directors of the authority at its 138th meeting held on the 5 November 2009 considered the findings in the investigation report and noted the following specific irregularities under the procurement process:

a)	Use of the wrong standard bid document contrary to regulation 128(2).

b)	Altering of a standard bidding document contrary to regulation 127(3).

c)	Failure to apply evaluation criteria stated in the bid documents contrary to regulation 168(1). Under Section 3 of the solicitation document, it was stated that the entity would use technical compliance section, that is, a pass/fail against technical criteria but it was not applied at all. The entity only applied a merit point system, that is, a variable number of points awarded for technical criteria out of a maximum number of points.

d)	Irregular conduct of the evaluation by the valuation committee contrary to regulation 174(3).

e)	Lack of detailed criteria for evaluation of the test demo contrary to regulation 172(1). Return of the financial proposals without the contracts committee approving the technical evaluation report contrary to Section 29(a) (iii). 

The board of directors of the authority in accordance with the PPDA regulation 12(2) and in view of the irregularities above resolved that the Electoral Commission should:

1.	Cancel the current procurement process in accordance with the procedure under PPDA regulation 95.

2.	Return the financial proposals and securities to all the 15 bidders. 

3.	Re-tender using restricted bidding by inviting all the 15 firms that had submitted bids by the date of bid closing on 25 June 2009.

4.	Expedite the re-tender of the procurement process to ensure adherence to the roadmap for the 2011 general elections by applying the following deviations granted by the authority: 

a)	Reduction of the bidding period to 10 working days.

b)	Reduction of the best evaluated bidder notice period to five working days.

c)	Reduction of the period for opening of the financial bids to five working days.

d)	The criterion for the test demonstration should be covered under post-qualification and only in respect of the best evaluated bidder in order to save time.

e)	Undertake necessary consultations and issue a correct and comprehensive solicitation document. 

In light of the glaring procurement omissions in the whole procurement process, the board of the authority in accordance with Section 9(1) (b) further resolved that the Secretary of Electoral Commission should replace the head of the procurement and disposal unit. 

Please note that in accordance with Section 9(4) of the PPDA Act, you are required to inform the authority of the status of implementation of the above recommendations by 30 November 2009".Signed by Cornelia K. Sabiiti for the Executive Director. Here is a copy of the report. 

THE SPEAKER: What is the problem? It seems that the matter is being handled by the appropriate authority.

MS BAKO: It is all about the timing. This letter was dated, 6 November 2009 and today is the 25 November 2009. The Electoral Commission set a road map and according to the road map here, by this time all the procurement processes should have taken place. It is here and I think all of us have a copy of this letter. We in the Opposition are asking. If this is the level of fraud that is taking place in the Electoral Commission at this stage of procurement, how can we trust the Electoral Commission to deliver free and fair elections?

In this report, you realise that the recommendations indicate for example that there has been an increment of marks for certain forms at the expense of others and we are behind schedule. This is the very Electoral Commission that we should trust as the Opposition to deliver free and fair elections. If such fraud is taking place within the commission, how can we in the Opposition be rest assured that come 2011, we shall have free and fair elections? This is given the fact that in the initial place, they in themselves are not free and fair. The responsible minister should tell us how far they have gone with this because the deadline for implementation of the recommendations in the document is close to six days. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a copy of the report and also a copy of this letter so that the responsible minister can react to these issues as soon as possible.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Christine Bako for bringing this important matter to the attention of the House. I have been directed by the Leader of Government Business to let you know that the matter you have raised will be passed on to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs who is also the Attorney-General and who happens to be responsible for electoral matters. I thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LAND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007

2.38
MRS MARY OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand up to naturally support this Land (Amendment) Bill. Why do I say naturally? It is only natural that we should support anything and everything that tries to protect the vulnerable and we know that this Land (Amendment) Bill aims at doing exactly that. We know that tenants are given very unfair treatment by the landlords and we are here as a voice for the voiceless. We are talking for the more than 200 million tenants against 600,000 landlords. 

It has been said time and again that most of these landlords give very unrealistic timeframes at their whim. They will evict a tenant and when we talk about vulnerable people, I am talking about our mothers, sisters and your wives as well. These are very vulnerable people especially the women who, among others, are actually going to be assisted by this land Bill. 

We know very well that most women do not have security of tenure. If a woman is married and as soon as her husband passes away, she is hunted around like a headless chicken and in most cases chased away from the land because she does not have security of tenure. We know that women are key and very crucial in food and agricultural production. If they don’t have security of tenure, how will they carry out this very important role of soil conservation and so forth? 

We also know that women are very crucial as key actors on climate change. If they have security of tenure, it means that they will, for instance plant trees. But as it is, we are not sure of ourselves.

We do not want to have a bloody and messy revolution. The peasant revolution in India of the 1950s was because the tenants didn’t have security of tenure and therefore they rose up against the landlords and there was this bloody revolution. 

The French Revolution was along the same lines. The Mau Mau Revolution- When I heard some of my colleagues here saying that people will get up and fight, actually unless we pass this Land Bill, the tenants will turn against us because history abounds with these happenings worldwide.

I wished by colleague hon. Agnes Akiror had been around. I think it was yesterday when she said that many of the landlords are generals who are untouchable. I think this country knows the reverse. Since the advent of the NRM Government, there is no general who has been untouchable. I am sorry to cite the late Kazini but he was in and out of court; he was even in prison so how can we say that these generals are untouchable? Nobody is above the law in Uganda. (Interruption)

Mr Speaker, I have got seven minutes. I know that there is a ploy here to cut short my time. So I am not accepting any information. (Interruption)

MR OYET: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Mary Okurut for giving me this opportunity to provide information. The information I want to provide is that today as we talk, Brigadier General Charles Otema has fenced off 10,000 hectares of land, which belonged to the IDPs of Nwoya County. We took the matter to court, to the CDF and the Minister of Defence but nothing has been done. I wrote to the Prime Minister, Prof. Apolo Nsibambi but nothing has been done. 

As we talk, Gen. Julius Oketta who is a Member of Parliament here is evicting people who are sitting on 10,000 hectares of land in Amuru. Which general are you now talking about? 

MRS KAROORO OKURUT: Mr Speaker, we have given examples of generals. If you have taken the matter to court, then wait for the court ruling. If other generals have been touched – if Gen. Oketa is guilty, why do you think the law will not catch up with him? So, Mr Speaker, I beg to rest my case, but I urge everybody to support this Land (Amendment) Bill. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yesterday, I think there were only three remaining – you can come in.

2.50
MR GORDON KATENDE (NRM, Mityana County North): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. First of all, I want to state that I support the Bill. And I want to say that I support it from an informed position. There sections in the Bill where I had reservations before the consultations. But I participated in the consultations in Kayunga District, Nakaseke District, Mukono District, Kampala Central, Rubaga Divison, Makindye Division and in my own District of Mityana and in my constituency. 

On top of that, as a member of the Buganda Caucus, we also consulted the Mengo Government and H.E the President of Uganda and the clan leaders. From all those consultations, I made up my mind that supporting this Bill is not wrong but in the interest of the people I represent. 

Mr Speaker, I do not want to be like somebody who made up his mind before the consultations. If I may quote the words of the Speaker of Parliament of Uganda, by the names of Edward Ssekandi, he said, “Some people have got intellectual dishonesty”. I do not want to be in that category.

Mr Speaker, it is true that many people are being evicted and this Bill is going to alleviate some of those problems. It may not be entirely prohibitive of the evictions – we cannot stand against change. There is urbanisation world over. If you go to Europe and America, it is about only 2 percent in the rural areas. That means that the world is moving into urbanisation and definitely evictions will have to exist. 

But the big difference that this Bill is going to bring is that the eviction is going to have a human face. Today, somebody can get a court eviction order at 5 o’clock in the evening, by 8 p.m. they have demolished the house; they have chased everybody away; they have destroyed plantations – and there is no time for appeal. So, this Bill is going to bring in some harmony and enable people go for redress. 

Secondly, according to the Busuulu and Envujjo Act, clause 10 stated that tenants should be obedient to the landlord according to the customs and area laws. Now we have got a lot of movement of people and they no longer respect the customs in place. So we need a law to guide them because we now have a heterogeneous community yet at that time we had a homogenous community. 

The other aspect is that the widely spread evictions are bringing in insecurity. In my own constituency, so many people have been evicted. Thanks to hon. Vincent Nyanzi, the Minister who has supported me through political means, but the law was not on our side. So it is not true that the laws we have are already enough, otherwise, the lawyers would have stopped these evictions but they find a problem because these laws are scattered all over. So I support the idea of bringing them under one roof.

Our people who are poor do not have the funds to get guns – now days they bring bulldozers. I do not know whether that is catered for; because a bulldozer is not a gun but can be used to destroy your assets. 

But having said that, in Buganda, we still have the issue of 9,000 square kilometres which I think Government should come up quickly to address after passing this Bill.

The other item missing glaringly is that this Bill is going to give more powers to the district land boards to even determine the ground rent. But the composition of the district land boards is not yet fulfilled as per the constitutional requirement. So, I request that during the committee stage, we move an amendment on clause 57 of the Land Act to ensure that 50 percent of the membership of the district land boards is constituted by representation from the region. For instance in Buganda, every district in Buganda would have representation from the regional land board. 


On the issue of the land fund, according to the Prime Minister’s presentation, he said it would require Shs 1.767 trillion. I think this is an affordable venture. Not every long ago, in this financial year, this Parliament appropriated Shs 1.1 trillion for a road fund. 

So, I think, if we are really serious and we want to solve the problem, this Parliament can comfortably pass a land fund of Shs 1.8 trillion without disrupting other activities in this country. Also, that should be immediately followed with a national land policy to enable us move in a coordinated manner. 

With those remarks and the intended amendments – when we moved around Buganda, those were the main issues. One that the President of Uganda must meet the Kabaka of Buganda – (Member timed out.)

3.02
MR PATRICK OCHIENG (NRM, Bukooli County South): Thank you, Mr Speaker for this opportunity. I not only want to say that I support the Bill, but also to report to this House that the constituents of Bukooli South are among the citizens of this country who requested that Government does something about the rampant evictions that are currently going on in this country.  

Mr Speaker, we at one time had a tsetse flies infestation in not only my constituency but the whole of Southern Busoga. Government then requested the people to leave those areas or else die of sleeping sickness. People vacated the area but decided to go back thereafter when the same Government declared the area habitable. It is the similar scenario that is happening now in Northern Uganda, people leaving their land, going and settling somewhere and then being told to go back and resettle in their land. 

What happened in my constituency? Those who went in first decided to take big chunks of land for themselves and made themselves arbitrary landlords who started inviting others to come in. 

What did they do, Mr Speaker? Around 1983, the minister, the MP and councillors of the area then sat down in Kampala and decided to fence off an equivalent of now two sub-counties. They got a land title from here and did not go to the ground but remained with the title and kept quiet while continuing to mobilise the community to vote them in. Only recently, nine years ago, they came out and said, “You people are here illegally, you must go; this is our land.” When that happened, we got annoyed and said that we had also lived there with them and how dare they do that all of a sudden? We, first of all, refused to accept their claims and they went to court. 

The court never even attempted to go to the ground where we are housing two sub-counties. They said that these people had a title and so we had to leave. So, hon. Members, this is what we are talking about. I do not have much time to talk about everything but I basically want to say that we are part of the group which requested that something has to be done, and I am glad something is being done today in order to help us. (Applause) So, we did not need much consultation; we had done it and we had even put down in writing what our thinking about the current scenario is. 

Yesterday I was here and a Member of Parliament from Kawempe said that the definition of kibanja is that somebody is demanding you. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, I want to report to you that for us in Eastern Uganda especially my area, we still use Luganda, which was introduced to us by one gentleman called Kakungulu. We use it for prayers on Sundays and for writing agreements. 

We did not have this mailo but to date every agreement including my own given to me by my father and the ones I give to my brothers have the word “kibanja.”  We do not have a debt but that is what we were told. (Laughter) And it is in this respect that most of my constituents came here and did not have any problem with signing agreements with the word “kibanja.”  The Samya say, “esibanja” and we also say, “kisibanja.” This is going to have a big problem because I would just imagine that I owe somebody because my agreement reads: “kibanja.”  

That is not all, Mr Speaker, some years ago, this country invited the World Bank and there was a programme to demarcate all parcels of land in this country. At one point they did a survey of pilot areas although these pilot areas have really not done much. We feel that this is the time those areas which had titles in the beginning are currently the best.   When you go to Bushenyi, you find that those areas have everything and you will hardly find them with land wrangles. 

When they went to Soroti they had a problem; I personally wrote to the minister then that if they had a problem in Soroti, they should come to Bugiri and specifically start with Bukooli South. Simply because we think it is the right time to use this facility to enable everybody have their land registered. 

Exparte judgements as reported and as explained in the report of the committee are most welcome. People go ahead and do whatever they want by a stalk of a pen. You can imagine two sub-counties with almost 60,000 people being rendered land less and homeless after extensively developing an area. 

This goes along with the issues of the land fund; yesterday we got a report from the Prime Minister in which he mentioned almost every place in this country but left out Busoga. I would like to request through you, Sir, that Busoga be included because we have similar problems. And if that money has to go higher like my Member of Parliament here has said, we request that this Parliament considers the issues of the land fund immediately. If there is a problem, we request for support from those who initiated these issues of the imbalance and this history. And I am sure they should have the audacity to come down to help this country with these issues. 

Recently the Minister of Lands wrote to us and said that those who do not have any problem more especially the landlords and who do not intend to evict the tenants tomorrow, do not have to worry. Why is everybody worrying about this issue?  I think it is not called for; let us accept and help those Ugandans who are helpless today. 

Today a title in my village costs almost Shs 2 or 3 million and this is a lot of money. (Member timed out.) 

3.11
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you Mr Speaker for giving me this chance to contribute to this Bill. Mr Speaker and hon. members, I am one of the six members on the Committee on Infrastructure who expressed a dissenting voice to this report that was presented to the House by the chairperson of our committee. In other words, we do not support everything that is contained in the report and we advance our reasons for that cause of action. We have, therefore, presented a minority report which you can find attached to the main report. 

Mr Speaker, despite the fact that Government has frantically –

THE SPEAKER: Sorry, hon. Member and I am sorry that the visitors have left but there were hon. members seated in the distinguished visitors’ gallery; these are members attending the Third Conference on Maternal and Newborn Health from 22nd to 25th November. The conference has been organised by Parliament of Uganda in conjunction with Inter-Parliamentary Union and the World Health Organisation. I did not introduce them in time because I did not have the details. Join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, many contributors have spoken about how unpopular this Bill is particularly in reference to clause 32 (b) that talks about ownership by customary ownership tenure. Although Government concedes that this is unpopular, I think this is not the time for us to rejoice. I am saying this because the history of infirmity of land by this Government is very well known and those of you who heard what the President said immediately the Constitution was promulgated will bear me witness. 

Those of you who know that one time Government came with a White Paper here that sought to make reforms on management of lands that was eventually defeated will bear me witness. Today we are confronted by a Bill which again demonstrates an attempt by Government to reform the ownership of land in this country. 

I would like to submit that this piece of legislation, the leftover of the carcass of the Bill is now directed towards a single region and this region is the central part of the country. I do not know whether we, hon. gentlemen and ladies should sit here legislating for just a section of this country. I would like clarification on this because if we should sit in this House and make national laws, the laws that we make should be national and not regional in character. 

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you. Is it in order for the hon. Member holding the Floor to reduce the central region to a mere section and yet he knows that this region hosts all the tribes in this country and that anything that affects this region affects the entire country because I know for sure that this region hosts all the tribes in the country and therefore very important that we legislate and make laws which benefit all the people of Uganda. Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: I think what you have to do is to give him information that the central region hosts many tribes of Uganda. I think that would be enough.

MR AMURIAT: Buganda has never been Acholi neither has it ever been Teso, Karamoja, Kabale or Ankole - (Applause) – it has never. Since the formation of its boundaries, Buganda has remained Buganda and this is the angle I am taking while making my submission. 

The Bill seems to enhance security of occupancy of lawful and bona fide occupants on registered land. In doing this, it appears to try to re-establish the relationship between the landlord and the tenants. It seeks to regulate the process of eviction and it also seeks to seek annual nominal ground rent. For anybody to claim ownership of land, that person has to have a document that proves he or she owns that land. 

In my opinion, even if we passed this legislation, it is not going to solve the inherent problems of evictions. I would like to propose that rather than seeing in terms of passing legislation upon legislation that will be kept in our drawers and shelves to gather dust; we need to guarantee security of tenure and a simple flow chart. Those of you who know a little bit of mathematics will know that security of tenure involved possession of a land title ­–(Laughter) -(Member timed out.)

3.19
MR MOHAMMED KAWUMA (DP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you for giving me this opportunity. The Speaker yesterday remarked that for the first time, an overwhelming number of members have contributed to this Bill. This, therefore, manifests the magnitude and importance of the Bill and this implies that we have to perceive and consider it with the highest interest that reflects into our community. 

In this country of over 30 million people, there are merely 600,00 people that have registered land and the land focuses on registered land. If Government really has the interest to protect the tenants, then the sitting tenants will be facilitated to posses title and their guarantees their ownership of that land. 

I will give a case in Entebbe Municipality where I sometimes get disturbed by this consent of public land in Buganda. Buganda has ceased to have customary land – we used to have customary land. It is these 9,000 square miles that are now referred to as public land. 

In Entebbe Municipality, public land which is formally the customary land, the Entebbe Municipal authorities have been making themselves land lords and evicting tenants, the original people who have been staying on this land since time immemorial.  We have parishes like in Kigungu and Kiwafu where people have stayed or over 50 years and they now have titles of 2008 and 2009. Now the indigenous people who have stayed on this land for over time are now referred to as tenants and squatters. I actually sympathise with these people belonging to the bibanja association – very unfortunate. 

The Prime Minister yesterday told this Parliament that the land policy draft was made in 2007 although I am meant to know that the Uganda Government contracted Uganda Land Alliance and the land drafted was completed way back in 2003 and up to now it has not been completed as we are still making consultations. If that is the case that we are really taking the interests of the tenants, the existing land law  would have applied and we at least see one general – these big shots that have been evicting people are handled by these laws that are not substantive or give harsh penalties. 

The issue is not because of the absence of laws and I stand to strongly oppose, pray and appeal to the members to let this Bill stay because it does not serve the purpose.  Like my hon. colleague here from Busoga was saying that we are moving towards urbanisation and making reference to European countries that have 4 percent of the population in the country Side. You are now making people to stay on this land other than helping them to occupy it because we are just putting temporary measures. 

In economics, we look at land as a resource. We are legislating to create dual ownership of the land, but neither the landlord nor the tenant is going to use this land for economic purposes. You have a temporary permit; so, you cannot mortgage this land and the landlord cannot take this land or mortgage this land in the bank. I am very sure that consultations were made between the bankers and the committee, and the bankers said it was not relevant, and that the landlords and the tenants will not benefit in this area. So, we are giving a temporary solution. It is an aspirin to a person with ulcers. It is a very unfortunate situation. The Constitution mandates us to legislate for development, but we are here trying to legislate, yet people cannot use the resource to help themselves out. 

Mr Speaker, there are many reasons why we have not resolved land matters. There are the land tribunals where legislation was put and actually, there was an attempt to put land tribunals in force. I will inform this House that the whole of the West Nile region of about seven districts had one chairperson and this person was staying in Kampala. Her family was here and she was presiding over a committee for seven districts and under the Ministry of Lands then. They were sitting for only four days in a month. When they were transferred to Justice, they reduced the days to two. I am also made to understand that the tribunals have failed because of lack of facilitation, but it wasn’t because of lack of resources in this country. DANIDA was willing to finance them, and maybe because people did not see any avenues through which they would benefit like in CHOGM, they sabotaged the whole thing. 

The Land Bill that we are looking at focuses on registered land; only 600,000 land titles for the so much land that we have in this country. So, as I rest my case, I stand to strongly protest, pray and appeal to Members to stay this Bill because we have not enforced the other provisions in the Penal Code –(Member timed out.) 

3.27
MR SIMON ROSS EUKU (UPC, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When the Land (Amendment) Bill was tabled in 2007, I was a Member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, which was one of the committees that worked in tandem with the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. We moved around the country and I was among the group that moved to the East. We consulted people and we got the views that I believe I will present today before this House. 

When I went through the report produced by the committee, I did not see any reflection that the chairperson indicated that consultations were made in various districts. So, it gives me the impression that the report that the committee has produced may be lacking some information, because I went to Mbale, Tororo, Teso and other committees also went to various parts of the country, but there is nothing to that effect reflected in the report of the committee. 

What we are debating today concerning matters of land can be summarised in two forms: We are debating issues on registered land, where registered land refers to freehold land, mailo land and leasehold land. The other category is the customary land tenure system. Our debate tends to be centred mainly on the registered land because I believe the provisions of the Constitution make it supreme. The inclusion of customary land within the Constitution, to be amended within the Land Bill, is completely out of the provisions of our Constitution. 

I do support the Prime Minister when he said in his letter that he read to us yesterday that section 32(b) was deleted. Unfortunately, there is an amendment that is moving around which we have seen, that has section 59 which talks about customary land or section 32(b) being amended in a different form, and yet Article 241 of the Constitution is very clear. Mr Speaker, allow me to read verbatim what Article 241 of the Constitution says in reference to the functions of the district land boards: “The functions of a district land board are – (a) to hold and allocate land in the district which is not owned by any person or authority….” If that Article is to be analysed, the inclusion of section 32(b) will serve no purpose because the amendment that has been put there makes that part redundant. So, I believe that we should just delete section 32(b) just like the Prime Minister’s letter suggests, other than the circulated copies that we have seen around. I do not know whether you have that copy where they substitute section 32(b) with section 59, but one of my colleagues may read it to you. So, I am concerned about the contradiction between the circulated substitution and the letter that the Prime Minister read to us yesterday. 

If this Bill is passed into law, it brings the transactions of land into closer control of the controlling authority that may be the state, because if two or more persons are transacting business on issues of land, then the consent of the controlling authority must be sought and the controlling authority here is none other than the Land Commission and the district land board. So, in order for us to avoid a situation of that nature, I pray that the Members in this august House should rescind from that and we put this Bill aside.

There is one pertinent issue that we have not debated in this House that concerns the non-indigenous Ugandans. We have several people who may have moved to this country, but unfortunately when this Bill is passed into law, they will be recognised as the lawful or bona fide occupants and it will bring more problems on the issue of land. An example - and I believe it was debated in this House. Sometime back, some cattle keepers who moved from Northern Tanzania entered Ugandan land; wherever they have disappeared, nobody knows, but the moment this Bill comes into law, these fellows will find a place to be put. They will find a place on our own land. Will this Bill recognise such uninvited tenants? There is no provision in this Bill that caters for people of that nature. Unless this Bill is intended for such things, then it should be passed into law.

If this Bill is passed into law, I do not think we shall be far from what happened in the 1900 Agreement. 

3.27
MR CHARLES ODUMAN (FDC, Bukedea County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to make a contribution on this particular matter. I have specific instructions from the people of Bukedea to deliver five points as part of the debate on this matter and those instructions are written and are contained in what I have before me, indicating the people who have signed up to those instructions. They include district councillors, sub-county councillors, people in the communities by name, sub-county, parish, village and signatures. I wish to go on record of this House with these instructions and lay a copy of these instructions on Table. (Laughter)

The five points are as follows and I will be very specific:

Delete clause 32(b). Specifically, the people are saying they do not want to go into a discussion on any matter on customary land at this time because they believe the provisions are sufficient in the Land Act. The provisions are sufficient in the customary system to settle disputes regarding customary land and, therefore, they have concluded on that matter as follows: That traditionally, the people have had three things in their hands: Land, the cows and women. (Laughter)

MS NAJJEMBA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to include women as property? Are we property? Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you see this; do you recognise it? (Laughter) I think the point which hon. Najjemba is raising is, do you consider women a chattel? Maybe you never intended, can you please mend the wrong?

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, the context in which it was put was satirical from the presentation in the meetings we had -

THE SPEAKER: No, what they are saying, for instance, you cannot categorise women with cows. I think amend.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, the meaning of what was presented -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, you do not have to argue. Do you consider a woman a chattel?

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, we do not. We just treasure them.

THE SPEAKER: Can you count them in the same pigeon hole: Money, books, cows and beans? (Laughter)

MR ODUMAN: For the record, we simply treasure them and by conclusion at that meeting, I want to say this. In that meeting -

THE SPEAKER: You are out of order.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, I wish you allow me to go to the next point because that was the first instruction.

The second instruction is that we should reject the provision for the minister to determine ground rent as proposed in Clause 1 of the Bill. They are saying this goes against the spirit of decentralisation. It is about giving power to the people to determine their own affairs on one hand and on the other hand removing it away from them. If the land board delays to determine ground rent, the solution is not to remove power away from them; the solution is to provide penalties for that non-performance. So, specifically, they are saying that we must reject provisions for the minister to determine ground rent because that is in principle removing their power. 

Number three; we recommend the immediate operationalisation of the Land Act and in particular establishing the Land Fund, the land boards where they are not, the land tribunals and the land committees, immediately.

The people now realise that the provisions of the Land Act, 1998 are good, but they are wondering why we are not operationalising the Land Act in its entirety. Yesterday, we got a presentation from the hon. Prime Minister and he said, on page 2, that ultimately the problem would be solved through a Land Fund. But he goes ahead, and rightfully so, to say this is going to  be very expensive and that it needs Shs 1.7 trillion for land compensations only. Now, what will the land fund require? What will it take to establish structures, the land boards and land committees in the villages?

This projection is a lot of money and unfortunately, this projection was not done at the time of debating the principal Land Bill. This morning I went to find out which Minister of Finance at that time signed the certificate of financial implications and I was reminded that at that time there was no such requirement. That means that we were led to make a law that is too expensive to operationalise. When you look at this, you might need as much as an annual budget just to operationalise the Land Act. 

The only conclusion we can make, which the Prime Minister did not make, is that it is impossible to operationalise this Land Act. So, what do we do? The solution is not to amend it. The solution should be to revamp it. We made an Act which is difficult to implement. Now, that makes the Act very defective right from day one. If you have something that has a factory error, the solution is not to repair it because it is repairable -(Member timed out.)

3.45
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Apac): Mr Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. On Monday, I was at home and I held a meeting with our head of clan and other traditional leaders. There was a hot debate going on in the district about this Land (Amendment) Bill. I cautioned them against discussing a document which they had not looked at and I promised that if I came back, hon. Angiro and I would look at the document and make some comments which might help in their discussion. I stand up to do exactly that. I will make very few comments. 

I am satisfied that the area which was repugnant to the people of Lango, that is, the amendment under section 32(b), has been deleted. I want to be on record for saying that I thank the minister for hearing the cries of the people of Lango that their customary land tenure and method of handling it should not be interfered with by any Act of Parliament. I thank the minister for that.

There seems to be a problem arising from the introduction of Clause 4 in this amendment, which starts with, “For avoidance of doubt, no transaction of any kind…” etc. My reading of this clause is that it only amplifies the functions of the land board. Some people on my side here seem to think that there is an attempt to smuggle in the removed 32(b). I am a lawyer of some standing and my reading is that this is an attempt by the minister to amplify the functions of the land board as it appears under section 59. 

I have held a discussion with the Attorney-General on this matter and my thinking is that the provisions under section 59 are enough even without this new inclusion. The new inclusion, even if we put it there, is not going to do any other thing except maybe increase the number of clauses under 59. I had advised the attorney-general that if it was not too painful for Government, we could drop this particular new clause and 59 will still be effective because it is being misunderstood from this side. Mr Minister, maybe the verbal artillery you are getting is because of lack of understanding of this new clause and maybe it would do you better if you dropped it.

Let me say something about the whole amendment. My thinking, and I am being very general, is that Government will pass this Bill. It will pass it. There is no doubt about it but I do not think it will go far enough to fight the ills that you are trying to fight. My thinking is that you as a government should come out with a planned settlement policy. You are now giving areas for people to settle on people’s land, but you are not telling them where to settle. You might end up increasing problems because, hon. Otafiire, you might wake up and find that somebody has built a latrine in front of your gate and you cannot send him away. (Laughter) So, do something about planned settlement. Other countries do it because even if a person has the right over land, planning still remains the responsibility of Government.

I think we are handling matters piecemeal and this is very dangerous for a government. Our population is now going to 30 million but the size of land is not increasing. Very soon you might have to rethink even land ownership. Why don’t you, as a government, start doing something about checking the population explosion? I find it funny when some people argue that a big population is a big market. A big market! You people go home every weekend and you see those boys in trading centres playing Omweso, playing cards, is that a big market? And then when they hear that you have gone home, your compound is full. Are you the market or they are the market? Do something urgently about population explosion. It is not a matter for getting votes; it is a matter for survival for tomorrow. Stop thinking about votes; start thinking about your people and your children tomorrow.

Mr Minister of Lands, thank you for keeping your promise to the people of Lango. I have no problem with you and on this cause you have done a good job!

3.53
MR MICHAEL OCULA (FDC, Kilak County, Gulu): When the hon. Omara Atubo was appointed to be the Minister of Lands, some of us knew that he was up to some task. As soon as he took office, the first target was Acholi land. You remember very well how we put up a spirited fight and up to now, matters are still before the courts of law.

What is before courts of law originated from the office of hon. Omara Atubo. He wrote a letter to Amuru District Land Board that they can allocate customary land to investors, and as I am talking now we are in court because of that.

I am grateful that 32(b) has been removed, but let me go on record by saying that Government should never again think about customary land. The matters concerning customary land was adequately handled during the CA debates. That time I remember I was still a student in Makerere but I used to attend the CA debates religiously. It was adequately handled and the hon. Omara Atubo was part of the team who walked out on matters of customary land ownership. Let customary land owners handle their matters as they are handled in different societies. [Major. Guma: “Order”] Hon. Guma, this is the first time you are giving order.

MAJOR GUMA: Mr Speaker, is it in order to personalise the discussion of this Government Land (Amendment) Bill on an individual who is simply a messenger of the executive arm of Government presenting a Bill on behalf of Government; on behalf of Cabinet? Is it in order for members of parliament to personalise things and start saying, “Omara Atubo, thank you for helping Lango” and others like that?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know how many times I am going to say this. I have appealed to you not to personalise this law. I think on record I heard the name of Omara Atubo, my OB, for over 50 times or more. I told you that I have detected that some people have devised a strategy of blackmail and intimidation. They think they can intimidate him in the eyes of bibanja holders or the other establishment. This should not be done here. You are mature people, you should speak candidly, do not personalise, do not use strategies of intimidation. A number of you are talking about 2011, please be candid.

MR OCULA: Mr Speaker, thank you for your guidance and by nature I can never intimidate anybody.

Going to the Bill, it emphasizes the court process in causing evictions. We are quite aware that the court process is a very expensive process; we are quite aware that those people who are supposed to be protected may not be able to afford the fees to go and defend themselves in court. Now, who is going to be assisted? In the long run, we are going to find that actually those who have been evicting people are going to use the court process to their advantage and they will continue the evictions.

Finally, last week, the issue of Buganda came up and it was debated at length. The timing of this Bill is very unfortunate; it is at a time where the Mengo establishment is not at peace with the central government. It appears as if the government came up with this kind of Bill to say, “I have numbers in the House and will continue to pass this Bill.” If this Bill was brought in good faith, why did we not wait for the consultations between Mengo and Government to be concluded?

THE SPEAKER: Look at the record. This Bill was published, gazetted in December 2007. It is my duty to protect all of you; do not take advantage of this and the other to intimidate.

MR OCULA: I am quite aware that discussions between Mengo and central government are still ongoing.

THE SPEAKER: And business stops because there are discussions?

Anyway, Members, we have pupils and teachers of Kitagobwa High School, the constituency represented by Hon. Sam Njuba.

4.11
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to participate in this very important debate.

I want to make an observation that the debate is taking tribal sentiments and it is being handled with a lot of emotions. I want to appeal to my fellow Members of Parliament that as Parliament, we must rise above tribal and party affiliations because the matter of land is a question that affects everybody regardless of your political and religious affiliations.

This Bill is intended to address the problem, which is on-going. But in my view this Bill is not going to address the current evictions that are going on. It is intended to address a problem, which many of us do not know; it is a hidden problem.

The Land Act of 1998 provides for the security of the tenants by occupancy. And the proposed amendment of section 35(1)(a) will only promote speculation and encourage speculators to enjoy sitting on the land that does not belong to them, manipulate and benefit out of it.

Sub-section 35(1)(a), which says thus: “A tenant by occupancy who purports to assign the tenancy by occupancy without giving the first options of taking the assignment of the tenancy to the owner of the land, commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine of an amount not exceeding 96 currency points …”; which money is Shs 1,920,000? 

If you get a stubborn tenant by occupancy who decides to sell that land at Shs 10 million and accepts to commit the Shs 2 million, such a tenant will have made a profit of Shs 8 million, but at the expense of the land owner. So in this case, who are we protecting? (Laughter) Who are we protecting? It is provided for here. Yes, it is criminal, but the man will accept to be called a criminal as long as he makes a profit of Shs 8 million and transfers the tenancy by occupancy to another person who will do the same thing. Do you see how a vicious cycle is going to continue? Are we not going to maintain the status quo? 

This is a serious matter; we must debate it with sober minds. Yesterday while the chairperson of this committee, hon. Byandala, was on a talk show, he admitted that during the committee’s consultations the entire Buganda region rejected the Bill –(Interjections)– he did; it is on record.

MR BYANDALA: I was very clear that when the Buganda group from Mengo came, they rejected the Bill, but that the areas we visited in Buganda expressed interest in this Bill. So is he in order to say what I never said? 

THE SPEAKER: I am tired of those who are exploiting this situation. I have known the situation you are talking about for 47 years. Some people are just studying the situation and you bring it up? Please, debate calmly.

MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have observed that a Member of Parliament is accorded seven minutes to make a contribution but in some cases, nearly half of those seven minutes is used up by you in giving guidance –(Interjections)– yes, and this is very serious. We need to find a middle line where a Member is accorded his/her full time, but at the same time the Speaker takes off time to make guidance. This is not procedurally right; we must be honest.

THE SPEAKER: Since you have asked for guidance, I give authority to guide it.

MR OYET: Mr Speaker, my time –

THE SPEAKER: My appeal is that you do not threaten anybody. And hon. Mabikke, look at me – do not talk nonsense. (Laughter)

MR OYET: Mr Speaker, I hope my time will be compensated. Before the interruption I wanted to say that yesterday but one I consulted my people in the constituency. They told me the following: one, to oppose section 32(b) absolutely and I would like to assure you that the law under section 32(b) will never work in our case. 

They also told me that as a national leader, I should not be on record for making laws that will target a particular group of people. Their position is we always have to make laws that will protect the interests of the entire nation and that is why I am opposing this Bill. 

It is because the Bill is intended to victimize Mengo Government and the Buganda sub-region where you belong, Mr Speaker. We must be counted and seen to be defending the interests of Ugandans. We do not want a situation where some people will take advantage of the situation to address historical problems with the Buganda region using this law; it will never work.

Mr Speaker, I would like to assure you and the House that even if this law is passed, it will never be implemented because some of the people who are seated quietly on the other side of the House will be the very ones to mobilise people against this law. I sat with many of them while we were in Arusha – they said they could not support this law but because the party had already taken position, they would not come to the House to debate this law. (Applause) That is why the majority of them are not here. Must we be guided by the party position or by the instincts; the national duty? I think that is where we must all belong as Parliament. We have an obligation to serve our people regardless of their political interests. 

On many occasions I have stood in this Parliament and supported other motions that were against the interests of the Opposition –(Member timed out.)

4.11
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am one of the Members who signed the minority report. I would like to clearly add that I do not support this Bill both in body and soul. 

When the minister was appearing before the committee, we asked him some questions. I asked the minister the number of people who are affected by evictions in this country and those who are affected by evictions in Teso. We need the statistics. To date, I have not got the answer.

We are debating from an uninformed position because we do not know the number of people or families affected. I would be happy if the minister or the Leader of Government Business told us how many people are affected in this whole country and in the different regions.

The NRM Government has failed the landless people. I say so because it has failed to provide money for the land fund to cater for the landless people. Why did you fail? 

Yesterday, the Prime Minister gave us a figure. If we had scaled down this allocated money on an annual basis, within five or 10 years, we would have been able to cover the landless people. Why did government do that? We even asked the number of families who were settled using the money we provided at one time as a land fund. How many? It makes some of us believe somebody pocketed this money the way CHOGM money has been eaten. 

Government is failing - stop pretending that you are protecting the tenants. The government has failed to provide money for the tribunals. Stop lying to Ugandans. 

My brother is suffering all the punches for nothing. The minister -(Interjections)- it is you who is causing all this stress -(Interjections)- I pray to the Almighty that He gives him strength to overcome the stress –(Laughter)

MR KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable gentleman on the Floor to debate as if the Minister of Lands is not part of the government? Is he in order?  

THE SPEAKER: I do not want to repeat myself. Can you continue? 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. I wish hon. Otafiire was the one presenting this Bill. I wish it had come during your time. That is where I am having reservations on this because my conviction is that government has failed the landless people. It has betrayed them. 

Yesterday, I was happy when the Prime Minister told us they had dropped Article 32 - just a moment –(Interruption)
 
MR JOHNSON MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank my colleague for giving me way. I would like to inform the honourable colleague that it is not yet Uhuru. I know government is laying a strategy of dealing with the interest in land, bit by bit. What government is doing now is to deal with one section. Once that section is done with, they are coming back to customary land. 

MR OKUPA: I wish you had waited for me to conclude my statement. I was saying that when the Prime Minister stated on page 5 that because the government listens, Cabinet dropped clause 32(b), I thought he had listened. However, when you read page 8, it talks of as provided in – let me read it: “The Bill, therefore, seeks to create a focussed offence by providing both criminal and civil penalties and remedies in respect of illegal evictions on land in one law as provided in clause 32(b)(v) of the Bill.”

When I read this, I was lost. Was this an error in the statement of the Prime Minister or not? 

MR WACHA: Thank you hon. Okupa. I think I should help the hon. Prime Minister. The part you are reading is a quotation from hon. Ruhindi’s letter to the Prime Minister. I think it was done before the dropping of 32(b). I think I have helped you.

MR OKUPA: Then the Prime Minister should have clarified because how could he quote something, which is wrong? Please – 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I was quoting what hon. Ruhindi had given. That was a quotation and under Article 32, restitution and all the other elements quoted there – they are in 32(a) – and I was quoting what he had said. I thank you.

MR OKUPA: So, you quoted something, which was also not correct. (Laughter) I still do not believe the government has helped the people of Kasilo. The people of Teso would want this Bill withdrawn and 32(b) dropped. 

I would not only jubilate because to me, injustice anywhere is injustice everywhere. To the colleagues who come from where land is owned customarily, do not jubilate because our brothers from other areas are still not comfortable with other clauses so we should be moving in unison and support all as a country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I will cover you after I have taken some from this side.  I will take you. 

4.20
MR JULIUS EMIGU (FDC, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Some time last year I went to Kaberamaido and consulted the people about this Land (Amendment) Bill. But while you are saying we should not personalise this Bill and I do not intend to personalise it, when I went with this document to my people and they begged to look at it, they saw a name Daniel Omara Atubo and asked me, “Which Omara Atubo is this?” (Laughter) I told them it is the son of Atubo of Otuke County in Lira District. (Laughter)

We have a very close relationship with Lango region. Kaberamaido is the last district from Teso side that borders the Lango region. So, we share everything in common. During the times of campaigns, they were very sure that hon. Omara Atubo was not campaigning for the NRM Government. And they know very well that he is in Parliament on the Independent ticket. So, they were wondering how he crossed over to the other side. (Laughter) I did not have a clear answer to them but I said -(Interjections)- I am quoting what they said. 

MR OTAFIIRE: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Member to personalise this debate to hon. Omara Atubo? Omara Atubo or no Omara Atubo, there would have been a Minister for Lands who would have brought this on our collective behalf -(Interjections)- listen – Nyamaza! (Laughter) Omara Atubo or no Omara Atubo, there would have been a Minister for Lands who would have brought this Bill on the behalf of government. Therefore, is it in order for this honourable gentleman to insinuate that this is an Omara Atubo’s personal project? I am partially responsible for what Omara Atubo has done here. Without him, I would stand in his feet - (Interjections)- are all of you in order? (Laughter) Mr Speaker, are they in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it appears to me that many of us are a bit tired because people are repeating themselves – maybe you have exhausted the points you wanted to raise. Would you please address the issues?

MR EMIGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That was exactly the first suspicion that the people had but the second one comes from this section, which says, “A person claiming interest in the land under customary tenure ….” They asked this question, “Who is this person who is still claiming interest when our people lived on this land for centuries? Where has he been?” The suspicion came from the point that by coincidence, there were people who were moving in the Teso area and they settled in the forests, swamps and in our communal land with their cows. Nobody knows where these people came from. Could it be that they are the people who are still claiming interest because they do not have land and probably the government is trying to find a way for those people? Why the Balaalo, as they call them? Why disturb the people who had long settled on the land who are no longer claiming interest but possess it? 

The other thing is that I have not heard of the examples of people who have been evicted especially from customary land. I want the examples to be given and also the people who evicted them and probably what the government did to those who evicted them so that we know that government is working for the people. But without that example, I do not think we are really serious. 

Actually the rich are the ones evicting the poor. Now, if you say that such a person claiming interest can only be removed on the orders of court, imagine a poor man in court with a very rich man; this rich man has the capacity to go through all the stages of the courts. I do not know at which level of court it will be, maybe Grade III or Grade II or Grade I up to the Supreme Court. The poor man will probably stop at the LC I level. Beyond that, the man with money will manage the costs. I request government to bring in the issue of the land fund. That would have solved the problem. 

Yesterday the Prime Minister admitted that he is a landlord and he said, and I do appreciate it, that he has over the years been helping the people who are living on his land to acquire the land in a correct manner by having land titles. I was impressed by that because they reached an amicable solution. But what hurts me is that there are some landlords here – yesterday I saw people standing on the Floor of Parliament saying, “I am a landlord and I must be paid for my land.” Honestly, we are addressing historical injustices? 

If we as government think that we must put a land fund and then somebody who acquired land in a fictitious manner is proud to stand on his two legs in broad day light and say, “I must be paid”, that is very unfair. We are accepting the issue of the land fund because of the peace we want in the country. So, the land should be bought. 

I thank the Prime Minister for his sincerity. At least he had some sense of shame because probably some of the land was not got in the rightful manner and that is why he has handled the issue amicably. I wish these very arrogant persons would also have some sense of shame. Actually, shame upon them! You acquired something wrongly and we as government are trying to get the fund to solve the historical injustices and yet you just talk proudly. If the word, “warned” was parliamentary enough, I should have said they are warned. Thank you.

4.29
MR PETER LOKII (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Thank you. I stand to support the amendment Bill. I would like to begin with a statement made by an elder in Nigeria. He said, “Land belongs to a vast majority of people. Many have died. Some are living. Many more are yet to be born.” I think it is important that we understand how important land is to our people. 

I also would like to say that it is true that if you are born of poor parents, you will always have to inherit poverty. This, therefore, means that if the Bill is intended to resolve the issues of assets and land is the only asset, as somebody in the Opposition said, which Ugandans and Ugandan families and children can have, then it is important that this Bill is passed to give an opportunity to the children of the poor to also own the asset of land. 

Secondly, I would also like to ask the honourable minister to give us a response because while section 32(b) has been dropped, we still have a complication in the Karamoja region in terms of people who are explorers or those who are prospecting minerals. I am sure that this is one reason why they have interest in our land. We have people who came under the guise of the Gum Arabic project but later begun putting up signposts. I think some of them could have got titles on this land. 

Customary land is land for harvesting rangeland resources by our people who are pastoralists. We also have people who have been prospecting gold. We would like to get an explanation to this because in 1996, we were given information in an English newspaper called the Daily Telegram that somebody had advertised land in Karamoja to be sold at US $2 billion. This land covered the areas of Pokot and parts of Moroto District. To date, we do not know the state of this land yet it was registered under mining. 

I think it is important that this Bill helps us to put right the wrongs that have existed in our country for long. I do not think it is fair that our members seem to be making this discussion to look like it is about NRM politics or wanting votes out of this Bill. We are trying to address a situation, which past governments did not bother to attend to and I think it is important for this government to go on record for helping the people of Uganda. If they are in Buganda region, we would like to help them by passing this ill. 

Guest of honour -(Laughter)- I would like to bring - the House had gone dull and I thought it would be important to chip in that. I would like to bring to the attention of the House the two concerns that seem to be affecting the members and this is the issue of the involvement of courts in solving issues to do with land conflicts. It is important that the minister gives us or puts into consideration this concern because it is true that many of our peasant people cannot access justice through courts. Government should, therefore, think about this issue especially where the courts will take place, the procedures and the very high costs.

Secondly, members do not seem to agree with the fact that the minister plays a role in determining rent. It is important that we provide options that are acceptable. In totality, I support the amendment Bill. I thank you.

4.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HOUSING (Mr Kafabusa Werikhe): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I wish to thank honourable colleagues for the various contributions made on the Land (Amendment) Bill, 2007. It is my humble appeal to honourable colleagues not to personalise this Bill but rather look at it as one being spearheaded by the hon. Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development together with other colleagues of the same ministry. 

That is why for its first reading on 5 February 2008, I stood here and presented this Bill to the august House. If it was hon. Atubo’s Bill, I would not have stood here for its first reading. That is the appeal that I am making to our colleagues.

I did so, on behalf of the ministry and the government as provided for under Article 117 of the Constitution. It is, therefore, unfair to tag this Bill to one person thereby making him look guilty of no crime committed.

As we inch towards the conclusion of this debate, let us look at the merits and demerits of this Bill and make our decisions accordingly in the interest of the affected people whom we represent here in Parliament.

I may sound tautological but for emphasis, I would like to restate that the Land (Amendment) Bill has come up as a result of a serious problem of illegal evictions born out of historical injustices with regard to land. The problem of historical distortions with regard to land was recognised by the framers of the 1995 Constitution where Article 237 clause 8 and 9 were specifically enshrined in the Constitution to ensure security of occupancy by the lawful and bona fide occupants or Bibanja holders on Mailo, freehold and leasehold land at all times.

It is, therefore, a constitutional command that we, as legislators, protect the interest of the lawful and bona fide tenants. As representatives of the people, we cannot watch the ever increasing and massive eviction of our people go on unchallenged.

There is overwhelming evidence in many parts of Uganda that massive evictions are going on and I will mention a few. We have been debating as if evictions on Mailo land only happen to be in the central region of Uganda. We have mailo land in Mbale in Nakaloke, Namanyonyi - Kakungulu came to Mbale and he was actually given land by colonial masters. We have people who were actually dispossessed of their land –(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The word “mailo” is a legal term. In 1900, land in Buganda was being given out and the minimum was one square mile – it was being given in square miles. So, the Baganda started calling the land “my mailo”. In 1908, Buganda Lukiiko enacted a law called “The Land Act”, which officially made mailo land an official phrase in Buganda only. What we have in Mbale is freehold of Kakungulu. Is the minister in order to rise here and try to misinform the House on a matter which is very clear?

THE SPEAKER: I think that presupposes that he had the information you had. So, the best thing to do would have been to give him that information, and you have done it. 

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In my submission earlier on, I referred to mailo land, leasehold and freehold; these are the registered pieces of land that we have. In Mbale, Kakungulu was given land by the colonial masters, that is freehold, and it is in his names. Therefore, the people who are there are lawful occupants. As a result of that, we have people who –(Interjection)

MR KAGWERA: Mr Speaker, I what to inform the hon. Minister that what he is saying is incorrect. We have mailo land in Toro, contrary to what he is saying. Hon. Okello-Okello said that mailo land is in Buganda only, but I am informing you that we have mailo land in Toro. 

MR WERIKHE: The point here, Mr Speaker, is that land, be it leasehold, freehold or mailo is not only found in Buganda or the central region but it is also found in other parts of the country. As a result, we have people who are being evicted from various parts of the country, including Mbale. I mentioned Nakaloke, Namanyonyi, Bukasakya and Mutoto where 80 square miles are being occupied by tenants and, therefore, it belongs to people who received it as freehold. So, people are being evicted from this land. 

We are not referring only to people from the central region. Besides, why shouldn’t we speak for people from the central region? We are national leaders and we are not legislating for just a certain part of this country; whatever touches this country affects all of us. When we had problems in the North, we unanimously agreed that there was a problem in the North and we supported all our people -(Member timed out.)

4.45
MR URBAN TIBAMANYA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the issues raised in this Bill have been mainly four. The first one is whether the Bill is necessary. The second is the problem of untouchables. The third one is that the Bill is targeting a particular section of people, and the last one is, why don’t we leave things as they are.

On whether the Bill is necessary, it raises the fundamental question as to why we make laws. One of the reasons we make laws is because we wish to establish a platform for social harmony and non-antagonism. The question to ask now is: Is there harmony or is there antagonism? I think both sides have agreed that there is a problem. They have agreed that there are evictions, except that one side is saying that it is by untouchables. That means that we are both admitting that there is a problem which needs a cure. Therefore, the law becomes necessary to establish a platform for establishing harmony and non-antagonism. 

On the untouchables, this still raises that fundamental question as to why we make laws. We make laws to provide for, when a person’s deeds amount to an offence; how an offence is controlled through reprimand. So, if we agree that they are untouchable, the best way is to make a law to handle those untouchables. In this Bill, we are creating criminal sanctions against those who evict people so that the Police can come in and take action against those untouchables. 

Honourable members we are saying that this Bill is only targeting a certain section of the country and we have been informing the Members that this problem is across many parts of the country. My brother, Werikhe, has mentioned the East in Mbale, but I also want to mention that in Ankole, we have such problems. Yesterday, the Prime Minister ably gave you statistics of where these problems are, including Ankole, Toro, Kibaale, Bugisu and then –(Interruption) 

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I am pretty sorry for interrupting the minister. The minister is addressing Parliament, of which I am part. I earlier declared my interest that I sometimes do not follow pretty well; is he in order to continue addressing me when I am not following? He has not given me the opportunity to follow. Is he in order?

MR TIBAMANYA: Thank you. As I was saying, the problem is not only in Buganda but in Ankole, Toro, Kibaale, Bugisu and other places. Indeed today, an honourable member from the Opposition side did say that a very high ranking officer acquired land in Acholi of many square miles. I would like to believe that there are customary tenants there and if that title is existing, then it will have to come under this law so that the customary tenants there are also not evicted. So, the law is really national and for everybody. 

Mr Speaker, society changes and as it changes new problems and challenges emerge which need laws to redress them. Now, what has changed as far as land matters are concerned? One, the land administration itself has changed several times. During the pre-colonial times, there was some land administration; during the colonial times, another new administration came up; at the time of busuulu and envujjo, another one came in; and during Amin’s era, there was another land administration. This has changed the spectrum and therefore there is need to harmonise or indeed cure some of the ills that have been caused in the past. 

Hon. Wacha said that there is a population explosion, which has put some force on land. The population which was at 1 million in 1900 is now 30 million people. So while talking on land matters, and as society changes, you must come in with certain laws to regulate this. Also, in the past it was necessary for some people to seek patronage, but now, where there is peace and freedom; people do not need to be patronised; to have a chief looking after you and you –(Member timed out.)

4.53
DR JOHN ARAPKISSA (Independent, Kween County, Kapchorwa):  I stand to support this amendment Bill –(Applause)- for the following reasons:  While land in Kapchorwa is mainly customarily owned, some few people own land and so the issue of landlords is not such a very big issue. 

However, there is a worrying trend in Ngenge Sub-county which borders Nakapiripirit District. Because of cattle rustling which caused insecurity for people in this area, some became IDPs, some were displaced in the mountains in the upper part of Kapchorwa, others went to Bugiri and others went as far as Masindi and the Republic of Kenya. However, with the current improvement in security after the disarmament exercise, some individuals have conspired with the district land boards and leased land in the absence of the real owners which creates fake landlords. So, I hope that this Bill, if passed, will protect these people whose land is being grabbed from those unscrupulous landlords. 

Similarly, we have the Sabiny; Sabiny are people from Kapchorwa and Bukwo districts who have been owning land in the current Sironko District and lived there up to the late 1960s. Because of similar insecurity caused by cattle rustlers, they also ran away from this area. Now that peace is returning, these people are going back, but are unfortunately being chased away by the leadership of Sironko District -(Interjection)- No, the owners are Sabiny people but they live in Sironko District. 

Some of you could have watched NTV last week where houses were being burnt in the presence of the RDC and LC V of Sironko. Fortunately, His Excellency the President wrote a letter on 1st September and copied it to the area MPs and LC V - we unfortunately never got it - instructing the Ministry of Lands to re-survey the land because there is also a problem between Sironko and the current Kapchorwa District. The instructions were to last three months while the Ministry of Lands looked into the issue of the boundary and the Sabiny owners who are being denied a chance to come back and occupy their land. The three months are ending in about five days. Unfortunately, the Minister of Lands has walked out but there are other ministers from the Ministry of Lands here; I do not know whether the three months end from when the letter was written or from when it was received by the Ministry of Lands? So, I think we should pass this motion so that those people in Ngenge and Sironko District are protected. Thank you very much. (Applause)  

4.57
MR IBRAHIM KADDUNABBI (NRM, Butambala County, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to say from the onset that I do not support this Bill. (Applause)  I do not support this Bill because one of the reasons why we cursed the colonialists was because they created dual ownership, most especially on the land in Buganda. What this Bill is intending to do is to reinforce the dual ownership, most especially in the central region. (Applause)  

I do not know whether we have taken a thorough study of what effect this will have on our economy. In my view, I know that all the people who go to banks for loans mostly use land titles as collateral. If we go ahead and pass this Bill, I know we are going to affect our economy tremendously and I would request Government to desist from taking that direction. 

I know it has been said that this Bill is intended to address evictions. It has already been said over and over again that evictions can be addressed and handled by other laws if we are really serious. Evictions are not only on mailo land or land in that category. Why is Government now removing 32(b) if it also knows that customary land has evictions? We have been told in this House about evictions going to happen or happening in Northern Uganda; what are we doing about that? If we are serious about evictions, we should really try and make a law which will handle the situation. 

I know the only way forward, in my view, is the creation of a land fund. The Prime Minister said that it needs a lot of money and I actually agree with him because Shs 1.8 trillion is not little money. However, we know that we have allocated Shs 1.1 trillion to the road sector each financial year, so it means that Shs 1.8 trillion can be found. This Bill came to this Parliament in 2007 and from 2007 to date, those are about three years. If Government was serious that it wants to address the land fund issue and really see it come to an end, it should have allocated about Shs 300 billion each financial year for only six years and this problem would be solved. Up to now, we do not have any coin which is directly going to address this problem. 

If you found out from which regions the 300 or so land titles which were purchased are coming from, you would find they are not from the most affected places. What are we doing as Government? I do not support this Bill and I know it will not solve the problems we are telling the people it is going to solve. I thank you. (Applause) 

5.01
DR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE (NRM, Sheema County North, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am Dr Elioda Tumwesigye from Sheema County North. When this Land (Amendment) Bill was introduced in 2007, I actually thought that it does not concern my area just like many people think. In December 2008, around Christmas time, I got a rude shock when nearly the entire parish of Rwamujojo in my constituency rose up in arms with pangas saying they were going to kill anybody. This is because for a long time they did not know they were sitting on mailo land of somebody who used to be related to the King of Ankole sometime back. So, somebody related to the king came up and said “this is my land” and told people, “I am going to give you a few days and you must leave.” People came to me, the Member of Parliament, and that is when I knew that this Land (Amendment) Bill goes beyond Buganda and reaches others parts. (Laughter) 

Indeed in Sheema, soon after that we realised many areas, even in my own constituency, where many people have been living on land and their grandparents lived there, the burial grounds are there and they thought the land belonged to them. However, they realised later that the land belonged to other people. It is not true that all this land belongs to Prince Barigye, who was paid. Actually, there are very many other people who are landlords in Ankole and were not paid. 

Therefore, when I look at this Land (Amendment) Act which has very few clauses, and I see a clause that stops evictions –(Interjection)– Yes, it is exactly there. I have the Land (Amendment) Act here which talks about evictions only for none payment of rent. What I want to state is that this Land (Amendment) Act should be looked at as an important milestone on a journey to address the fundamental question –(Interjection)– I have kept quiet for some time, you leave me. I have looked at this Act as –(Interruption) 

MR KAWUMA: Thank you. The hon. Member holding the Floor has for more than one time in his deliberations said, “…in this Land (Amendment) Act.” As far as legislation is concerned, we are discussing a Bill; is the hon. Member holding the Floor in order to refer to a Bill as an Act? 

THE SPEAKER: You are quite impressive because you are conversant with the terms we use here. (Laughter) Hon. Member, it is a Bill. (Laughter)

DR TUMWESIGYE: The Land (Amendment) Bill, which is intended to amend the Land Act. I want to say that this Bill should be seen as a milestone on a long journey aimed at addressing the challenges we have in the land sector. I am looking at it as saying, “okay, we have these evictions and they are rampant, but can we first put a stop to them and then in the meantime, explore the land fund.” 

We have seen discussions, even with the British Government, trying to look for money to compensate. Therefore, as you are trying to look for that permanent solution, can we have a stop to evictions? The people who were actually being evicted in my place are from all political denominations. I wonder what they will think if they came and realised that some of the people they are following are actually in favour of their being evicted. 

The other important reason as to why it is important to pass this Bill is that we currently have a lot of challenges in this world. We have climatic changes, people struggling for food and water, and now we even have people who are planning on getting chunks of land to start getting bio-diesel fuels for money. Many countries that have money like South Africa, Saudi Arabia, Libya and other countries come to our countries to actually buy huge chunks of land. So, I would imagine somebody can come and sit here in Kampala, call a few landlords who have land titles either in Ankole or wherever, and they will sell them this land and very soon people on the land will just see foreigners coming and taking the land. I would imagine that by enforcing this dual ownership, which the honourable colleague was objecting to, we can at least for the time being protect ourselves from that catastrophe. 

Recently, India came and acquired 200 square miles in Ethiopia to grow food for their own people when the Ethiopians were suffering. We have seen South Africa buying land in central Africa. The moment we allow landlords to have a free hand in this land, you will see people coming to Uganda and the people you are purporting to protect in Buganda will be sold off to one big company and they will have nowhere to sleep.  

Uganda has been able to survive all these wars. People come to Uganda and say, “Why are Ugandans so happy despite being so poor?” It is because people are living on small holdings - they have something to eat, they have a house and they are living. We have had wars. These wars have come and people spend many months without any money –(Member timed out.)

5.08
MRS BEATRICE MAGOOLA ZIRABAMUZAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): I thank you, Mr Speaker. People have been waiting to see what will happen to the Land (Amendment) Bill after sitting on it for almost the last two years. You know the ills and the goods of land. People have been separated because of land - father and son, relatives and the rest. I want us to deliberate and come up with a law that will give peace and security to our people. 

Mr Speaker, who owns land? Those who own land are very few. They are the landlords; I may be one of them but we are very few. I have looked at the tenants and I have looked at those who bought land, but they are very few. I also looked at those that do not have land - the poor, the children, the women and the widows. I looked at two other things and one of them is the rampant illegal evictions which are almost everywhere. You find a family out in the cold at midnight and you wonder where they are going to stay after the land has been taken away. 

I have looked at another issue and it is the growing population. About 20 years ago - I may not be very specific but about 20 years ago - we had four million people. Right now, we have over 30 million people. I look at these categories of people that I have mentioned and I wonder where they are going to be. Who is going to secure them? Where are they going to get food from and other things that they need for their living? It is from those two points of illegal evictions and big populations that I want to support this Bill because all of us need to have a place where we can put our heads. 

Mr Speaker, if this Bill is enacted, I think we shall be able to house our own people. People will know where to put their houses, where they will have a garden and so on. However, I would like to request that the land fund and the national land use policy are put in place so that they can regulate this land which we are talking about. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.13
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this motion. On the day this Bill was tabled before Parliament, I held a number of consultations in the constituency. I moved from sub-county to sub-county and I was given two conditions. The first condition was that as long as section 32(b) is deleted from this Bill, the people of Kigulu South have no complaints, no concerns and no quarrels with this Bill. Since this clause was deleted, I have all reason to support this Bill. 

I want to inform the honourable members that the other clause that the people of Kigulu South were interested in was the one addressing evictions. We have had so many people coming in disguised as investors, with forged titles from the Ministry of Lands, and claiming people’s land. We feel that when this Bill becomes law, it will protect these people. 

After consultations within the constituency, I went for a radio programme and the people who called in were not from Iganga and Kigulu South alone. All those who rang in said that as long we protect their customary land, they have no quarrel and are not fighting the Bill. Mr Speaker, I have to support this Bill wholeheartedly. I thank you very much. 

5.18
MS NABILA NAGGAYI SSEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my colleagues from the Opposition for the deliberations and contributions they have made over the period that the Bill has been debated. I am meant to echo and re-state my commitment as their shadow minister that their issues are completely captured and there are many sections in the Bill that they are not comfortable with. 

The issue of the land fund has come out very openly and as of today, no convincing rejoinder has come from Government to allay the fears as to why the land fund has not been evenly distributed in this country. The land fund, which we talked about, has only worked in certain areas and has helped in evictions because the landlords have been compensated. My colleagues, especially from Buganda, are very concerned about Government’s refusal to talk about the land fund in Buganda region and when it will come in place.

The other issue that my colleagues are very concerned about is the issue of the only section in the Bill that says that non payment of ground rent is the only section which will make the no-eviction strategy sustained. There can never be any legal provisions for this as a lone ground to stay evictions, and most evictions are carried out with court orders as of now. Court orders come with evictions. They go to Police with these court orders and Police helps them to carry out lawful evictions, according to them, because court has okayed the evictions. 

We are very perturbed about this section, which will completely recreate new court orders, if they will be there, as opposed to the existing ones which are used to evict people. The minister and the government should come out very clearly on how this lone ground is going to work in harmony with the already existing court orders which have been given out to evict people.

Another issue is an emerging consensus from the Opposition on the 9000 square miles as customary land tenure for Buganda. My colleagues are saying that with the capture or deletion of 32(b), it only deals with the customary land tenure which has been existing in the Land Act. However, Buganda has been asking Government to reinstate the customary land so that the Baganda also benefit from the deletion of the clause. As many people are supporting the Bill because the deletion benefits their areas, Buganda is wondering why they are not concerned about reinstating the 9000 square miles as customary land so that Buganda also is a beneficiary of the deletion of the clause.

The issue of rampant evictions has also been captured, but my colleagues are saying that the enforcement agencies will not have changed even with the passing of this Bill. The same enforcement agencies that are not helping people who are being evicted are still in place. So, the Opposition is urging Government to show which new enforcement agencies are going to be in place to effect the amended Act, apart from the existing ones which have not helped the people.

With this issue, I want to also raise the issue of women and their security of tenure which has not been ably covered by Government. It has been glossed over. As women, we need to see how Government has intentionally or systematically taken up the interests of women in the amendment. We cannot say that the women were deemed taken care of in the other Act. We want to see if Government is interested in the welfare of women and if the amendment has captured the security of tenure of women in the amendment sections.

I wish to state here that as a sector minister of lands in the Opposition, we have a consensus that the Bill leaves - (Member timed out.)

5.23
MR CHARLES EKEMU (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. My main concern with the Bill is that we are discussing it without giving due attention to our history. I know Uganda as a country has undergone a lot of turbulence. We have on record traumatic events that we have actually gone through but we do not seem to be taking a lesson or learning anything from that. What I see is an attempt to politicise what should be an issue that concerns all Ugandans. 

I have listened very carefully and this side has come up with a position just like I have heard deliberations from the other side. I am aware that if we are to be guided by the spirit of trying to ensure that we enhance and sustain peace and stability, we should not be seen to be pushing for legislation or refusing to be flexible and listen to the concerns of the people.

I remember as Members of Parliament, you did give us time to go and consult widely and we actually consulted extensively. From the presentations of the minister and Leader of Government Business, we have been given the impression that section 32(b), which was a controversial provision, has been deleted, but all the same, we are legislating in this House and leaving a section of the population concerned that their interests are not being addressed. I think this is something we must look at as a House.

As a national parliament, I think we should be discouraging legislation that is targeting or setting one side of the population against the other. In yesterday’s Monitor, there was a very clear article that revealed that a survey had been conducted on how many Ugandans are actually aware of this Bill. Imagine even after you had sent us as Members of Parliament to consult - to get people’s views, this survey which was carried out in September, just a month or so ago, reveals that only 25 percent of Ugandans are aware of whatever we are deliberating here. So, you will wonder what is pushing us to make sure that this Bill is passed into law probably this evening. That is why the suspicion is even higher, that we may be driven by other forces. But it is at the detriment of any future generations because any legislation that we pass into law, whereas, it may not affect us now, it may affect those future innocent generations.

So, I would propose, and I am really calling on the real conscience of the legislators in this House, that being slow but sure is a better way of delivering this Bill. Let us have the people own-up to it. It has even come out of this House and Members have pointed to the other side asking, “Where are the representatives, 60 and more?” You cannot blame those members of parliament because they are voted by that electorate and if they appeared here and gave their honest views as hon. Kaddunabbi -(Interjections)- I was here and I heard his deliberations. So, I think rushing the Bill for the sake of taking advantage of what we are calling the tenants or squatters, whom we estimate to be about two million or so in this region and who are easily convertible to voters, we are simply trying to politicise this matter. I do not think that this is the right way to go.

My concern also is that we are refusing to look at the rights of the landlord whereas we are considering the Bill and it seems to be favouring the tenants. The impression out there - and that is why probably sensitisation must go further; even if it took five years, as long as we reach that consensus - is that the landlord is being derogated of his rights. His rights are being taken away from him and those of the tenant are being enhanced and yet in our Constitution - I took trouble to look at article 26 of this Constitution which gives every Ugandan, including those landlords, the right to own property. If we are not careful, it is being misinterpreted there that the proposed law is just out to target those people who own land in this region. So, we have to be very careful and avoid using this game of numbers because whereas it may be good now, it can be disastrous and have devastating effects for future generations.

Lastly, the Bill claims it will enhance harmony between the landlords and the tenants, but instead I am seeing that it will create more disharmony and a lot of tension between the landlord and the tenants -(Member timed out.)

5.31
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Independent, Kapelebyong, Amuria): Mr Speaker, I am a teacher. When you set wrong questions, you get wrong answers. When you ask wrong questions emphatically, you get wrong answers emphatically. The doctors tell me that if you do not identify the correct ailment you will give wrong treatment. The problem we are grappling with is that we have not gone to the root of the problem. The object of this Bill is not to cure the actual problem. The object of this Bill is to enhance security of occupancy. If you help me to occupy land, when shall I go to my own land? We are protecting these people and they will stay in this land, but it will never become theirs.
 
The problem we have is that the people of Uganda had land. The Baganda are the target of this Bill. The Baganda here, I think, at one point had land. When I was at school they used to tell me they had 52 clans and the Bataka who were in charge of the land. How did the Baganda lose their land so that they become occupants or tenants on their own land? What is the problem? (Applause) So, this Bill is not going to cure the problem. 

When I heard that a Land Amendment Bill was brought to Parliament, my expectation was that the object of the Bill would be to help the people of Buganda to acquire land so that they own their land – 

THE SPEAKER: So, hon. Member, are you saying that the lawful occupants should question why we call them lawful occupants? I am a mailo owner. Proceed. (Laughter)  

MR MALINGA: Mr Speaker, for us to help the people of Buganda, we should have a Bill brought to this House to help the people of Buganda to own land -(Applause)- not just to occupy land when they are not lawful occupants. Let us not pretend and think that by telling people, if I have a headache, you give me Aspirin; you are not curing the problem. Who are these people who are denying the Baganda their land and they just want them to stay there - “You are occupants; nobody should evict you, but do not own land.” (Applause) Who are they? I think let us be fair.

Mr Speaker, I have lived in this country and during the Teso war I lived in Buganda in Nakifuma. I understand the problem. The Government of Uganda should not pretend and the people of Uganda should rise and tell Government, “let the landless people -(Interruption) 

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way.  The information, I want to give you is that in Bushenyi there was land where Hon. Elioda Tumwesigye comes from. We were told by the President himself that he bought this land from the Mugabe of Ankole and allocated it to -(Interjections) This is what we want also here.

MR MALLINGA: I want to appeal to the MPs from Buganda region that this is the time for you to stand with your people and tell Ugandans what you need. If you do not do it now, you will never have another opportunity. We have kept referring to Hon. Daniel Omara Atubo because he is the one who signed this document. Hon. Omara Atubo came to Teso and consulted us. By bad luck after the consultation a storm came and nearly hit him in a radio station, they had to be rescued. For us in Teso you get land through either inheritance, or you are given or you buy and there is no problem of tenants or bona fide occupants. I have just come back from Ankole –(Member timed out.)

5.39
MR MOSES KABUUSU (Independent, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): I come from Buganda and I am a Muganda. Right now, the people from Kyamuswa are worried about passing a law that will legitimise unlawful eviction on the pretext of going to the courts of law to solve the problem. It is common in this regime that with or without the laws and courts, there are untouchables who have been unlawfully evicting people.

That is why we are coming back here to say that the existing laws cannot stop evictions. The lawyers have submitted. Mr Speaker, you are a lawyer yourself and you are aware that there are sections especially section 59 in the Land Act that protects and even gives penalties to people who violate this law even including unlawful evictions. They have not been implemented. Even the Minister of Lands given chance here, will tell you that he has no money in his budget to implement the land boards to enable them work. He is unable to facilitate land tribunals to work. He is unable to facilitate several departments of the Ministry of Lands to go down to the grassroots to help people who are being evicted. I am now standing to legislate and say that let us spare the incompetence of the ministry by putting a law that stops people from transacting.

Yesterday I was visited by a parent who has a student at the university and they are writing exams next week. He wanted to sell a kibanja to pay school fees for the student at the university, but he was worried he had to consult an absentee landlord because there is a Bill which seeks to criminalise him not to sell before he consults.

In Buganda here, like other people would sell cows, we sell land to bail ourselves from problems. Here is a law that will require a husband who has a wife who needs medical attention and the only solution is to sell a kibanja and this is a law that will criminalise him from selling before consulting to solve a problem. As we deliberate here, Baganda, the landlords who owned land as it was distributed in the 1900 Agreement, have protected their land and many of us who either acquired political or military power have approached them to buy land and they have not sold. They have only accommodated settlers. Now, I am seeing either politically or militarily empowered people waiting for this law and have dual occupancy on land to persuade the loose tenants to sell them land and evict the native Baganda. The loose tenants will sell land to the people who have acquired political and military power. 

I have gone to Law School and I can interpret a law. I know the intention and the spirit behind the Bill. It is my honest appeal to Members that whether we need a pain killer in form of a Panadol or a Bruffen - a pain killer has never been a cure to a problem. 

Since February 2008 when this Bill was tabled, we have had fewer evictions just because there has been political will to stop them, by the President. There was no law to that effect; there was –(Member timed out.)

5.47
MR OCENG ALEX PANYTOO (FDC, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for picking on me at last because I have been standing up, without catching your eye, for the last three days.

I would like to completely disassociate myself from this Bill. In Acholi and many other areas, especially in the African culture, there is never anybody to joke with on matters of land, mothers and women. (Laughter) Matters concerning these three should never be turned into jokes.

In our culture, we hail women; we protect and love them. We also serve them. (Laughter) I am proud of my culture because people in other areas share women; we never share women and you never joke with somebody’s mother.

I would have been happy if the minister had come with a list or data on landlords, bona fide and lawful occupants because he had a lot of time. Where is the list? We should know the intensity of this matter. How serious is it? We are legislating on something that has not been recorded. 

Who are these landlords, you are talking about? How many are they? How many are the occupants? How many are the tenants? How many are the bona fide occupants? How many are they? You gave a lot of time to the ministry, but they have failed to bring this record. 

There has to be a record to show that there are two categories of landlords especially in Buganda; the traditional landlords who were created by the colonialists and the contemporary landlords who came from the bush and started acquiring chunks of land. (Applause) The traditional landlords were in good relationship with their tenants but the contemporary ones are the worst.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my appeal to you is that we should keep cool. I am about to end this debate.

GEN. OTAFIIRE: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Member holding the floor to impute that people came from the bush and acquired land forcefully, when he cannot name one of them? I would like to remind you that Kaddu took my land. I had forgiven him, but now that you have brought it, I will ask for the resumption of that case. 

Mr Kaddu was implying that since I came from the bush I acquired land by force. If so, then this gentleman’s innuendo is that Otafiire who was named and has never been cleaned, acquired land by force after coming from the bush. So, is he in order –(Interjections)– you DP people, you abandoned your principles. DP was a party for poor people.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us keep cool. We are about to end this debate. But you must also realise that from the different submissions, people have different opinions. If you listened to the revolutionary leader Kibanzanga’s contribution and what the hon. member on the floor is saying, you realise that they are saying the same thing. They are saying, who are you to say you are the lawful landlord and so demand busuulu? I think the opinions are that the land should belong to every – that is different.
 
Some people believe there should be landlords and tenants. At the same time, there are some people who are saying there should be no tenants. Who are you to call me your tenant when the land belongs to me? So, let us only speak to this issue. Otherwise, if we say we wait for the land policy – maybe that policy will change the law. So, please be cool. I think let us end.

MR PENYTOO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to request you to compensate my time that was lost. 

As we are all aware of the African history – our forefathers acquired this land by blood and iron everywhere in Africa. So, as we handle matters concerning land, we should know that we are treading on a dangerous path; it is dangerous. 

It must be noted that we are living under a liberalised economy; and here is a Parliament of Uganda going to legislate a law on one component of that liberalised economy, which is land. We are going to determine how land should be swapped or change ownership. That is another danger. Are we not moving away from the liberalisation of the economy? Are we not going back to those old bad days?

Mr Speaker, you also know very well that land has many natural resources. These days, the Ministry of Energy has been surveying the land with natural resources – the results have been shelved and those in the know have taken this opportunity to move out strategically to acquire land in some areas –(Member timed out.)

5.55
MS AMALI CAROLINE OKAO (Independent, Woman Representative, Amolator): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this time. I rise to oppose this motion in its entirety because that is the position of my people. In Lango region, we have been taken up by Clause 32(b) of the Bill and it leaves me with a lot of questions. 

Why did the drafters of this amendment include 32(b), which concerns customary land ownership? Article 237, Clause 4 of the Constitution stipulates that all Ugandan citizens owning land under customary tenure may acquire certificates of ownership in a manner prescribed by Parliament and, (b) that land under customary tenure may be converted into freehold through registration. 

The objective of the Bill is to deal with registered land. However, I have always wondered what the motive behind the bringing in of customary land was until the deletion of Article 32(b). If it was not ill-intentioned - until Government knew that maybe there was a problem - that is why they deleted Article 32(b).

I thank the people of my region for rejecting Article 32(b) of the amendment, which was aimed at tying them to this kind of resolution. 

In future, if we are making laws, we should be patriotic and consider issues in a very serious manner, not just to please other people.

This amendment leaves me with a lot of questions. If we follow the statement of the hon. Minister of Lands, I do not see anywhere this amendment addresses the causes of the evictions. According to the statement, the first cause of the amendment, I can read verbatim, “Is because of lack of adequate knowledge of the law about the rights of the registered land-owners and the tenants.”

I looked for where this amendment addresses that problem and did not see it. I am aware that very many tenants and landlords are very ignorant about their rights. Instead of the minister coming with a suggestion that people will be educated about their land ownership rights - our people out there are supposed to get this right – the minister adds that there are registered owners who are not disclosing to purchasers the tenants on the land to be purchased.

As provided for in the Land Act, bona fide and lawful tenants enjoy tenancy of occupancy. In this case, I wonder – and this tenancy sometimes elapses after three years and sometimes these landlords are not aware of the tenants because there is no register for tenants.

I also call upon Government to make sure that at least the tenants are registered so that when there are complaints, we know the tenants, the landlords and the people with the complaints. 

The minister’s statement also says there are individuals who connive and evict tenants. We have heard Members talking about very rich people who are armed evicting tenants and also Government evicting tenants. What is this Bill going to do to address this situation and who are these armed people? We want to know because it has been left ambiguous and we do not know who these people are, yet the evictions are continuing.

This amendment –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you for your contributions. By now, 108 Members have made contributions. I will wind up the debate tomorrow by allowing the minister to wind up and we shall proceed. Friday is a public holiday because it is Idd Adhuha. We have to leave a bit early to enable our people enjoy Idd Adhuha. I am suggesting that tomorrow, we sit in the morning for a few hours to allow the debate be concluded so that Members can travel to their constituencies.

We shall start at 10.00 a.m. and maybe run up to 1.00 p.m. Let it be tomorrow. With this, we adjourn the House to tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. prompt.

House rose at 6.04 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 26 November 2009, at 10.00 a.m. 

