Tuesday 21st November, 2000

Parliament met at 2:10 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Ayume Francis, in the Chair)

NATIONAL ANTHEM

The House was called to order

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE GEORGE COSMAS ADYEBO

THE RT. HON. PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that it is resolved by the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, duly convened, constituted and sitting in Kampala on this 21st day of November in the year 2000 that: 

Whereas Parliament notes with deep sorrow the demise of hon. George Cosmas Adyebo, former Prime Minister of Uganda and a Member of Parliament for Kwania, Apac District, which occurred on Sunday, the 19th day of November in the year 2000, and; 

Whereas the late George Cosmas Adyebo has had a distinguished career as an educationist, an exemplary political leader and a sports promoter, who deserves national recognition; 

Now therefore, the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda does hereby convey its most sincere condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends, the people of Kwania, the lango community and the entire nation upon the loss of a distinguished son of Uganda, hon. George Cosmas Adyebo;  

Does further register its unbounded admiration and gratitude for the services that he has, in the course of his life, rendered to the people of this nation.  

Mr. Speaker, I beg to move (Applause).

MR. BUTELE: Mr. Speaker, I beg to second the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, you may now proceed to speak to the motion.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr. Speaker, it is with great sorrow that Government learned of the death of hon. George Cosmas Adyebo, which occurred on Sunday, 19th November, 2000. I wish, on behalf of Government, Parliament and on my behalf to express deep sympathies to the bereaved family, the relatives, friends, and the constituents he was representing.  

His death has robbed Parliament and the entire nation at large of a dedicated political servant. During his time, the late Adyebo spearheaded the formation and development of the Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme (phase I). Under this programme, northern Uganda witnessed reconstruction and rehabilitation, which included reconstruction of schools, provision of safe drinking water, reconstruction of health centres and dispensaries, reconstruction and rehabilitation of district farm institutes, and reconstruction of roads. The late Adyebo was also very instrumental in initiating the Northern Uganda University of Agriculture, which is yet to be launched. 

The late Cosmas Adyebo will also be remembered for spearheading the penetration of the Movement system of governance into northern Uganda by mobilising the youth, religious leaders, elders, councillors and his fellow Members of Parliament. As a result of his great effort, many people in the north have appreciated the Movement politics.  

Honourable Adyebo was a very popular man in Parliament, mainly because he was frank, developmental, courageous and so open minded that while debating serious issues, it did not matter to him whether his words would find favour or not. He was a footballer and a supporter of sports.  

Honourable Adyebo was one of my key advisors. And I found his advice very useful and constructive. Many of you may not know that making things coherent is not so simple. It requires a lot of advice to build teamwork. And from time to time when I was stuck, I got his advice. This is what I mean when I say that I found his advice very useful and constructive. His positive and frank approach in politics will be greatly missed.  

He was born on 18th June 1947 at Owiny village, Nambyeso sub-county, Kwania, Apac to Mr. and Mrs. William Ogwal. He was a holder of a Masters degree in economic engineering from Charles University, Czechoslovakia. 

From 1976 to 1979, he worked as a systems analyst programmer with Uganda computer services, Ministry of Finance. From 1979 to 1983, he joined the Ministry of Education. He lectured at the Uganda College of Commerce, Nakawa, now Makerere Business School. 

From 1983 to 1989, he served as principal of Uganda College of commerce Aduku. He was a member of Apac district council, and he was then elected to become a Member of NRC.  

The late Adyebo was Uganda’s Prime Minister from 1991 to 1994. He was the Deputy Vice chairman of the NRC and served concurrently as senior presidential advisor from 1994 to 1997. The Late Adyebo was an elected delegate during the debating and promulgation of the 1995 Constitution.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate hon. Adyebo’s spiritual insight by quoting what he quoted in Parliament from the book Ecclesiastes:

“There is a time to be born and to die, to plant and uproot, to kill and heal, to tear down and build, to weep and laugh, and to mourn and dance. To scatter and gather, for hatred and love, for war and peace.”  Let us mourn the death of hon. Adyebo with the hope that his good deeds will be emulated. May the Almighty sustain his family during this difficult period. “Gumarach Pipeco Otime”. Sorry for the death that occurred. I beg to move.

MR.BUTELE ANTHONY (Madi-Okollo County, Arua): Mr. Speaker, first of all I must thank God and you too for giving me this opportunity to second the motion as regards a colleague and Friend, the late George Cosmas Adyebo, the Member of Parliament for Kwania, who recently passed away after a long illness. He will always be remembered by the people of Kwania, Apac, Lango and the entire Uganda for the part he played when he was still alive. We will miss him in this august House. 

Why should we pay tribute to the Late? Mr. Speaker, we should pay tribute to the Late for whatever he did in several of the positions he held, including lecturer in Uganda College of Commerce, Principal of Uganda College of Commerce, Aduku, a district councillor, NRC Member, CA delegate and Member of Parliament for Kwania. That is why we have to pay tribute to him. We do it for the positive role he has played in those areas where he served this nation.   

I would like particularly to refer to the part he played as the Prime Minister of Uganda. I would like to zero in on point number three of the 15 point programme, where the Late Adyebo played a very positive role. You pay tribute to people for doing good things and for not doing bad ones. As Prime Minister, how did he stand for No.3, which is national unity? Before I talk about national unity, I must talk about the unity within the family. The late kept his family united and went further to his village, his constituency, Apac, Lango region, and to the whole of the north as a Prime Minister.   

As a Prime Minister, hon. colleagues here will bear me out, he tried to unite the people of Uganda under one government and under one leadership. Even when I was Minister for Karamoja, he went to those areas. During that time Karamoja region was feared, but he went there, he went to the north and he went everywhere. That is why I say we should pay tribute to him for implementing number three of the 15 point programme, which is national unity. This is very important before other things can be done.  

After paying tribute to our late colleague, what is next? I suggest that we continue praying for the family, we continue praying for him, and we continue supporting the family. So, we should continue supporting the family in what respect? In the field of education for the children, shelter for the children, and the children’s up keep. We can do that individually, collectively, and also as a Government. I must state here that the Movement Government did a lot to support the family when he was ill. I suggest that the Government continues to do more so that after we have paid tribute here, something is done in the field of educating the children and shelter for the family, because the children are still young.  

What more can we do, Mr. Speaker, in recognition of what he has done for this country? In my humble way, I suggest that maybe one or two streets here in Kampala be named after him, just for remembrance, just like Akii Bua.  We have an Akii Bua Road. So, I think that could be considered here at the national headquarters, and also in the district. This is my humble request, which Government carry out. 

I would like to conclude by saying that let Adyebo’s soul rest in eternal peace. I thank you for listening to me and I second the motion.  I thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM (Mr. Ayumu Akaki): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Hon. George Cosmas Adyebo, whom we are mourning today, was a man known for frankness, a man known to speak out his mind. We would be doing improper justice if we do not speak about him frankly and accurately, without appearing to say things which were not attributed to him. It is in that light that I want to be extremely explicit and dangerously frank about hon. George Cosmas Adyebo.  

On behalf of the Members of Parliament from Lango, that is Lira and Apac and thereby the entire Lango community, and on my own behalf, I wish to extend our sincere and solemn message of condolences to the bereaved family of the late hon. George Cosmas Adyebo as well as to the entire electorate of Kwania county constituency. The death of George Cosmas Adyebo is a big loss to his family, his electorate, to this Parliament, and indeed to the entire nation.  

The late George Cosmas Adyebo died after a protracted illness, on Sunday 19th November at 5.00 a.m. in the International Hospital, which is situated on Old Kampala Hill. He died at the age of 54. He leaves behind a widow, four children, and both his father and mother who are above 80 years old.  

The life of hon. George Cosmas Adyebo can be summarised as open, honest, and even occasionally controversial, but he was sociable and courageous. He was an educationist, a politician, a God-fearing man, a lover of sports and games, and above all a family man. The last occasion he left his sick bed, before he finally collapsed on Sunday 10th November, was on Friday 8th November, when he went to visit his children who are studying at Kisubi. 

As a matter of fact, it needed the courage and openness of the late George Cosmas Adyebo to embrace, propagate, and strengthen the support of the NRM politics and government in Lango. He did this honestly and relentlessly. It is not just for nothing that in the Lango sub-region he is referred to as the grandfather of the politics of the Movement. 

Permit me to refer, in a little more detail, to some aspects of the late hon. George Cosmas Adyebo. As a student, he was brilliant right from childhood. It is recorded that the late hon. George Cosmas Adyebo performed so well in P.1 that he was allowed to skip P.2 and P.3 during his primary education. He completed his primary six level with flying colours. In Lango of that time, now Lira and Apac, the best 30 students would be selected to go and compete for scholarships. Out of these, six would be selected for scholarships. Hon. Adyebo made it, and was at the top of all the 30 best students in Lango.  

He proceeded further to study economics in Czechoslovakia, as was mentioned by the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, on a scholarship, and he qualified with a masters degree. He was among the first persons to work as a systems analyst and programmer in the Uganda Computer Services in the Treasury Department, a job he did from 1976 to 1979.  His career was however interrupted when he had to flee to exile in Kenya, where he worked as a secondary school teacher.  

When he returned from exile, the late hon. George Cosmas Adyebo joined the Uganda College of Commerce as a lecturer and was later transferred to Aduku, his home place, to head Aduku UCC. Aduku UCC then became a very popular college, and students from all over Uganda competed to join it because of the good academic standard and examination results of the college then. I believe that was mostly due to the late hon. Adyebo’s brilliance, good management skills, hard work, honesty, and an uncompromising disciplined character in administration.  

After 1989, the late hon. George Cosmas Adyebo joined active politics, starting as a member of Apac District Council up to Member of the NRC, the Constituent Assembly and the Sixth Parliament, in which we are now. Up to his death, there were all signs that the people of Kwania, whom he represented in Parliament, were going to return late hon. George Cosmas Adyebo unopposed to this Parliament in the forthcoming parliamentary elections. 

He had what some people called an unexpected rise to the high office of the Prime Minister of Uganda in 1991 to 1994. As Prime Minister, he became the second langi to hold the post of Prime Minister in Uganda. As Prime Minister, he did say he worked under some difficult conditions, but nevertheless, he scored many successes in steering the leadership of Government business and initiating and managing some special regional rehabilitation and developmental programmes, including NURP, which has already been mentioned.  

When hon. George Cosmas Adyebo ceased to be Prime Minister, he was elected Vice Chairperson of the NRC, and he steered the proceedings of NRC with great skill and harmony. I believe hon. George Cosmas Adyebo would have preferred to remain a great debater in any legislative body. This drive could be adjoined to the time of NRC before he became Prime Minister, and during the CA and this 6th Parliament.  We shall miss his debating talent, but above all it is unfortunate that he has died without revealing to us, his friends and colleagues in Parliament, the names of the 100 most corrupt leaders, which he stated he had compiled. Many social friends, those with whom he played the game of mweso, and the Nakivubo football fans will greatly miss hon. George Cosmas Adyebo. His family members, above all his parents, his friends and relatives will suffer a severe loss because of his death. However, since death is inevitable and irreversible, all of us Members of Parliament can only pray for his family and friends and wish them courage and God’s blessing to soothe them. 

Finally, we extend our thanks and appreciation to the Uganda Government, to Parliament, and individuals for any assistance rendered to him and his family during his illness up to the time when he passed away, and even up to the time of the burial arrangements. Actually, the burial is taking place. We are most appreciative of the messages from His Excellency the President of Uganda and from the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister to the family and the Lango community for this sad loss. We appreciate their encouraging and supporting words.  

However, we are also aware of some basic needs and problems that the family could face immediately after such a protracted illness.  Everything he earned virtually went to meet the bills for treatment.  In this regard, we wish to appeal to Government, to Parliament, and to all people or persons of good will to continue assisting the family materially. We shall present to Government specific areas of immediate need and specific problems, and we appeal to Government to receive and treat them with sympathy and humanitarian consideration.  

May the good Lord rest the soul of the late George Cosmas Adyebo in eternal rest. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  

MR. MANUEL PINTO (Kakuuto County, Rakai): Mr. Speaker, I rise to support the motion, to convey my heartfelt condolences to the family and to his friends, and to pay tribute to a friend and a colleague whom I have known since we came to the NRC in 1989.  

It has been said that he was the second Prime Minister from Lango.  The first Prime Minister from Lango, who was the first Prime Minister of Uganda, is still alive. The 6th Prime Minister and some of the others have since gone. The late Abraham Walligo, the late Samson Kisekka and now George Cosmas Adyebo.

As Prime Minister, hon. George Cosmas Adyebo set a record by moving from the Backbench straight to Prime Minister. I think, without any experience in Cabinet, for one to move from the Backbench and to be assigned the responsibility of heading Government, was a challenge.  A challenge which I am sure he discharged with diligence. We must recognise that despite any shortcomings, he tried his very best.  

I remember at one time he told me about one of the challenges, during a conversation I had with him. Remember that as Prime Minister, he had to sanction travel of Ministers abroad. You will recall that at one time there was a Vice President who was also Minister of Internal Affairs. So, the Prime Minister had to sanction the Vice President’s travel. If he had difficulties, due to unavailability of funds or any other reasons, you could imagine the numerous challenges that the late hon. Cosmas Adyebo faced. When he explained, I could see that there was indeed a problem of protocol. There was indeed a problem of seniority. And if there was a problem of unavailability of finances, nevertheless he managed.  

Another one was when we intervened in the Constitutional Commission. You remember that there was a problem with accountability, when DANIDA stopped its funding because there was lack of accountability.  The late Prime Minister, Cosmas Adyebo, took keen interest and obtained a file from me, which was going to be delivered in Parliament here, under the Chairmanship of Al haji Kigongo, then Vice Chairman. In a very short time, he wanted a copy of this because he wanted to pursue this cause, because it would give a bad name for a donor to withdraw a grant to the Government of Uganda, especially during the time of constitutional making. He informed me that he took all steps to instruct the Police to take positive action to arrest the culprits, but the machinery of Government was slow, to the extent that the accountants were able to go to the bank and withdraw the evidence. The evidence was signed cheques, which were in Barclays Bank, and one of the culprits is known to have said that the evidence was destroyed because he had got the originals and chewed them up. He actually ate them! The man was willing and able, but the system did not favour him. So, when we heard of the Sebutinde report and what has been revealed, I could understand further the kind of atmosphere that anybody who is charged with public office faces, especially if you would like to follow up a matter to the end and get conclusive evidence and conviction. 

On the famous 100 names of the corrupt that he had identified and written, you will recall that he was a member of our corner here, and in that fraternity he shared with us, not the names, but he would say, ‘I could reveal them, but what next?’ He must have weighed the options and found that it was not prudent to reveal them. But mentioning that there are 100 names listed and identified is sufficient for soul-searching. And as a serious person, he had gone to the extent of categorising the most corrupt in a list of 100.  

Let me now come to the question of care, Mr. Speaker. Recently I attended a funeral service at Rubaga. The Archbishop of the Church of Uganda, the Rt. Rev. Nkoyoyo, said these words in luganda, ‘okuyamba okutono kusinga okusasira okungi’ - a little help is far better than many words of condolences and tears. I am happy to learn, on authority, that the administration of Parliament will pay for the hospital bills of the past two weeks in which our fallen colleague and Friend has been under attention at the International Hospital. But what happens to the period before that? Everybody knows he has been suffering a protracted illness. 

The last time he came here, he sat next to me and he spoke. What I heard him say was lamentation, and he even said ‘death is for all of us, but when I am still alive please help me.’ He was asking for help. It is in that spirit that I would like to appeal to my honourable colleagues and Friends to start some kind of contributory health insurance in this Parliament. We are on the road all the time, and you know the conditions of our roads. Now that they have been improved, you know the excess speed and the disasters on our roads. Accidents can happen to any of us. Illness can befall any of us, but if one fell sick for a long time, what kind of arrangement do we have for the care of the family and children, who must go through school in order to have a future? If Government helped the late Prime Minister, I would like to thank them. If Government did not help the late Prime Minister during his suffering, it is time for soul-searching.  

I come from Rakai District. Our colleague, hon. Patrick Kiggundu, travelled to Rakai District on national duties as a Parliamentarian and he had a serious accident which has afflicted his life and changed his life. I am glad that he attends Parliament, but I would have thought that a little more could have been done for hon. Kiggundu, because this is not the first time we talking about it. A lot more could be done for our Friends as national leaders. It is an obligation, because you serve a nation. I am sure some arrangements could be put in place so that during the prolonged care, people have some comfort. 

Death for hon. Adyebo has been long coming, but his pains have been for a long time. The family has suffered with him. I support what hon. Akaki says. I hope they can get together and present a programme or a budget through which the children, at least, could be maintained and sent to school. This was a former Prime Minister, it would be sad if the family is left to be destitute. Mr. Speaker, there was a hero we recognised here, Akii Bua, and there were swearings that he was going to be helped and his family was going to be assisted. I am yet to be informed, but I know that nothing has been going to the family of the hero, who got national honours and was recognised as a national hero because he obtain for Uganda a gold medal.  

Well, our Friend has gone, so shall we. So, if there is anything that we can do when we are still alive to help others or to make life a little more comfortable, especially in the area of need, accident or illness, we should be doing it knowing that what has happened to him can also happen to us. George Cosmas Adyebo, go to rest, fare thee well.  Thank you.

MRS.AMONGIN APORU (Woman Representative, Kumi): Mr. Speaker and hon. colleagues, I rise here to support a resolution to honour the life and the work of our departed colleague and former Prime Minister of this nation, the late George Cosmas Adyebo, whose body is lying here amidst us.  

I would like to start by quoting from the Bible, Job chapter 14 verse 1. It says: “Man that is born of a woman is of few days and full of trouble.” 

George Cosmas Adyebo, born of a woman, has lived his few days on this earth. He has gone through and has seen different levels of trouble, and we are here to give him a befitting farewell. Hon. colleagues, like some of you, it was from radio that I heard about the death of the late George Cosmas Adyebo. It was so shocking, because just two weeks ago we were burying a colleague. I questioned myself as to what was happening to Parliament. Shall we survive? It seems the chain is on Parliament, but what arrangements do we have for Parliamentarians who die?  

The late Cosmas Adyebo was a man full of humour. He would always be amusing. He was always comic in speech and in dress, and he had a symbol of a black heart and a golden wooden walking stick. And whenever he got here, every Member would know that Cosmas Adyebo was within Parliament. When he shot up from that corner to make a contribution, every Member was rest assured that he would end up with a humorous statement or phrase. He was so entertaining. He was a joker, and when you invited him to your constituency as a guest of honour, the audience would leave with at least a phrase to remember him by because of his sense of humour. He would make humorous remarks. 

Adyebo was a man of action, but he was simple. We miss the talent that was shown to most of us by the late George Cosmas Adyebo. The late George Cosmas Adyebo as a son loved his people. He took into consideration the common human needs of his people, and not only the people of Kwania, but also the people of Uganda at large. He was always seeking for ways and solutions of solving human problems. He would always base his support for his people on reason. The people of Kwania should be helped to search and find another Cosmas Adyebo within his constituency. His approach was humanitarian in nature. He was always concerned about reducing the problems and suffering of his people, and indeed he was struggling. Even when he was sick, he had his people at mind. He died a strugglist. He died working, and he was committed not only to women and children, but also to everybody.  

I would like to mourn the departed George Cosmas Adyebo as a teacher. As a teacher, I miss him. The late Adyebo as a teacher promoted extra curricular education. He was a lover of sports, especially football and netball. He also promoted music dance and drama in schools, and he did a lot when he was a principal at Aduku. Most of you saw how Adyebo was a good dancer whenever we had our parties. And he would always say ‘if you are coming to step on my shoes, do not attempt to dance with me.’ His favourite was waltzing. Waltz was the dance he liked best.  

As a professional teacher he encouraged most of us to start PLE projects in our constituencies by buying the books that he was always selling here at reception. It gave a leeway to most of us, Members of Parliament, to do something in our constituencies regarding primary leaving examinations. He supported UPE and in every school where Adyebo was a parent, for example in Kisubi and Nakasero, he left behind a landmark. We miss him as a teacher and we miss him as a parent who used to encourage children to do activities that would be good for their future.  

The distinguished man we are paying tribute to today has left a landmark in the politics of Uganda. Adyebo will be missed in the Movement, in Kwania County and in Lango, and the vacuum is very difficult to replace. While the late Adyebo was a Prime Minister, he played a big role in the reconstruction of northern Uganda. He played a big role in construction of schools, construction of markets, provision of clean safe water in the rural areas, and above all he had a hand in the peace that we are now enjoying in northern Uganda.  The late Adyebo did not show the people that he was tired, but he would go down and make sure that he went through difficult times with the people.  

As a human being, it is not only enough to talk about the good about the late Cosmas Adyebo, what about the weak points of the late Cosmas Adyebo. I must say that when I saw him when he was sick, he was bitter. He was bitter because of the reluctance to support him and yet he was a key person in the Ugandan Government –(Applause). He has died bitter, but as colleagues in this House, we must pray for forgiveness for his bitterness. We must learn a lesson and chart out a way forward for those of us who are still living.  

As a neighbour to Lango, I wish, on behalf of the people of Kumi District, to convey our heartfelt condolences to Parliament, to the people of Uganda, and to the people of Kwania specifically for the great loss of this gallant Ugandan. Words cannot make up Adyebo, but in Adyebo’s children we shall hope to make another Adyebo. 

I would like to end by thanking the Clerk to Parliament and the Government of Uganda for the arrangements that they have put in place to give a befitting send off to our hon. colleague who has left us.  To the widow, Nelly Adyebo, and the children, we like to support you in prayer, and we want also to say that this is not the first family, there are many others that have gone through the same. Job 14:2 says: “He came forth like the flower and has been cut down; now the shadow is being felt and continues to be felt.”  

Cosmas Adyebo was like a flower yesterday, Cosmas Adyebo is no more, and Cosmas Adyebo has left a vacuum. I want to pray and continue praying with the rest of you. May his soul be granted the right place and let it rest in everlasting peace. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MRS.ABU DOMINICA (Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to support the resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to our fallen brother. 

The very fact that we reacted in a lot of sorrow and shock when we heard of the death of hon. Cosmas Adyebo speaks for the good virtues that he stood for. I had the honour of knowing hon. Cosmas Adyebo when we first met in NRC in 1989, and since then he always referred to me as a sister. He always referred to me as ‘my big sister’, and indeed I felt like a big elder sister to him.

If dead people could only be allowed to peep out here and see the way they are being mourned and the kind of life they have lived on this earth, I think people would steer clear of bad things like hatred, malice and arrogance in this world. We are here mourning our fallen Brother because of the exemplary life he led while he was still in this world. He was very loving, friendly, humorous and kind-hearted. It is true, as hon. Aporu said, that we all have our weaknesses, and I know hon. Adyebo as someone who could get aggressive and sometimes ruthless, but he would always try and make it up to you so that you do not part with bitterness.  

Hon. Adyebo has touched the lives of many people. We admire his courage. Whether you agreed with him or not, he always stood by what he believed in, and went for it. He was a very committed person, especially to his family and to his constituency. A few days ago, even when he was bedridden in the hospital, he was still donating things. There was an announcement over radio that he had given 100 iron sheets to his constituency. Even on his deathbed he was still thinking about his constituency and sending them messages. I hope, my dear hon. brothers and sisters, we shall really live to emulate this.  

I will not bore you with many of the things that have already been said, but I just want to ask Government what they are now going to do for the bereaved family. I would like to beg for your indulgence, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, and give you a live testimony. I had a friend who had a very sick father and she used to tell me that whenever she was going to visit her father upcountry, she would ask her husband for money to buy the old man some sugar, some juice and things like that. The husband would say that there was no money.  Then a message came that the old man had passed away. Now the husband found a lump sum of money to give to this woman to take for the burial arrangements. 

She came to my house very early in the morning and told me, ‘do you know, he has given me such a big sum of money to take for the burial, but do you know what I have done? I have tacked it under his pillow, because when my father was alive and needed services, there was no money, now that he is dead there is this big lump sum of money’. It is as if to say, go and bury him very deep so that he may never surface again. I am not saying that we are going to bury the assistance that Government has given, but I want this little testimony to really sink. I especially beg our present Prime Minister to listen to this testimony, analyse it, and see to it that Government never repeats this kind of thing.  

Hon. Pinto has already mentioned that we have a colleague here, who could perhaps - I am not saying that it will be done - benefit from treatment outside the country. Must we wait until he is dead and then come and say that he was so good and he will be irreplaceable.  Government is fond of saying that we shall find it impossible to replace so and so, when actually there is already somebody sitting in the chair.  

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to beg Government to consider three things. The children's education could be assured. A sum of money could be committed so that the children's education and their future therefore, are assured. Secondly, if Government could only deal with the vehicle motor loan scheme, which is torturing Members, so that the loan can be written off and therefore the family could be enabled to use this vehicle to earn a living. If only Government could also find out the fate of the house in which the late hon. Adyebo died and do everything in its power to enable the family to secure a home in Kampala. I do not want to say much, but these are my three pleas to Government.  

I would like to end by thanking the Clerk to Parliament for really giving the late Cosmas Adyebo a befitting coffin for a befitting former Prime Minister. We appreciate this, and we do hope that you have set an example, which will continue long into the future -  (Interruption)- well, when I die it may not be as good, but I expect the Speaker to buy a befitting coffin for my size - (Laughter).  

Finally, normally when someone dies, we go and say sorry, and we gather for a few days and then we forget. Besides the insurance scheme, which hon. Pinto talked about, it would also be good if we had a kind of scheme where we could make some contributions for our fallen colleagues. I remember in NRC, the Clerk stands to correct me, we lost a total of 40 hon. Members. That was in NRC. In this Parliament, if I am not mistaken, this brother of ours is the 11th hon. Member to die. So, you can see the rate at which we are losing our brothers and sisters. If we had a scheme, whereby we can contribute something little on a regular basis, perhaps it would help their families. 

With those few words, I beg that God the Almighty gives hon. Cosmas Adyebo the peace he so much deserves.  Thank you.

MS. BABIHUGA WINNIE (Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the late hon. Cosmas Adyebo. I would like to convey my heartfelt condolences to the family, friends, relatives, and indeed to the House, the hon. Members of Parliament, because this is yet another Backbencher leaving us very untimely. It is very unfortunate, and we are not really prepared for it.  

colleagues who have spoken before me have said a lot about the achievements of the hon. Cosmas Adyebo as a person and as a leader.  There are gaps and questions in our mind, because I would like to pay tribute to him as a very distinguished Member of this House. When he stood up to speak, he really stood by his convictions, he displayed his eloquence and wisdom. He was a nationalist. We stand here and consider the good gesture of Government to give him a state funeral, which is very commendable, but it is a mismatch to the way he was handled and treated in spite of his achievements. 

We see the way he was handled and treated in the times when he desperately needed the supportive hand of Government, and we ask ourselves at this point, what could have been the reason. When he died Government quickly came in, but why did Government not recognise the suffering of this great leader?  And as we mourn him, there are several hon. Members of this House who are suffering quietly, not only hon. Members, but people who have made significant contributions to the welfare and development of this country. I hope that through you, Mr. Speaker, Government will wake up to support these individuals in their suffering, in recognition of the efforts and energy that they put in to build and re-build this country. 

I would like to highlight the question of policy, not only for hon. Members of Parliament’s health and welfare, but also of the entire Public Service; for those who toil away to support this country.  There should be a provision for a death gratuity so that members of one’s family know that they can fall back to it, and also for one to know what is due to them in terms of this benefit. A number of our Members have died during our term of office, and I wonder what is being done to support their families. What about those individuals who would like to seek for support to better their health? Where do they go? This country cannot develop and go forward if there is no policy to take care of one’s health and welfare.   

The hon. Adyebo made a significant contribution to politics and education, and he was said to be very courageous. I want to say that his courage and his example will move us to higher levels of commitment, not only to our country but also to those policies that safeguard the welfare of the individuals and their families. 

I would like to end by expressing my deepest condolences to our fallen comrade, and I want to pray and hope that Government will live up to its expectation of what has been expressed on this Floor. I hope they will positively support the family of the late George Cosmas Adyebo, and I want to trust that he is resting in eternal peace.  Thank you, Sir.

MR.KYEMBA HENRY (Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to say a few words about our fallen colleague lying before us. I feel very sorry for you and all our colleagues in this House, for it would appear that time and time again, you are made to represent the helplessness of our situation in this House.   

Today we are mourning the death of George Cosmas Adyebo, but as hon. Members know and have said, he is just one of those in the line of our very dear colleagues who have lost their lives in the service of this country. And the message that is always coming to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the Executive in particular, is that are we doing enough, or are we waiting, as some Members have said, to give these hon. Members a most distinguished farewell? I do not want to go into that very much, since a lot has been said. But I do hope and pray that those responsible will play their part, so that at least when one of our hon. colleagues goes, not only Backbenchers, but even from the Front Bench, something is seen to be done for the fallen comrade.   

Certainly, I want to associate myself with the comments that have been made that George Cosmas Adyebo fought a courageous war against his illness, and a little assistance here and there could have possibly made a difference. George was courageous in illness, as he was courageous in this august House. He will be remembered in this House for his courage in his contributions.  

Before he joined the Backbenchers, I was indeed privileged to have been a Minister under him, when he was Prime Minister. I know the leadership that he gave to the Ministers during the period that he came to lead us right from the Backbench. It is not easy for one to become a Prime Minister from the Backbench. All the other Prime Ministers I know have had a spell on the Front Bench. 

George had a sense of humour, which we shall miss in this House. He had a seriousness when debating, which we shall all miss in this House. His convictions and points on the economy were always made loud and clear on the Floor of this House. Indeed, George was friendly, but very serious whenever it came to discussing various issues. I had occasion to travel with George Cosmas Adyebo as Prime Minister on a number of trips all over Uganda. He was a real nationalist as far as this country is concerned. And I think this country has lost a nationalist who will not be easily replaced. 

I would like to take this opportunity to applaud the team spirit that was exemplified by the working method of the late former Prime Minister. His contribution should be a challenge to all of us to do what is expected of us whenever we are assigned responsibility. This corner in this House, where George Cosmas Adyebo had his abode, will miss him just as much as you will miss him from all sides of this House. 

I would like to take this opportunity to join those colleagues who have appealed for assistance for the welfare of the family. If we did not do enough for the deceased, at least let us make sure that the young ones will not feel his absence so much.  

I would like to conclude by conveying to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the family the very sincere condolences of my constituency, Jinja Municipality, and Busoga region in general and indeed the eastern region as well. I know George made very many friends in those areas and they will miss him dearly. May his soul rest in eternal peace.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I had recognised the following, and I will give them opportunity in the following order: hon. Ajeani, hon. Mike Mukula, his neighbour, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, and hon. Alex Onzima. After that we will see how to proceed from there. By the look of things, we still have number of hon. Members who would wish to contribute to this debate, I request you to try and be as precise as possible so that you shorten your time of contribution.

DR. AJEANI (Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Hon. Members of this august House, all of you know me as a man of very many words, but today I am speechless. I rise just to add my voice, for purposes of record, to those who have spoken before me. I would have taken a much longer time if I had spoken before hon. Dominica Abu, because much of what she said was what I wanted to say. Nevertheless, it is difficult to speak about a person whom you regarded as a person greater than you when he was alive. Indeed, that is exactly how I regarded George Cosmas Adyebo. In my personal life I regarded him as a person definitely greater than myself. And I believe he lived a life greater than I have lived so far. I do not know whether I will ever live up to the level or the height that he lived up to.

I would like to share with you one short moment I had with him in February 1992, when I was on my way to Kinshasa after being appointed new ambassador to that country. I met Cosmas Adyebo at Nairobi International Airport in the VIP lounge. He asked me where I was going. I said I was now going to take up my new post in Kinshasa. He said, ‘I am glad that it has finally has come, but my brother, I am sorry for you, you are going to Kinshasa at a time when those people have their local problems. My advice to you is go, but do not get yourself involved in the internal wrangles, rather work hard under certain situations. Do your best to make sure that our common border and the people who live and operate along our common border live and operate peacefully.’ Today I remember to share this with you because he is no longer with us to give, what I call wonderful, fatherly and brotherly advice to those of us who are still around and those who are coming after. 

It touched me, because I had been meeting so many people in this country. I had met many leaders, but they never bothered about what happened to people who lived along various borders, but he cared.  Coming from Lango, he would have enough time to run either to Kenya or beyond if Uganda was attacked on the western border, but he advised me to do the best that I could do to make sure that such problems never arose. Today he lies in State, motionless.  

Sometimes you get so tired of beautiful long speeches about people who have died. Indeed, I get so bored, because the person has died and yet before, nobody said that the person was wonderful. And nobody stands up and says something fruitful for those whom the departed brother or sister has left behind. 

Members of this august House, I respect you very much because the people who sent you here are all greater than me, and they are people whom I respect. I would like to appeal to all of us. It would be a shame if this august House, filled for the first time with the highest brains in this country, finished the five terms and walked out of here without putting in place some law to take care of people who are left behind by those who have contributed a lot.  Let me borrow a leaf from Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar. There were many things that Mark Anthony said at Julius Caesar’s funeral, but I would like to quote one thing. He said: “The bad that a person does remains forever to be remembered but the good that a person does is oft interred with his bones, so be it be with Caesar.”  I would not like it so be with Cosmos Adyebo, honestly, let it not be with Cosmos Adyebo

If I continue talking and talking, I will make a mess of the whole thing. I thank you very much for feeling so sad and sharing your grief with all Ugandans at this time. Let us be practical from now on. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you. 

CAPT.MUKULA MIKE (Soroti Municipality, Soroti) Mr. Speaker, I rise to support the motion, and may I borrow a leaf from Shakespeare. In his book, The Twelfth Night, Malvorio said, “some people are born great, others achieve greatness and some have greatness thrust upon them.” 

The late lying before us rose from the Backbench to the Front Bench as Leader of Government Business and a Prime Minister. Such achievements are rare in life. Our Brother and comrade was a great man. I recall in 1996, when we had just been elected, he presided over my victory celebrations in Soroti Municipality as guest of honour. He was not a Prime Minister then, but the people of Soroti Municipality recall, with humility, the greatness of Cosmos Adyebo when he was a Prime Minister. This was because he drew up a strategic programme worth over 100 million dollars for the north and north- eastern parts of Uganda under NURP. Under this programme, over 1786 classrooms were built, 288 primary schools were built, and roads were also built, for example from Kumi through Serere to Soroti, covering a distance of 78 kilometres. This road gave our people access and they were able to sell their produce. That road cost 8.3 million dollars. That was a program that was worked out and drawn up under George Cosmos Adyebo.  

The Soroti-Lira Road, a total of about 105 miles, cost a total of 9.4 million dollars under NURP. Hon. Cosmos Adyebo, to our people, is a star. He is a hero because after the war in Teso, the NURP Program gave our people hope, and hon. Cosmos Adyebo came in to launch many of these development programs.  

Hon. Cosmos Adyebo was also a lover of sports, especially football.  Express Football Club remembers Cosmos Adyebo because whenever he appeared in his white suit, red shirt and a red tie, Express would win. Express always won whenever Adyebo came in. They would even forget the witchdoctors they were using. They knew hon. Cosmos Adyebo was a light and hope, and they would always win.

I would like to recall that one of the achievements we have in this Government is the ability for us to work and re-establish order and dignity amongst ourselves. But a lot has already been said about certain things that left my dear Brother, George Cosmos Adyebo, bitter, and that is the inconsistency in Government. I hope that this is an eye-opener for those at helm of decision making, because when Cosmos Adyebo was at the centre stage of decision making, he helped many people. I am very sure that this is not the time for us to dwell on that, but hon. Cosmos Adyebo, I am told, took enough during the time when he was sick. 

I would like to say that I have traveled and I have seen a lot in the course of my travel, but I recall at time, and this has always been said, when I was in church, a pastor talked about how he had travelled round the world. He got to Guatemala at one point, and as he moved around, he saw a number of houses and some of these houses had television aerials. As he walked around, as a man who was born again, he realised that some of the houses, which are even like areas in Katwe or some of these difficult areas that could not afford televisions, had aerials.

 Being a born again person, he asked one of the people in one of these wretched houses, ‘my dear brother, I see an aerial outside but inside this house I do not see a television, because we have been walking around, I thought I will be able to see a television.  This man, who was about 68 years, told his colleague ‘I am born again, and I will not tell you a lie. In this area if you want to be known, if you want to be seen and recognised, you must live like the rest. My children have put up an aerial, but I cannot afford the television. Outside we look like the rest of the people, but inside we cannot afford the television.’ 

The purpose of this analogy, hon. colleagues, is that a number of people in the Christian life just have the names. They are baptised as George Michael, John and so on. It is like the houses that we have in that place in Guatemala. You have aerials outside, but inside your heart is not complete, because in order to have a complete circuit that aerial should have the light and you switch on so that you can see the pictures. I am told that hon. Cosmos Adyebo, before he passed away, was born again. He completed the circuit of the aerial and the television. And I am very sure that before he went, he did forgive those that he believed had wronged him while he was still on planet Earth. 

May his soul rest in eternal peace.  My dear brother we shall meet again in the Promised Land.  Thank you.

MR.LUKYAMUZI KEN (Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand here to pay tribute to a dear friend, the late Adyebo, on behalf of the people of Lubaga South, the district of Kampala, and the Kingdom of Buganda.  

One of the most outstanding writers on the phenomenon of death was William Shakespeare. Death is not only happening now, it has been happening over the years. Shakespeare, in one of his plays, said, “let death comes when it wills.”  No matter what, death should not scare people. We cannot, in this august Assembly, tell Mrs. Adyebo the words of Shakespeare about death. We would be making her more angry, because she has lost a dear friend, whom you cannot replace overnight.  

I knew the late Adyebo Cosmas as a man of friendship. I knew him as a talented political communicator with unique talents. He wore an image of a simple Prime Minister, which has never been found in many spheres of influence in the Uganda I have lived in. He was simple, he was approachable, he was not arrogant, and he was himself. You could not even think that he was a Prime Minister. In instances of this kind, where people get excited with power, it is difficult for one to wear the image of Prime Minister and retain that simplicity Adyebo retained. I pay tribute to him because of that unique characteristic.  

It has been reported that the late Adyebo was a great lover of sports. And it has also been reported that whenever he showed up in Nakivubo, the playing team won. We should emulate the example of Adyebo the man. Apart from the fact that hon. Ogaba is forced to go to Nakivubo because he is protecting his job, besides the Brig. Moses Ali, who also regularly finds time to go to Nakivubo, we do not seem to have seriously committed sports persons in the top leadership in Uganda. I want to present that challenge in very serious terms. We have yet to cultivate a spirit of joy and a serious concern for sports. Uganda has not performed very well in sports, even internationally, because we lack that characteristic of global concern and commitment to sports. When the boys and girls are in the pitch and they see a whole President seated in the pavilion for over an hour watching them, they gain the guts to win and to play well.  It is a rare occurrence in present day Uganda. We have yet to get an explanation as to why they cannot find time to be in Nakivubo to boost the morale of the players and the footballers or netballers.  

Recently I was in Nakivubo to officiate as guest of honour at the netball tournament of East Africa, and a Ugandan team won the sports tournament in my presence. So, it is important for Ugandans to remember this great son of Uganda, who dearly loved this country and dearly loved sports.  

The late Adyebo was a great admirer of Ken Lukyamuzi, the man. He used to joke with me because of being realistic. He would tease me whenever he met me in the corridors. He would say, ‘you federal man, what are you up to?’  Then I would also tease him back and say, ‘yes, if I enjoy eating matooke, why do you not let me eat matooke and you also enjoy eating millet.’ And he would stop at that and laugh and go away. I loved him because of that simplicity. 

It has been reported that something should be done for the late Adyebo’s family. My understanding is that the House where he has been staying is property of the National Housing and Construction Corporation. I propose that the encumbrances attached to that house be paid for by the Government. I move seriously that the encumbrances be paid for by the Government, because we would like Mrs. Adyebo and the children to stay peacefully in a home which is already guarded.  

I would like to propose that Parliament sends a special delegation, comprising of representatives from all the districts of Uganda, disregarding those which have yet to come into being. I am saying so because on a number of occasions when a distinguished person like him dies, we are briefed through notices that there shall be transport to the burial place. We never get the realistic representation that we would have liked. If we are talking about Uganda in its totality, this is one occasion where we would commission a team, comprising diverse MPs from all over Uganda, to symbolise our commitment to a Uganda which Adyebo loved.  

I would like to end by describing the late Adyebo as a man who loved tradition, as a man who loved his origin, as a man who loved Lango as a society. He was never ashamed of talking about Lango. There are people who are ashamed of talking about their respective origins. In Adyebo, I saw a man of joy, a man of dignity and a man of love. Au revoir Adyebo. 

MR.ONZIMA ALEX (Maracha County, Arua): I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to support this motion in which we are paying to tribute to our fallen comrade, the late hon. Cosmas Adyebo.  

I would like to begin by thanking the Prime Minister and all those others who have contributed to this motion, for avoiding the usual culture at funerals where people normally tend to struggle on the political affiliation of the dead. It has been a common practice that at such occasions, when a person was probably advancing multi-party ideology, those belonging to that camp will want to use that occasion to give the implication that the loss is only to that party or political organisation. And when it also comes to a person who probably has been advancing the ideology of the Movement, they will say ‘Oh, it is a loss to the Movement’. But today I think we have really departed from that position, because the fact that we have lost a person, whether he was multi-partyist or movementist, it is a loss to our nation. It is not a loss to any political organisation.  It may be there, but you talk about it in a hidden corner. But when we are in a public place like this, let us acknowledge that it is a loss to all of us.

I heard what the President had to say about the death of our colleague over radio. In his own words, he said, “the late was a pillar of the Movement in Lango, he was a clean politician and he was a patriot”.  At the same time, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister said, “the late was a great statesman, he was the backbone of the Movement in Lango, and he was a very good legislator.” Indeed it is true that the late did his best to sell the Movement political system in Lango, and we all know that it is not easy to sell the Movement system in that part of our country.

We also know that in the 1996 presidential elections, the constituency of Kwania, which the late represented, was the best in supporting the President in Lango region. If I can recall correctly, that is the constituency where the President suffered the least defeat, of less than 2,000 votes. And also in the recent referendum, Kwania did the best in Lango region. All this was the effort of the late Cosmas Adyebo. Indeed he had a very high degree of support in his constituency. I think he actually got 72 per cent in the last parliamentary elections. All this confirms the statements that were made by His Excellency the President and the Prime Minister in their condolence messages.  

We also know, and it has been said here about three times, that the late was elevated from the Backbench straight to the prestigious office of Prime Minister. But the Members who raised these issues fell short of also saying that he was dropped in the same manner he was elevated. This is a man who did his best to sell the Movement in Lango region, and this to me was more difficult than the protracted struggle by NRM, which we had in Luwero Triangle. How then did it happen that when this pillar of the Movement, this clean leader, this politician and patriot was faced with a lot of difficulties in struggling to stay alive, the good Movement turned its back on him. Why?  

When we say we have here a fallen comrade who never stole from Government, and yet when he entered his difficult moments, nobody came to his rescue, what lessons do we learn from this? I think this can even tempt some other people, who are occupying some high ranking offices somewhere, to say if they do not care for themselves, it is more likely that they will be ignored by the political establishment.  So, it can easily bring in the element of corruption. It can easily make some people think that for them to cater for their futures, which they do not know about, they should also play about with some figures here and there so that when they are confronted with such a condition, they will be catered for and their families will be safe.  So, this could be one area where people might be forced into corruption.  

So, I would like to appeal to Government. When somebody is elevated from whatever position to a high office in this country, it is not really good to drop this person in the manner you elevated him or her. Therefore, since Government did nothing to help, or if ever it did anything it was minimal, it is not too late. The late has some orphans and a widow left with us, I suggest that whoever is responsible in this House should talk to His Excellency the President so that these children can also be included in the Statehouse scholarships. Whatever criteria they have been using, this one should be one of them, particularly the orphans of the late George Cosmas Adyebo. I would not mind about Onzima or any other MP, because in the first place we are too many, but for a rare high-ranking officer like this, it is only befitting that the Government seriously considers enlisting these orphans to benefit from Statehouse sponsorship.

On the issue of housing - (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we have run out of time allocated for these proceedings. Can you wind up please.

MR.ONZIMA: Just one or two things. I hope, on top of the Statehouse scholarship, Government will also seriously consider the issue of acquiring a house for the widow and the children. I understand the late also sold a house in order for him to get money to travel abroad for treatment when Government ignored him.  

Finally, I request the Sixth Parliament to seriously think of amending the Constitution, especially when it comes to by-elections following the death of a Member of Parliament. I was greatly disappointed when we were still mourning the death of the late Emmanuel Kirenga and the Electoral Commission was busy telling people about the nomination day and the day for elections. It is really unfair! It is as if you were outside there waiting only for Members of Parliament to die everyday, which is very unfair. Why can’t we wait for a minimum of three months before we go for by-elections? So, I ask whoever is responsible to amend Article 81 or 82. At least a considerable period should be given before these by-elections come. Otherwise, mourning will be meaningless if we begin –(Interruption)- the election process when we are still in the first week of the death of a Member of Parliament.  May his soul rest in eternal peace.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Onzima, you should learn to respect the Chair. Do you understand? We do not speak as and when we wish here. That is why there is a Chair. 

MR.ONZIMA: I am sorry, Mr. Speaker, if what I have done has offended - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Twice you have ignored the Chair and next time it will be a different matter. I will now ask the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister to wind up the debate.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr. Speaker, I want to thank hon. Members for their contribution and concern for the bereaved. And I want to point out that in accordance with African culture, it will be improper for me to stand here and say that the Government did this or that. It will be most improper, but I want to assure you that Government did make a contribution, but I will not, as I said in accordance with our African culture, start listing the assistance. It will be demeaning to such a distinguished person who assisted this country.  

May I once again convey our deep condolences to the family, and we request that the Almighty God may sustain the family during this difficult period. Mr. Speaker, I now beg that the motion I moved be adopted. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question, that is after I certified that there is quorum. 

(Question put and agreed to)

NATIONAL ANTHEM

(The House rose at 4.20 p.m. and adjourned to Wednesday 22nd November 2000 at 2:30p.m)
