Tuesday 28th November, 2000

Parliament met at 2.35 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

STATEMENT

THE CHAIRPERSON, SELECT COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (Lt. Col. Mudoola): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

It will be recalled that on the 1st August 2000, Parliament passed a resolution, which established a Select Committee to generally investigate allegations of mismanagement, abuse of office and corruption in the Ministry of Defence. This House resolved that its terms of reference should include the following: 
The salary scam, the helicopter saga, the rotten food purchase, the purchase of undersized uniforms, the purchase of unusable military tanks, payroll inefficiencies, procurement procedures, and gratuities/operations sections problems in particular relating to widows, widowers, orphans and former army personnel.  

Parliament further resolved that the Select Committee should report its findings to Parliament within 90 days, which expired on the 2nd November 2000. It should be noted that due to some unavoidable circumstances, the Committee could not complete its work within the stated limited time as per the resolution. I wish to point out the fact that, as is usually the practice in this House, the Select Committee comes up with an interim report that is discussed.

However, hon. Members, we appreciate the fact that the nature of our investigation requires the Committee to meet in camera. The issues involved are also quite sensitive and complex. It is the view of the Select Committee that all the terms of reference should be thoroughly handled up to their logical conclusion. And meaningful recommendations should be made in light of the findings. The giving of a partial report, we believe, would jeopardise our findings.

Hon. Members, I wish to report that all the Members have been exceptionally dedicated to this work. But as you are aware, the Committee has not been able to complete its work due to continuous interruption, especially during the budgetary process, in which all Committees were directed to stop business. You will also recall that following the constitutional amendments in respect of quorum, the Committee has had to leave its business unfinished in order to raise quorum during voting time in the House. This has tremendously hampered our operations, and as a result, it has delayed the investigation. When we are interrupted, we have to re-schedule interviewing these witnesses, and at times they are so busy or they are out of the country, so this has also delayed our work.

Having the above factors in mind, and looking at some of the terms of reference, which my Committee found to be too extensive, I therefore seek an extension of two more months to enable the Committee accomplish its task and report to this House. I beg to move, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you moving this on behalf of the Committee? Has your motion been seconded or should I take it that all the Members of the Committee assented? Well, hon. Members, you have heard the report and the motion, it is now open for debate.

MR.ONGOM ABSOLOM: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Whereas it may be necessary to give the Select Committee some time, it would have been better if the Committee indicated how far they had gone, so that the House knows what more time to give. They are asking for two months, but now we do not know the basis on which to approve the two months, because we do not know how far they have gone. Apart from stating their difficulties, they have not really told us how much work they have done and how much is left. Is it possible for the Committee to advise us on this?

DR. MALLINGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the nature of this Committee is that confidentiality has got to be exercised. We have covered quite a lot of ground. In fact, most of the interviews are almost finished, but some of the work entails visiting countries outside Uganda to investigate some of the purchases. So, we have done maybe three quarters of the work now, and as the chairperson of the Committee has pointed out, there has been a lot of interference, especially with the formation of quorum. Sometimes the people you expect to come and be interviewed do not turn up. 

Perhaps this is one of the most important Committees that this House has ever set up. And when we finalise our report, you will be extremely grateful to us for the work we have done. So, we beg that you support us and grant us the time that our chairman has asked for. Thank you very much.

MR.SEMBAJJA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In granting the Committee more time as requested by the chairperson of the Committee, I want to find out whether the Clerk to Parliament will have enough money to sustain the Committee when the whole House goes on recess.  Otherwise, we may give them permission to continue and there will be no money.

DR. MALLINGA: I think you cannot measure the importance of the work of Government, especially Parliament, along monetary terms. The nation has got to rise up to its ability to support this Committee. What the Committee is investigating is so vital to the nation, that even if there is a last cent in the nation, it should be scrapped up to support this Committee. 

MR.OKELLO OKELLO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, invariably all the Select Committees we have had in this House have come back to ask for an extension of time.  To me it is becoming fashionable to do so. I would like to get an assurance from the chairman that if they are given the two months, they will definitely complete the work and there will be no second request for extension of time.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Incidentally, this extension of two months includes the period that you been carrying out this work before this motion. Because, if your mandate expired at the beginning of November, and November is now ending, I believe the two months take into account this period that you have been working. So, the extension actually means only one month, which goes to the end of December. 

LT.COL. MUDOOLA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.     One Member asked whether if we were given these two months from today we would not come back for another extension. I assure you that we will not, because what we are remaining with is two main items. We are left with the salary scam, the pay roll and the war compensations, those are the three areas we want to cover, and then after that we write a report. So, I am sure that if you give us the two months from today, we will not come back for further extension.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You say that your mandate ended at the beginning of November and I have asked you whether you have not been working.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: Though the mandate ended in December, you remember very well that we started work two weeks later. We were sworn in on the 15th and we started the work on the 16th. So, though we have been working, we still need this time, and we request you to give us that time from today, so that we do not bother coming back to ask for a further extension.     

MR.NYAI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bearing in mind what the Business Committee discussed this morning, giving two months of monthly days may not be useful to the Committee. Would it therefore not be useful to determine the Committee’s work in terms of parliamentary time, which will be available to them when the House is in session? So, I would say maybe to the end of February.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think they intend to work even when you are not working as Parliament. I think that is what they mean.

MR.NYAI: I have understood, thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will now the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS BILL, 2000

Clause 40

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, as you will remember that last Thursday we completed the clauses in this particular Bill, save for clause 40. We also did not consider the schedules, but it is only clause 40 that we stood over. I hope the Minister or the chairperson is ready to report.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman and hon. Members, we have considered this clause, which makes it obligatory on the part of employers to give leave to their employees who are entitled to voted in any election, or at least these presidential elections. They are to give them obligatory leave to go and vote. 

When this clause was being debated last week, it was indicated that possibly three days should be necessary for this sort of exercise, and the potential economic costs were pointed out. So, we have considered this issue now and we have come to the view that possibly as many as about 10,000 people will be involved, countrywide, in this sort of thing and the cost to the country could be enormous.  

For the above reason, and if Parliament agrees and the Committee agrees, I would like to move that this clause be deleted. I have talking to Electoral Commission, and this issue could be addressed administratively. For example, the Electoral Commission can easily have polling posts in the factory or near the factory to make it possible for those who are entitled to vote to be able to vote. Those people have told me that because of this, they normally tend to have election days over the weekends, and a number of factories do not work then. So, I beg to move that this be deleted.         

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr.Ogalo Wandera): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This was the policy of the Executive, and if they are withdrawing it, I really have no objection to it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the motion is that clause 40 be deleted.  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

The First Schedule, agreed to

The Second Schedule, agreed to

The Third Schedule, agreed to

The Fourth Schedule, agreed to

The Fifth Schedule

MR.OGALO WANDERA: Mr. Chairman, I propose that the fifth schedule be deleted for reasons given earlier when considering the clauses.  I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the fifth schedule be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to)

The Sixth Schedule

THE CHAIRPERSON: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the sixth schedule be deleted for the same reasons as stated above. I beg to move

(Question put and agreed to)

The Seventh Schedule

THE CHAIRPERSON: Mr. Chairman, in Form OC, I beg to move that the word “interim” appearing in the second line be deleted. This is because there is no longer an interim Electoral Commission.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

The Seventh Schedule, as amended, agreed to

MAJ.GEN. ELLY TUMWINE: Mr. Chairman, I would like to move under Rule 108 (1) and (2). I would like to make an amendment under that Rule.  It is about a recommittal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: A report will be made and then after we have adopted the report, but before the Third Reading, you can move. If we agree then, we shall recommit. 
I now put the question that the title of the Bill stands the title of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In a similar manner, I would like to be advised whether this is the right time for me to move an amendment in regard to clause 22 (2).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We shall deal with it in a similar way as we shall deal with his.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and Committee of the whole House reports thereto.
(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Presidential Elections’ Bill, 2000” and has passed it with several amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to)

MAJ.GEN. ELLY TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to move an amendment under Rule 108 (1) and (2), which deals with recommitting an item in a Bill. And I would like to make an amendment on an issue which was moved by the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and was passed by the Committee of the whole House. It is on clause 38, which in effect was deleted. I want to move that it be retained in this Bill because of the following reasons

Under Article 59 of the Constitution in chapter V, Clause I, II and III, every citizen of Uganda who is 18 years and above has a right to vote. And it is the duty of every citizen of Uganda who is 18 years of age or above to register as a voter for public elections and referenda. 

Article 59 (3) says that the state shall take all necessary steps to ensure that all citizens qualified to vote, register and exercise their rights to vote.  

Clause 38 of the Bill reads as follows:“The Commission may make special provision for the taking of the votes of patients in hospitals, or persons admitted in sanatoria or homes for the aged and similar institutions and also for persons in restricted areas such as soldiers and other security personnel; but the Commission shall publish in the Gazette a list of the restricted areas under this section.”  

If this clause is deleted, it will be disenfranchising the soldiers who will be on duty during the elections. The Army will be on standby a hundred per cent to ensure that there is a peaceful election in the whole country.  Should they be denied their constitutional right to vote by virtue of being on duty on the day of the voting? As I have said, the whole Army is on standby. It is very dangerous for national security to order soldiers to remove their Uniforms, put down their guns and go to polling stations long distances away. In effect, this might defeat the purpose of ensuring security. 

Furthermore, in the Bill the aspect of restricted areas is not defined. I would like to amend that, so that we define them. One of the points raised by the Committee, on the reasons for the deletion of the clause, was that monitoring in these areas is not certain, but this is not the case -(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, hon. Member, your motion is that we recommit this particular clause so that we consider it and then pronounce ourselves on it?

MAJ.GEN. ELLY TUMWINE: Yes, Mr. Speaker, and I can add to it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay that is the motion. It does not mean that when we recommit we shall pass it. The motion is that we go back to the committee stage, consider the clause and decide on it. We shall vote by putting up your hands. I now put the question. 

72 Members voted in favour of the motion

20 Members voted against 

MR.NYAI: Mr. Speaker, if the figures you have read are correct, that means we are 92 of us here and we have no quorum.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, there is doubt about whether we have quorum. Let us ascertain whether we have quorum.

MR.RUZINDANA: Mr. Speaker, there were abstentions, who were not counted. I think you can count the abstentions.  I abstained, for example.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the number I have ascertained is 143, so there is quorum. 

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, after sufficient consideration, I have called off my amendment.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS BILL, 2000

Clause 38

MAJ.GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to explain the importance of the constitutional provision that gives everybody a right to vote. But I would like to assure Members that I moved this amendment to assure you that the UPDF and all the security forces are interested in clean and transparent democracy, and I hope everybody supports that.  

The first principle of democracy is the right to vote and the freedom to vote. The Committee asked how would we ensure that these elections are supervised, monitored, and the agents of the candidates are represented. The amendment I would like to move on clause 38 deals with that. It says that we should define what a restricted area is, and I propose the following description:

“A restricted area shall mean, an area gazetted by the Electoral Commission for purposes of enabling voting to take place under exceptional circumstances.”  

We are not referring to every barracks, every unit area where it is peaceful and where it is possible to vote immediately near the barracks, we are referring to exceptional situations. I want to add that in exceptional circumstances, there could be some cases where certain security areas are gazetted as restricted areas. For example, if there is an eminent enemy attack and the army must be called to defence, or the security unit must be in position to fight in order to protect every other Ugandan elsewhere, -(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, I thought your intention was to restore what we deleted?

MAJ.GEN. TUMWINE: Yes, but there is also an amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You want to restore what was deleted during the Committee Stage?

MAJ.GEN. TUMWINE: Yes, Mr. Chairman. My main interest was to restore 38 as it is, and I am giving the reasons for it. Other arrangements like the monitors, the electoral officials and the candidates’ agents in those positions on that day are really a matter of administration by the Commission. So, I beg to move that we reinstate clause 38.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Mr. Kavuma Steven): I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I rise to support the reinstatement of clause 38 into the Bill. I concur with the mover that deleting that clause would amount to undermining the letter and the speech of our Constitution, in terms of Article 59(1) and (3). And certainly this Parliament cannot be seen to do that. 

Deleting that clause is not only unconstitutional but it is also undesirable. The clause talks about people who are in hospitals, among others, but are in position to vote. Today we know that there are some dedicated Ugandans who are in some areas treating the deadly disease called ebola. If you are going to say that the Commission should not have discretion to be able to make a provision for those people who have decided to risk their lives in order to save the lives of other Ugandans, then definitely you would be treading on a very dangerous path.  

We have homes for the elderly and the disabled. There are some in hon. Lukyamuzi's constituency, around Nalukolongo. All these people are entitled to cast their votes as per the provision of the Constitution. And the state is under an obligation to facilitate them to do so.  

We in the army and the Ministry of Defence are always very happy to hear that Parliament is genuinely concerned about some of our comrades who have been injured while defending the sovereignty of this state. And as you know, many of these people are in places like our Mubende rehabilitation centre. Those of you who have been there can see the problems involved in even moving them from one place to another within the barracks. It is a real handicap! I think the Commission should have the discretion, based on a legal framework, to look at such cases and be able to say they can facilitate them to vote by bringing a polling station nearer to them.  

Hon. Tumwine did talk about a fact, which we all know about, and that is, on polling day the army is on stand by. Whether we like it or not, this is the situation. Of course we have advanced greatly, because we know of other countries where even their boarders are sealed because they are going for elections. We do not go to that extent, but it would be irresponsible for us to tamper with the institutional arrangement and administration of the army at a time when we need that strong pillar. We need this strong pillar that is holding this Republic together to be actively alert and see that the progress of our people in exercising their democratic right goes smoothly.  

I would also like to say something brief about what happens elsewhere. This is not the first time that we have this type of provision. We did have a similar situation in the recent parliamentary and local council elections, and it worked well.  

In the United States they have a system of absentee ballots. That is the principle I am talking about, and nations have realised that people involved in the important occupation of defending the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a state can be given an alternative method of expressing their will as far as electioneering is concerned. So, I urge Members of Parliament to re-instate clause 38 in the Bill.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman, I think it is my duty to emphasise what my colleague, the hon. Minister of State for Defence, has said. 
First, Article 59 (1) of the Constitution says: "Every citizen of Uganda of eighteen years of age or above, has a right to vote".  

Now, clause 38, which has been deleted, in fact takes away the rights of the aged, the sick and people serving this country such as soldiers to vote. The question is whether we should do that.  

Second, Article 59 (3) says: "The State shall take all necessary steps to ensure that all citizens qualified to vote, register and exercise their right to vote".  

Now, this is the duty of the state and the Electoral Commission - (Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, would you please allow the Minister to make his contribution.

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: I am much obliged, Sir. I was saying that Article 59 (3) reads as follows: "The State shall take all necessary steps – (Interjections)- I request that the Members to listen to me

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please allow the Minister to make his contribution.

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: Clause 59(3) says:“The State shall take all necessary steps to ensure that all citizens qualified to vote, register and exercise their right to vote.”  
All citizens include the aged, the sick and soldiers.
Now, clause 38 as it is now says, "the Electoral Commission may". If we delete it, you are in effect saying that the state may not even try to meet its obligations.

DR. OKULO EPAK (Oyam South, Apac): I thank you, Mr. Chairman. The issue of the right to vote is absolutely important. But the impression we are being given is that if this clause is deleted, we shall disenfranchise some people. I do not think so. All that we are saying is that this facility for them to vote is problematic. They are free to go and vote elsewhere.  

The first question I would like to ask is; where would these people have registered to vote in the first instance? If they had not registered to vote where they are now being allowed to vote by special arrangement by the Commission, then what sort of register will be available?  What sort of voting documents would have been prepared for them? What sort of time period are we talking about, between the preparation of voting documents and the time when the Commission should gazette this area as a special voting area? All these are not answerable if you retain this clause.  

Secondly, this particular clause is actually unfortunately overloaded. The category of people involved here should never have been put together. I should have seen a situation where the military/the soldiers’ case would have been treated separately. Then it would be a bit easy to understand and debate them appreciably. But as it stands now, if the area is called ‘restricted’, and the declaration of the restricted area was undertaken by another authority, by this provision, are we allowing the Commission to lift that restriction?  If we are doing so, for how many hours should that be? 

The polling area, the access to the voters and so on must be free to candidates, to candidates’ agents and to candidates’ managers. Now, if it has not been free all along and all of a sudden, in one hour, you say it is now free for voting purposes, you are allowing unrestricted entry again simply for the number of voting hours. This is not fair! Once you have called it restricted, and you have not lifted restriction, it remains restricted. I do not see how a restricted area automatically becomes unrestricted simply because people are going to vote there.  

Some of us, who have experience in voting in these restricted areas, find it very hard to appreciate that this will be a useful arrangement. I have several barracks in my constituency, and that is where all vote cheating and intimidation of polling agents takes place, because of the nature of the area. 

Somebody is talking about the army being put on alert or emergency during the voting period. That is a very unfortunate statement. I have not seen an occasion or reason as to why, when we are going to vote, a state of emergency should be declared in the country and the entire army should be on alert. Do you mean that a voting period necessitates an emergency situation in a country?  As far as I am concerned, that is really a wrong mentality. It is a wrong attitude! It is militaristic and it is unfair to the civilian society who want to participate in voting without being intimidated that some military thing is going to take place. Unless civilians are going to riot on that occasion, but then all you need for that purpose is the police and not the army. 

I have not seen any occasion in any nation where people are going to vote and there is a threat of external aggression to demand that we declare a state of alert or emergency. Putting all the soldiers on alert means that they cannot even walk to the nearest polling station to vote. This is alarmist! And I would like to believe- (Interruption)     

AN HON. MEMBER: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would like to give vital information in that respect. On 24th April 1996, I was in charge of elections. At dawn we were attacked by ADF in Kisoro. That was when hon. Ssemwogerere was supposed to come and address a campaign rally in Kisoro. Soldiers from all over were flown in and were forced to stay there for two months to avert an attack by ADF from Congo. So, that is a classic example.  Thank you.

DR.AJEANI: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I had the intention of giving a small talk later on, but this comes in as information. I hope you will not take it that I have already spoken. 

In 1980, for those of us who were there mature enough to know that elections were held then, when were preparing for these elections, Arua District was attacked. As a result of this, the people of Arua were denied an opportunity to vote, because the place which was declared a peaceful place by the rulers at that time was now declared a war zone. So now, if we are not going to guard against such a possibility, we may be got unawares. We also know that the enemies of Government are always giving warnings on big occasions. And we are going to go for national elections, presidential, parliamentary or otherwise, so we are going to put the security of the nation at stake -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, you have mixed up issues. 

DR. AJEANI: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Maybe you will guide me. I was saying that because of what happened in 1980, we should be mindful, so that it does not re-occur.  Thank you.

MR.WAPAKABULO: I would like to inform the Member for Oyam South of what actually happened in 1996 during presidential elections.  

According to intelligence reports in Mbale, it was clear that certain anti-movement groups were due to attack from a neighbouring country for purposes of disrupting the elections. Two battalions of UPDF, who had registered to vote in Bungokho south, were moved to Sono and other parts of the border. Voting starts from 7.00 O’clock and ends at 5.00 O’clock, so it was not possible to rotate soldiers to come and vote in the presidential elections in Bungokho south. So, the Electoral Commission sent boxes to these voters of Bugema barracks in Bungokho south at Sono, at the border between Kenya and Uganda. These soldiers voted and the ballots were brought and counted by the Electoral Commission and eventually distributed among the candidates. So, it is not that we are talking about a hypothetical situation, it does actually happen, and it did happen.  Thank you.

DR. OKULO EPAK: I thank all those who have given me information, and I thank the NPC in particular for revealing illegal action that took place during that election in his constituency. I have all the doubts that that polling station was gazetted –(Interjection)

MR.WAPAKABULO: Bungokho south is not in my constituency.

DR. OKULO EPAK: Okay, it is your district. I have all doubts as to whether that polling station was gazetted. I also have all doubts as to which polling agents were available at that polling station. I am glad that this is the kind of thing I am saying we must avoid, and no lesser person but the NPC has actually come out to tell us why we should really not allow this sort of thing. 

As for the others, the point I am raising is that under no occasion, whether in 1980 or 1996 election as alleged by the mover of this motion, was there a national emergency and the entire army was put on alert. That was my argument. You can have all sorts of isolated cases, but there was never a state of emergency, unless somebody can tell me that in 1980 and in 1996 there was a state of emergency and the entire army, in all barracks, were on alert. There was no such thing! This was an isolated case, and it could have been accommodated as such. 

In any case, even in the case being mentioned, what sort of register was used?  Where was it picked from? Where were these soldiers? From which barracks were they from?  But I will pity citizens who will be under those circumstances. I pity them because it is tantamount to disenfranchising them. But the fact is, these are subject to abuse, and we are so used to election fraud. Now we even know that it happens in America. These are people who come here to observe our elections, and we are worse than they are. I think we should take more serious precautions against abuses, and this particular provision could be the target and the medium for abusing elections.  I oppose it.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, REGIONAL CO-OPERATION (Mr. Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I simply want to make the point that the right to vote is a constitutional right, as has been repeatedly stated here by previous speakers. It is a right to all citizens who qualify, and any Ugandan above 18 years of age qualifies, including soldiers, including invalids. They enjoy a constitutional right to vote.  

Those who have been speaking against retention of this provision are raising administrative difficulties, like hon. Epak is saying. My problem is with the argument that because of administrative difficulties, this Parliament wants to deny any Ugandan his or her constitutional right. Precisely that is what is being said. So –(Interruption)

MR.DICK NYAI: Mr. Chairman, the clause under discussion was simply said that, whereas our soldiers can vote, they can vote in the area next to them, because our soldiers buy food and everything from the next shopping or trading centres. We are not saying that the soldiers should not vote. Is it therefore, in order for the hon. Minister to say that the deletion means that this Parliament does not want our soldiers to vote?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, that is his conclusion. That is his assessment of the situation.

MR.AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Of course I know that hon. Dick Nyai does not have sufficient information to know, for instance, that those in operational areas or those who are on duty on special occasions, like voting day, in areas where insecurity exists, do not buy food from the neighbourhood. They are on full alert. They do not leave their barracks. They are given what is called dry ration. That is for his information. This Parliament is enjoined by Article –(Interruption)

MR.DICK NYAI: Do the violations give them the right to vote or not to vote?  What we were arguing was that this House has never said that they do not vote.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Dick Nyai, allow the hon. Minister to contribute. You will contribute later if you want.

MR.AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, Article 59 (4) of the Constitution reads as follows:  
“Parliament shall make laws to provide for the facilitation of citizens with disabilities to register and vote.”  

Parliament is supposed to make laws to facilitate the citizens to exercise their right, not to deny them that right. Therefore, I propose that we look at the provision that restores the constitutional right of the citizens to vote as provided for in Article 59. 

But then, because of the fears of administrative difficulties that have been raised, we should look at the proposed paragraph two in the motion, which covers that.  We should restrict ourselves to that, so that we see whether it is adequate or not. In my view, any citizen could challenge this law, if it is passed in a manner that appears to deny a soldier on special duty and people who are sick to exercise their right.  

The fear of the Committee, and the fear of some Members who have spoken, is administrative difficulty, and I think hon. Tumwine tried to accommodate that in sub-clause (2). So, I suggest that we really look at that, scrutinise it, and see if it overcomes his problems, and then we determine this without infringing on the right to vote by any citizen. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, last week we had an extensive debate on this clause. Today you have heard that there was a motion to re-commit the clause, and we did so. You have heard arguments for and against. The motion is to restore clause 38, and then I will put another question as to whether it stands part of the Bill. So, I think it is time for us to pronounce ourselves on this. I think the best way to do it is to put up our hands like we did when we were re-committing it. 

MR.BEN WACHA: I would like to ask a procedural question, Sir. Is it possible for those of us who are against this motion to go to the lobby and register our names?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No. I think you should just put up your hands if you are against. I will put the question.

102 Members voted in favour of the motion
35 voted against
10 abstained

MR.OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Chairman, I would just like some guidance from the Chair. The deletion of this very clause was recommended by the Legal and Parliamentary Committee, to which I belong. And this same House, last week, voted to delete it. I want you to guide me on our method of work. I want you to guide me as to whether this is the same House which last week used its wisdom to delete and within a week it is changing its mind. I am just wondering how it happened and what caused it, and I am interested in knowing, Mr. Chairman. 

MR.WAPAKABULO: Mr. Chairman, I seek clarification from the hon. Member for Otuke as to whether he condemns the idea of changing minds. This is in view of his changing his mind from being a staunch movementist to a very strong multi-partyist. Does he condemn the act of changing minds?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that clause 38 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr. J. Bidandi Ssali): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Presidential Elections Bill, 2000” and passed it with several amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFARS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS BILL, 2000

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Presidential Elections Bill, 2000” be read the Third Time and do pass.  

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I congratulate you for having passed this Bill, and I thank you for having passed it expeditiously. I appeal to you to use the same spirit on other pending Bills, so that before the end of the year we pass as many Bills as possible.  Congratulations. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT FOR CREATION OF NEW DISTRICTS

THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr. Bidandi Ssali): Mr. Speaker, at the last sitting of the House I moved that voting on the motion, after comprehensive debate, be postponed, and indeed it was postponed. So, I beg to move that if there is no amendment, and since we were at the voting stage, the question be put on the motion I moved. 

MR.ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I remember that last week before we adjourned, it was decided that we vote district by district, and if there were any amendments, then the person can move the amendment. To the best of my knowledge, this has not changed –(Interjections)- even those who are saying no, I do not know where they were, because that is what was decided. In fact we had already started voting on one district when we found out that we had no quorum. That was the decision. So, is that the procedure we are going to follow?  

DR. KINYATA: Mr. Speaker, when you look at the Order Paper before us, you will see that this House has got a number of very important Bills to transact before we go for the Christmas recess. We have only less than three weeks to go. We have already debated on all the eleven districts and concluded the debate. The Minister of Local Government has told us that all these eleven districts have passed through the procedure required by the Government, that is to the Cabinet and up to this House. So, I would like to propose a motion that you put the question on all the eleven districts as a read to us. 

MISS. KIRASO BEATRICE: Mr. Speaker, as hon. Ongom said, you made a ruling last time that we will pass district by district so that if there is anything somebody wants to comment about on one of the districts, that person is free to do so. Actually, to that effect, hon. Adolf Mwesige had circulated an amendment to the resolution, which he accepted would be tabled at an appropriate time –(Interjections)- So, I do not know why we should now change the rules.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we should allow an hon. Member to make his or her contribution without interruption. That is the best way we can proceed with our business. She has made an observation that there are people who want to amend the list. I think that is what she is saying.

MS. TIPERU: Mr. Speaker, I would like to second the motion that has been proposed by hon. Kinyata. I strongly support that motion because this matter, as he said, has already been discussed. More so, there are many people who are anxious to hear about how we are going to proceed with this matter, and it has been costly to them. 

Lastly, in case anybody has a query on any of the proposed districts, he or she should be allowed to air out his or her views, but the voting should be done at once. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, hon. Members, I remember that when we were voting, the mover of the motion said that if there is a Member who wants to amend the list, we dispose of that amendment and then maybe we can vote as we want.  Now, is there any amendment on the list?

MS. KIRASO BEATRICE (Woman Representative, Kabarole): Mr. Speaker, as I had already said, we had circulated an amendment on Kabarole District. And in the absence of my colleague, hon. Adolf Mwesige, who has gone to his constituency after the rebel attack, which I think most of you have heard about, I am going to move an amendment on that item of Kabarole District alone - (Interjections)- I do not see why people should get emotional, I am talking about Kabarole District. Mr. Speaker, if I could be protected.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She has the Floor. Please allow her to contribute.

MS. KIRASO: I will reserve my ideas about the whole idea of division of districts for today’s purpose and concentrate on Kabarole District, which I would like my colleagues to know is a unique case. It is unique because there was no consensus, like there has been in most of the other districts. So this House should be accommodative of dissenting views. 

Some of the documents, which I have got here, come from Mwenge, which is said to have wanted to join with Kyaka to form a district. If you allow me, I will have them circulated to my colleagues, because these documents are petitions -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If they are petitions, there are ways of presenting a petition. I think what you should do is make your contribution. Make your case and then any other person who wants to support you or who is against you can also speak. Otherwise, if we deal with a petition now, people will ask how you verify the signatures and so on. You just make your case.

MS. KIRASO: Most obliged, Mr. Speaker. The amendment I am moving is on the resolution on Kabarole District. I am moving that the creation of Kyenjojo District be withheld, because this is something which has brought a lot of controversy, especially amongst the people on the ground.  I would like to say that –(Interruption)

MR. KISEMBO MULEJU: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The current speaker holding the Floor has mentioned that hon. Mwesige objects to the creation of Kyenjojo District. In the motion that is circulated, he included my name. And the current Member has talked about a consensus. I never consented to have my name included.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, this is a very minor matter. If you say you did not support, at least she has support of Mwesige. I know that because he brought the motion. So, allow her to contribute.

MR.KISEMBO MULEJU: But I wish to withdraw my name.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your name is deleted.

MS. KIRASO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Kabarole District Council has already sent to you their petition decrying the manner in which the consultations were made and actually disassociating themselves from this kind of thing, which, as I have already said, has turned out to be very controversial.  

Earlier on, there was a request by Kibaale and Kitagwenda to form themselves into Kamwenge District. As the consultations were still going on and consensus had not yet been built, the issue of Kyenjojo District came up.  

I would like to confirm to this House that the people and the leadership in Kabarole were moving towards building consensus on the district of Kamwenge. The district of Kamwenge is no longer controversial, but the district of Kyenjojo is, because there are dissenting views even within that district. I would like to appeal to this House to listen to the voices of the people.  The voices of the people are not only through the Minister for Local Government. I represent Kabarole District and I know what I am talking about.  There is a lot of resistance to this division. 

Kabarole District has got six counties. The proposal does not even talk about dividing Kabarole into two, so that we have got three counties on one side and three counties on the other side, but it was ad hoc and for two counties.  If you have been following, this has been in the papers, even in today’s Monitor somebody wrote, “cry, beloved Kabarole”. If we do not want to ignore the voice of our people, I would like to appeal to my colleagues to accept that we withhold the decision to divide this district of Kyenjojo.  

There is even another voice from the people of Mwenge, that if the worst comes to the worst, they would rather have Kyaka, which has been a sub-district, become a district, but Mwenge remains with the mainstream Kabarole District. Mwenge is the heart of Toro, and you know that Toro is a Kingdom. 

The people in this Parliament will be free to vote the way they see fit, but they should not ignore that when there are problems like these in a district where people are not agreeable to something like this -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you have made a point.
MS. KIRASO: There has even been a threat, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, that this thing may even bring bloodshed in Kabarole District -(Interjections)- I am saying this because it is contained in a petition -(Interjections)- this view is contained in a petition -(Interruption)
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Order! Please, hon. Member, wind up so that we get other contributions. This is her observation.

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Speaker, this is not my own view. This is something that is contained in a petition from the Kingdom’s Supreme Council, Batwarane, because they think that the issue has become very controversial, and they think it is as controversial as that. Mr. Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to make it clear that the motion now being debated is in respect of only Kyenjojo District. The motion is that we delete that District from the list of the eleven proposed districts.

MR.KAJARA ASTON (Mwenge South, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I represent Mwenge South in the old Kabarole District. From the onset, I must refer to the Constitution, because the Constitution clearly states that power belongs to the people and that all authority emanates from the people of Uganda, and that people shall be governed through their will and with their consent.  

Having said that, I would like to oppose the motion for deletion of Kyenjojo District. The mover of the motion is talking about consensus and about consultation. I will give the House the manner of consultation that this district has gone through. About three years ago, the people of Mwenge and Kyaka gave us their views. They said they wanted services to be brought nearer to them in accordance with Article 179 of the Constitution. These consultations were conducted at the district level, at the sub-county level, at county level, and up to village level.  

I have a study report on the proposed Kyenjojo District from the present Kabarole District here. This was done by the Ministry of Local Government, which is in charge of local governments. The Ministry has qualified Kyenjojo as being economically, socially and politically viable; and bearing in mind the terms in the Constitution, we can see that this is one of them. And these are the technical people who qualify districts. 

I have a resolution from the Mwenge county local councils, consisting of eight sub-counties of Mwenge South and of Mwenge North.  In this resolution, as was demanded by the Minister of Local Government, the people of Mwenge are saying that they want Kyenjojo District created out of the counties of Mwenge and Kyaka. And out of 56 councillors in that county, 52 of them have appended their signatures to this resolution.  

I have another resolution, which is in the possession of the Minister of Local Government, from the people of Kyaka County. They are saying the same thing. They want a district of Kyenjojo comprising of the counties of Kyaka and Mwenge. About 98 percent of all the councillors in Kyaka have agreed to this. They want a district called Kyenjojo with headquarters at Kyenjojo and comprising of Mwenge county and Kyaka county.  

As Members of Parliament from Kabarole District, we have conducted a study, and if you remember sometime in June last year, we circulated this booklet. It gives the pros and cons and how Kyenjojo qualifies to earn a district status. I will lay all these documents on the Table of the House as proof that this has been done.  

Students from Makerere University who hail from Mwenge and Kyaka have petitioned His Excellency the President. The people of Mwenge have petitioned on three occasions. All their petitions are included in this booklet. They were petitioning His Excellency the President for the formation of a new district for the purposes of administrative expedience, and for the purposes of services being brought nearer to them. I will table this on the Floor of the House.   

Personally, speaking of facts and figures, I have consulted very widely with the Members of Parliament from Kabarole District. We held a meeting in this House in one of the lobbies. We were nine Members of Parliament and five Members supported the creation of Kyenjojo District leaving four. And if we are talking about democracy, the majority do support this idea.  

From a technical point of view, the Kyenjojo District we are talking about is devoid of services. Kabarole District is so large that if you combine the districts of Kabale, Kisoro, Ntungamo and Rukungiri, you would not attain the size of Kabarole District. In terms of population, if you combine the population of the districts of Masindi, Hoima and Kibaale you will not attain the population of Kabarole District. How can services, which are taken to such a big population, reach the people without having a small administrative unit?  

Talking about the Kingdom, the district of Kyenjojo has said it will be Kyenjojo District of Toro. In other words, the Kingdom will not be affected. We have given the example of Buganda, which has 14 districts –(Interruption)

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that it is not up to the people of Kyenjojo to decide whether they will be part of Toro or not when they become a district. It is a constitutional provision that any part that becomes a district now or later will be a district of Toro Kingdom.

MR.DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I do appreciate the desire by the people of Kyenjojo to extend the services nearer to themselves, but in a similar bid, I wish to notify this House that the people of Bunyole equally - (Laughter)- want to get the services nearer.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please wind up.

MR.KAJARA: Mr. Speaker, I must end with the distances from the current Kabarole District headquarters. I would like to implore this House to support the creation of Kyenjojo District, and support it for these and the other reasons, which I wanted to expound, but I have found it unnecessary, since the House seems to be moving very well.  Thank you very much.

MR.WAGIDOSO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the question now be put.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is that I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This motion came as a result of another motion by Dr. Kinyata. The motion was that we do not consider the creation of the district of Kyenjojo out of the eleven proposed districts. That is the motion whose case you have heard. Now, I want to put the question. The motion is that this district of Kyenjojo is not included in the new districts. 

(Question put and negatived)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, there is a motion by Dr. Kinyata. We decided last time that we vote on each proposed district, and we had started, but because of some queries, we put off the voting. Now the motion by Dr. Kinyata, supported by another Member, is that after dealing with amendments, which we have, we vote at once, but on understanding that we are voting on each of the proposed districts. Now, I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, we are going to vote once, but on understanding that we are voting on each of the proposed eleven new districts. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For purposes of our records, I would like the Minister to read the motion again, so that we know what we have voted on.  

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Speaker, the eleven districts that have been approved by Parliament are Yumbe District, Sironko District, Pader District, Wakiso District, Kayunga District, Mayuge District, Kyenjojo District, Kamwenge District and Kanungu District  - (Applause) - Kameramaido District, Nakapiripirit District. The last three take effect from the next financial year, that is Kanungu, Kaberamaido and Nakapiripirit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, the results of the vote were as follows: we had three abstentions, one Member against, and 149 in favour of the motion. So, the motion is carried. Let us proceed with other business.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US $48.5 MILLION FROM WORLD BANK FOR PRIVATISATION AND UTILITY SECTOR REFORM

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PRIVATISATION  (Mr. Manzi Tumubweine): Mr. Speaker, about two months ago, we moved a motion for a resolution to borrow US $48.5 million in order for the privatisation process to conclude. In the course of the discussions and deliberations on this resolution, some questions were raised, and Members wanted these questions answered. 

We have gone back to the Committee and held consultative meetings, and even organised a seminar for Members of Parliament in order to answer the questions that were raised. We attached the answers to all the questions that were raised as Appendix 3 on this new motion. There are quite a number of answers, and I believe that Members have had the time to read and internalise the answers we gave. I believe that the chairman may want to add one or two other things, but the answers were given comprehensively on all the issues that Members raised at the time.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr. Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Hon. Members, you will recall that you differed approval of the above loan and asked us to supply additional information on the divestiture and reform programme and give further clarification on the activities that are to be funded by the proposed credit. We have since sourced additional information from the Minister on the allocation of the proposed loans between the activities. And we now present a revised list of the expenditures under this loan.  

I have already circulated to all hon. Members the results of our findings. Emphasis has now been put on severance payments, those are terminal benefits which, according to the law made by this very House, must be paid before divestiture of certain enterprises like UEB are made. We have also reduced expenditure in the other areas, for example in the area of legal and financial valuation we have been able to reduce it to only US $1 million. In the area of utility sector, it has been imperative that we have money to prepare Uganda Electricity Board, Uganda Railways Corporation, National Water and Sewerage Corporation for divestiture. We have been able to revise the allocation down to 9 million and 1.5 for parastatal monitoring and improvement of the financial oversight of the public enterprises.  

So, ours was only to update the House about what we have got out of the new negotiations with the Minister, and to that effect, we have actually had meetings both with the Minister and the other Government officials. And as the Minister has said, we have also had the privatisation workshop, where Members’ questions were raised and answered.

First of all, I beg to re-introduce this matter to the House and to recommend that this House authorises the borrowing of US $48.4 million.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, as you will remember, we debated this matter and we had some reservations on certain items. We mandated the Committee and the Minister to go and sort out the problems, and this is the report that we have got. So, there is really no need for further debate. I am going to put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow.

(The House rose at 4.34 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 29th November, 2000.)



