Tuesday, 21 November 1995


(The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.)


PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)

(The Council was called to order.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA EXPORT PROMOTION BOARD BILL, 1995

THE MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr R. Kaijuka):  Mr Chairman and hon. Members, before us today is the Uganda Export Promotion Board Bill, 1995.  If you permit, Mr Chairman, I will begin by giving a brief background that I hope will clearly indicate the real urgency this country has for refocusing its priorities to make sure that much as we may be doing generally well on micro-economic management of our economy, but unless we seriously drive for exports we can ill-afford to continue depending on donor funding.  So, with your permission, Mr Chairman, the background to this is that at the time of our independence Uganda’s agriculture was relatively diverse and largely self sufficient in most foodstuffs including some processed foods; cash crops like, cotton, tea and tobacco performed very well.  In 1972 -(Interruption)
                                                          
MR ONGOM:  Point of order.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Whereas it is very important that the council legislates on some of these very important Bills, and yet we all know that the council has rules to go by.  I am not sure that it is in order for us to continue now when we have no quorum.  We have no quorum, Mr Chairman, is it in order for us to continue?       

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay, let us count the Members please.  Order, please.  It is not in order and, therefore, we adjourn for another ten minutes please.

(Council adjourned for ten minutes.)

THE MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Richard Kaijuka):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: ‘The Uganda Export Promotion Board, Bill 1995’, be read the Second Time, and with your permission, Sir, I wish to give reasons why this Bill should be supported by this House.

Mr Chairman, as I had already stated and hon. Members, you will agree with me that the dependency syndrome that most of the African countries find themselves in, Uganda inclusive, is totally unsustainable.  It actually, spells out doom for future generations.  So, today, certainly there are clear signals in some capital that countries will not continue to dish out or give grants and loans because of domestic demand and, therefore, Uganda must unequivocally and rapidly develop its own capacity, earn enough foreign exchange that matches its import bill and consequently have a surplus balance of payment position on a sustainable basis.  So, I thought I would take this opportunity to give a little bit of a background to where we would come from; and I had started to inform Members that Uganda’s agriculture was relatively diverse and largely self sustaining, sufficient in most foodstuffs including some processed foods.  Cash crops like coffee, cotton, tea, tobacco performed well.  

In 1972 agricultural exports were valued at 260 million dollars of which 62 per cent was provided by coffee; 20 per cent cotton, 7 per cent tea, 2.5 by hides and skins, 1.7 per cent by animal feeds and 0.4 by tobacco.  But as you know hon. Members, civil strife and general mismanagement of the economy resulted in the decline and in some cases abandonment of most crops with exception of subsistence crops.  Coffee exports continued principally because of the nature of the crop, which continued to yield reasonably well in spite of poor agronomic practices.  This led to our over dependence on a single export commodity with all the inherent dangers of fluctuating commodity prices.  Although agricultural commodity exports were valued at 320 million dollars in 1987 and this was only equivalent to 104 million dollars at the level of 1972 exchange rates, and trade balances was very negative.  Over dependence on coffee was reflected in contribution to our export earning which has risen to as high as 97 per cent in 1987; cotton at that stage contributed a mere 1.3 per cent and tea had climbed to 0.6; by 1990 commodity exports had further declined to 175 million dollars equivalent to 50 million dollars in 1972 terms, and the trade balance sunk further into the red with exports covering a mere 31 per cent.  

If I may talk about the export diversification and promotion efforts we have embarked on since then; in 1992 my ministry articulated a comprehensive export diversification strategy aimed at broadening our export base as an assurance against externally induced prices, which commonly feature on commodity markets.  Gradually and steadily the development of new export commodities particularly the grains, horticulture, floriculture, fish and fish products sub sectors are beginning to take place.  In 1993, earnings from non-traditional exports amounted to 70 million dollars representing 35 per cent of the total export earnings.  In 1994, earning from non-traditional exports rose to 91.51 million dollars and this represented 20 per cent of total export earnings mainly due to the good coffee prices realised from the coffee exports of that year.  

If I may turn to the background to the Uganda Export Promotion Council.  The history of the Uganda Export Promotion Council dates back to 1969 when it was established by the Uganda Export Promotion Council Act 19969.  Unfortunately, because of the unfavourable conditions that prevailed at the time, the new institution did not get off the ground and indeed collapsed in 1971.  It was not until 19983 that efforts were made to re-establish the institution through the enactment of the Uganda Export Promotion Council Act, 1983.  The Uganda Export Promotion Council was established to spearhead the development and promotion of Uganda’s exports with particular emphasis of the promotion of the non-traditional exports.  The major functions of the Uganda Export Promotion Council include the gathering and dissemination of trade and market intelligence, undertaking market research for Uganda products, co-ordinating all export promotion efforts, organising and participating in trade fairs and exhibitions, organising training programmes and seminars for the benefit of exporters, maintaining a documentation centre on foreign trade and export trade opportunities which are easily accessible to the business community in general and to the exporters in particular and recommending to government appropriate export policy and plans.  Now, right from its inception UEPC has faced severe constraints in its operations, which have resulted in it’s being largely ineffective.  First of all, although UEPC was re-established in 1983 it did not start functioning until 1986 when the NRM came to power.  

Secondly, UEPC has not been adequately funded, I am afraid, since its inception.  For example, between 1987/88 to Financial Year 1990/91, the Uganda Export Promotion Council annual Budget allocations amounted to a mere 10.9 million, 23, 54 and 60 million shillings respectively.  This poor level of funding could not permit Uganda Export Promotion Council to embark upon major programmes of export promotion apart from participating in international trade fairs with donor funding.  Thirdly, because of its small budget, the council could not attract and retain high calibre staff required to man such a vitally important institution.  Following the approval by this august House, of one per cent levy on imports to support institution involved in export promotion, funding of Uganda Export Promotion Council improved slightly although all the proceeds from the levy were not, and I repeat were not availed to these institutions.  In the period, 1992/93 to 1994/95 Uganda Export Promotion Council received 251.3 million, 309.2 million and 331.9 million respectively.  However, this level of funding falls far short of what an independent team of consultants consider to be the bare minimum required for an institution of this kind to provide effective services.  

Early in 1992, government recognised the need to streamline the institutional framework for the export promotion and development so as to remove the duplication of effort, which was clearly evident with a performing similar functions with those of Uganda Export Promotion Council, which was at the time with the Ministry of Planning.  Furthermore, it was also noted that a number of donor agencies were executing export promotion programmes without being co-ordinated by government or its agencies.  A review of the legal framework of Uganda Export Promotion Council was carried out between April and June 1993 and proposals were made with regard to Amendments that need to be introduced to make UPEC an autonomous institution which is more responsible to the needs of exporters and the desire of government to transform the economy through an export led economic growth in the shortest time possible.  

However, it was recognised that the problems faced by UEPC went beyond mere Amendment of the law.  The need to review the organisational structure, the objectives and functions, the level and source of funding as well as the manpower requirements was recognised.  In October 1993 I commissioned a team of consultants to take a thorough review of the Uganda Export Promotion Council as well as the review of the current and future needs of the Uganda importers and make recommendations for consideration by government.  Government considered the consultants report that had several options and noted the need to provide an institution, which can effectively meet the needs of current and potential exporters.  These needs are in three broad categories, namely; one, trade and market information services; these include the following elements, details of tariffs for all markets by product category, general market entry information, lists of importers by country and product category, price data from major price determining centres, analysis of market trends for products exported by Uganda, information on import and export procedures and documentation requirements by Uganda’s trading partners, tracking data on trade flow by product and by importing and exporting country.  Two, promotion services, and the main elements include; one, organising participation in relevant regional and internal trade fares for both public and private sector participants, two, organising trade mission to target countries, three, organising inward buyer mission to link up with Ugandan suppliers and four, to maintain an up to date information on all trade fares of interest to Uganda exporters.  The third category is the customary advisory services; these were specifically to meet the specific needs of individual export enterprises.  These services should primarily be targeted to small, to medium enterprises attempting to break into the export business or into new markets.  

It was recognised that assistance be provided in the following areas:  One, basis business skills, export documentation and procedures; export distributions channels, basis elements of foreign trade practice, briefing on target markets by product with detailed documentation regarding standards and quality requirements, pricing spreads and margins and tariff gratification.  Details of preferences given to Uganda products by country, technical evaluation of the companies’ readiness to export; technical advice on export agreements; advice on how to secure reshipment credit and other short to medium export credits.  With regard to the appropriate institution to carry out the above functions, government decided to retain the Uganda Export Promotion Council but provide it with greater autonomy and with an enhanced role for the private sector in directing its operations.  A restructured and a re-organised Uganda Export Promotion Council was considered to be the most workable and implementable option for Uganda at this point in time. 

This necessitated changes to the export promotion council Act 1983; considering the major numerous changes were being proposed, it was thought necessary to present a completely new Bill to this august House.  Now, these changes as you note in the Bill before you, include amongst others; one, a change in the name of the institution, the new name now called The Uganda Export Promotion Board as opposed to the Council.  The new name will give a new image to the restructured re-organised and revamped institution.  Two, provision of a more autonomous institution with greater participation of the private sector in the running of the affairs of the institution.  Three, upgrading the post of Chief Executive of the institution from the Executive Secretary to Executive Director.  Four, giving powers to the Board of Directors to appoint all staff of the institution and determine the terms and conditions of the employment.  Five, provision - and this is very important - provision of a reliable source of income by imposing a levy of 0.5 per cent on imports or at some later stage in need be on exports which should automatically be released to the institution from the consolidated fund.  Six, reduction in the size of the board from 15 members to 11 members.  Provision for nomination by various sector bodies of their representatives to serve on the board.  

Members will note that on page 8, article 8 of the Bill that there are only three representatives, representing ministries of trade, finance and agriculture, but the rest will be representing specific private sector associations; these are manufacturers, farmers, two relatives of exporters’ association, National Chamber of Commerce, Investment Authority and so on.  Eight, the Bill is spelling out the objectives of the institution and nine, the Bill intends to refocus the institution into identifying and developing new and viable exportables.  For some Members of the who are familiar with the new project called IDEA once this Bill is passed it should shift its home to this new revamped institution.  

Now, the proposed structure of the Uganda Export Promotion Board will be as follows:  The institution will restructured as follows:  The Board of Directors will be responsible for;  (a) overseeing the implementation of Uganda Export Promotion policies and programmes; approving the annual Budget and action plans, monitoring and evaluating the performance of the Board against the budget and plans, approving the annual reports and accounts of the board, establishing and approving rules and procedures for proper financial management and accountability, establishing and approving rules and procedures for appointments, discipline, termination of services and general personnel matters and approving senior staff appointments.  The Executive Director shall be chief executive of the new Uganda Export Promotion Board, a member of the Board of Directors and he will be responsible for day today operations of the Uganda Export Promotion Board; he will be responsible for the management of funds, property and business; he will be responsible for the administration, organisation and control of staff; he would also be responsible for keeping and ministry informed of the progress of business of Uganda Export Promotion Board.  The Executive Director will be supported by two units; we shall have the administrative, finance and policy planning unit; the institution will restructured into two divisions headed by Deputy Directors; you have one in charge of information and promotional services, and another in charge of advisory services.  The information and promotion service division will be restructured into two sections, namely, the information section and the promotion section which will be accessed through a walking centre equipped to provide general information to clients.  Then the advisory services division will be restructured again into two sections namely, the agricultural section for development of agricultural imports and the non-agricultural section for the development of manufactured and processed export products.  It is anticipated that the institution will initially be manned about 20 professional staff with a supporting staff of 11.  Mr Chairman, for these reasons, I would like to beg Members of this august House to support this Bill.  I beg to move (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN:  The Bill is now open for discussion.

MR WOLIMBWA (Bulambuli County, Mbale):  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I stand up to support the Bill.  Before I do so, I would like to say that this afternoon when I was coming I found our Chairman of the Sectoral Committee on Trade having a national duty somewhere else and he asked me to stand in for him, and i very willingly accepted to stand in for him.

Mr Chairman and hon. Members, when this Bill was presented to the sectoral committee in the course of last week, a number of questions were asked by the members and the Minister responsible who has just left the Floor, was asked to come and explain some of these question which members were not very sure about, and the Minister came and spent the whole morning with us.  I think, it will be better for me to highlight some of these question, because I know as Members may be debating this Bill, the same questions are likely to arise on their minds.  The first question that the sectoral committee wanted the hon. Minister to explain was to justify the necessity for the Board when there was already in place an export promotion Council; why was it necessary to have another body.  Another question which was raised and put to the Minister was for the Minister to explain why it was necessary to have this Board, when under normal circumstances the National Chamber of Commerce and Industries should have been responsible for doing this kind of business.  

Another question that was put before the Minister was the correct status of –

The committee was also concerned about this Bill whether it was a Bill that was naturally coming to the House or there was someone behind trying to push this Bill onto us.  Another concern, of course, was generally to with the Ministry of Trade and Industry with other organisations, which have been divested, but that is not part of the debate.  So, I will just go ahead to explain some of the answers, which we were given in the hope that when Members have seen these answers given it will be possible for this Bill to be debated very quickly and passed into a Statute.   

On the re-organisation of the Council which has been in place, the Minister was able to convince Members that it was necessary for this Council to be replaced by a Board which Board would, actually, be taking care of all the necessary activities which have anything to do with export of products from Uganda, and the information that he has just given about changing the image of the Council, Members were convinced that it was necessary to have a Board instead of a Council in order to be able to give it new life, to re-organise and to revamp it so that it would take care of the necessary changes which were required in view of the fact that Uganda as a country has had to change to focus, instead of government, actually, being in the fore front of business, government is withdrawing gradually and leaving it to the private people to handle, and Members were, actually, of the view that that was the right thing to do and they supported that.  

The new Bill will, actually, involve more of the private sector, and I think, this is very important because, as I have just said, it not necessary any longer for the government to be involved in business.  I think where government is going to come in is where the minister is going to come in and appoint a Chairman of the Board, other than that, I think, the minister will have very little to do.  We had, in fact, wanted even the Chairman of the Board to be directly elected by the members, but the Minister was able to convince us that because these people are coming from various organisation which may not be very related, immediately, they will take a long time before they could identify one of them to be chosen or elected as their Chairman, and therefore, I think it was necessary that the Minister should be able to appoint a Chairman for this Board so that the Board can start its functions straight away.  On that one we were able to agree and say, okay because of that kind of problem which would arise because you have people from different sectors who may not easily see things and they should be, the Minister should able to appoint a Chairman and the Board, of course, will be responsible for the running of the Board’s affairs.  

The Board will be responsible for appointing the Director, I think, that is very important, and I think that Members will recall one of the reasons why our boards in the passed have not been able to function properly was that they did not enough autonomy given to them to be able to do what they were supposed to do.  The Sectoral Committee on Trade and Industry was of the view that this Board having been given the necessary autonomy will be in a position to, actually, carry out what it is supposed to do.  

On the funding of this Board, the Sectoral Committee was a little uneasy about the funding of this body, especially, with the recommendation of 0.5 per cent of the funds, which funds would then go to the consolidated fund.  When funds normally go to the consolidated fund, it is very difficult for those funds to be channeled where they are supposed to go.  I think a case in point was where you have the Uganda Bureau of the Standards having not done well, not because they did not have the people to do the job, but they were under-funded; the money was deducted, alright, but it never went where it was supposed to be.  

So, members were very apprehensive about this 0.5 but, of course, in the Bill there is provision that money will be voted from this House which will towards the funding of this organisation or Board, but in the long run it was the view of the members of the sectoral committee that they Board should, actually, fund itself and move away from government funding it, it was to ensure its autonomy.  So, this was a point, which was actually, emphasised by the committee to the minister.  

Mr Chairman, and hon. Members, after the Minister had answered those questions - one EPADU, actually, the information was that EPADU had been divided into two units, one unit to remain in the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning and one came in the Ministry of Trade and Industry, and that when this Board is, actually, put in place, then this unit which is in the Ministry of Trade and Industry will find a home in that Board.  So, in that case, I think the EPADU has been properly located in the Ministry of Trade and Industry because that is where they belong; not to the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Finance should remain with the other unit.  

Member, this Bill as you have gone through is a very short one; short, precise and to the point, and the Sectoral Committee is of the view that Members should debate it quickly, give it their blessing so that it becomes a Statute without having to waste a lot of time on it because it is very straight forward and it should be able to go without a lot of problems. 

With those remarks, Mr Chairman, I would like to support the Bill on behalf of the Sectoral Committee.  Thank you.

MR NKALUBO WASSWA (Nominated):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the Bill.  It is high time that we have an organisation which can support our exports, especially, the non-traditional exports.  You will recall that when NRM came in, farmers were encouraged to produce, especially, agricultural farmers.  We produced produce around and we were told by the people who were in charge - they said you have markets for maize; we borrowed money from banks and at the end of the day we had a bumper crop, and then the Minister of Agriculture came in here and said we have a bumper crop but we have no market.  That is why we have debts with the Uganda Commercial Bank under the Rural Farmers Scheme, which never took off, it was lack of promotion of our exports.  We had people around the world who were starving, but this business of export had not been co-ordinated, that some farmers who got loans had not been able to pay off.  A case in point, I have here my brother who encouraged people in Butambala to grow ntangawuzi, now the ntangawuzi people, these poor farmers are due to be what - have been transferred to the trust, because it was lack of co-ordination; there is demand for ntangawuzi overseas but this whole thing was not co-ordinated.  With the Board I am of the opinion that we will be more organised, that our farmers will be able to take on ventures which are well researched -(Interruption).

MR KAYONDE:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I wish to give the hon. Member holding the Floor information that it was not co-ordination, which was lacking, but the problem was inherent within our established system.  At the time when the gingers were ready we did not have any aircraft to airlift them.  But, the interest rate of the bank at that time was 50 per cent, and therefore, the funds that were available went to settle interest rates at that time.  Similarly there was fuel crisis and there was high inflation, which made the project unviable at that time.  So, the problem was not due to the organisers of the farmers, but the government policy at the time and other problems that were inherent in our system. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  So, you are okay?

MR NKALUBO WASSWA:  We leave the ntangawuzi issue; currently we come back to what is going on.  The President has told people in Gomba to grow chili.  Now farmers are busy uprooting whatever they planted because there is no co-ordination.  They say there is no market for chili; it was Shell, which had come in, now I understand Shell Uganda has abandoned those things, and people are busy uprooting whatever they had grown.  Now, we need a Board which can sit down, plan; because, say in the case of ntangawuzi, if there was a proper plan you would not ask farmers to grow ntangawuzi when you are not very sure of the transport.  You would sit down and look at the cost of production, is it viable; but not to tell the farmers, you grow ntangawuzi, and tomorrow you say there is no plane, as if you could use bicycles.  I think, this one has come in at the right time it is a bit too late, but for the purposes  - here we have already made the laws, but as a farmer and a producer, I think, it will serve our own purpose.  But then, I would like the Minister to make this clear when he speaks of the Export Promotion Council, which areas are we addressing?  Because I am looking at a situation where we have this Coffee Development Authority; it is going to be parallel; is it going to be independent of the Export Promotion Board or it will be part and parcel of the same?  Because we want to make sure that what we are legislating for.  

It is so important that when we started this UCDA it had limited span of life.  Now, is it that later on as we take over, this Export Promotion Board will be able to take over the role of UCDA?  If not, let the Minister make it clear, because when he speaks of - under the finances under section 13 subsection (a) he says that the funds of the body shall consist of a levy of not less than 0.5 per cent on all the imports and exports, which means that whatever is exported this board will take 0.5, including coffee, cotton, mpuuta, timber, and ntangawuzi if it is there.  So, now already we have provided for UCDA to charge a percentage, now I fear double taxation on these exports.  

Secondly, if this one is for the promotion of exports, I do not see why the Minister wants also to charge 0.5 on all import; since it is only promoting exports, why he wants also to charge 0.5 on imports.  Then, under this section when you speak of 0.5, is it on CIF, is it on FOB, this percentage is on what, because normally when you are paying SGS it is based on FOB price; now, we do not want to put a very high load on our imports and exports, because SGS - or not necessarily SGS but the existing firm will have a percentage of say, 1 per cent; now he is putting on 0.5!  Now, our imports and exports are going to be more expensive (Interruption)

DR MAGEZI:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the speaker on the Floor that to me it only makes sense, given that the cost of production in Uganda is very high, that we should, in fact, subsidise people who export because they bring in forex money; and unless we do that, there is no way Uganda is going to be competitive.  We find out now that it is cheaper to produce yellow maize in China and come and sell it on Uganda market at a price below the production cost of maize in Uganda; and consequently, if you levy the percentage, there is no way you will be able to sell any food like maize or beans to the World Food Programme in this country.

DR LUYOMBYA:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, it seems that with government policy of liberalisation of trade and many other services; it seems to me that in some aspects we are creating a body whose services are going to be imposed on those who may not want them.  Supposing, I did not want advice from that body as an exporter or an importer, why should I pay the 0.5 per cent?  I would like to be clarified on that issue (Applause)

MR NKALUBO WASSWA:  Well, I think, Mr Chairman, it will be the Minister to advise Madhivani later on but - looking at this Bill under section 6(b) subsection 2, the Minister is proposing that this Board shall be carrying out farm trials of new crops with export potential.  That sound attractive; as a Member of the Finance Committee we have found that there is a lot of duplication in our function.  Already, we have NARO to do the job, now instead of the Board taking over the function of NARO, why do we not leave it to NARO, instead of the Minister saying that the Board is going to carry out on-farm trial; where are these farms and when are they going to start them?  We should leave that function to NARO with the experts other than duplicating those things.  I think let us promote what other people have researched, other than saying that now you are going to such a research section of the Export Promotion Board, that will give you unnecessary duplication; let us leave it to the people who are experts, other than also try to experiment in some troubled waters where we may not succeed.

The other point; while I am supporting, I look at section 10 of this Bill where the Minister is proposing to have a Chairman and he is putting it in the law that this Chairman will not have any vote, except in case of equality.  Normally if a Chairman of the Board is a Member he should be free; you should not tie him that he should not vote; he should be free to vote, but when you say he must not vote, I think, that one is depriving him of being a good Chairman.  You do not have to legislate that once you are a Chairman, you have to wait until there is a tie that you give your casting vote.  It is normally the practice, but we do not put in the law.  When you go ahead, under 11, subsection 5, the Minister is proposing that a member who has interest shall disclose to the Board the fact that, and the nature of his interest.  Now, the Minister has forgotten - now, if I declare what happens; am I free to vote, am I free to debate?  

In other Bills, which we have debated, we say if you have interest you do not vote; this one is silent and I do not know what will be the purpose of this one.  Now, when you go to subsection 6 of this section, the Minister is saying that subject to this Statute the Board of Directors may be resolution make rules for procedure and conduct of its meeting and adjournment of any meetings at which a quorum is not present.  I do not see - once there is no quorum you do not need to make laws; once there is no quorum there is no quorum and you go!  Do you need to put it in writing and say if there is no quorum, somebody has to propose to do this and that!  We do not normally do that is not serving any purpose for the purpose of what?

Now, under section 14 of this Bill, subsection 2, you will find that the Minister has proposed that it will be the Minister to approve the Budget, but then it will be the Board to approve the supplementary estimates.  Now, once you leave one loophole you first approve the actual budget, you have not provided that it will also be the Minister to approve the supplementary estimates.  Now, I can give you a good budget and you approve it, and I wait and have supplementary estimates where you will not approve.  I think the Minister should see to it that also the supplementary estimates have to be approved by him if he wants to approve the budget, otherwise, it will not serve any purpose for him to approve the budget and leave the supplementary estimates to the Board for approval.  

Under the same section, subsection 4, he is proposing that where in any year the funds collected from the levy exceeds the budgeted amount, the funds in excess of the budgeted amount shall be paid into the consolidated fund.  I am saying that is no; let it be independent to make its own budget and can propose expansion if there is any excess of money.  The moment you accept that any excess amount is paid to the consolidated fund, and then you should be able to dip in the same consolidated fund if there is a shortage; if they under estimate.  Now, we should leave the Board to operate independent of this interference of going to the consolidated fund and then borrowing from the consolidated fund.  Let them run their own funds, if they make profit, well and good let them expand; if they make loss, let them go and borrow like any other commercial organisation.  Otherwise we sell it and privatise it like any other institution.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I rise to support the Bill, principally because there is need to have a body to co-ordinate the export activities of the country, and secondly because I am bound by collective responsibility as a Member of the Sectoral Committee.  But there are one or two things that still need clarification why this body should exist in the form it is being proposed.  In 1991 this House enacted a law that set up Uganda Coffee Development Authority; as of now the Board of that Authority is divided why that body should exist, and the reasons are that the body is eating into the profit of the farmer, the processor and the exporter when they can handle the job themselves.  There is presently a Uganda Coffee Growers Association; there is also the Uganda Coffee Exporters Association and they think UCDA is unnecessary -(Interruption).

MR ADAM:  This is just a correction; he is calling it Uganda Coffee Growers Association.  We call ourselves, Uganda Coffee Farmers Association.  In fact our intention is to push out the middlemen, that is Coffee Development Authority and Coffee Experts Association, because these people eat all the profit for farmers.  That is the information.

AN HON. MEMBER:  I wish to thank the hon. Member for that correction.  The point I am trying to bring about is that the House deliberates, creates statutory bodies and at the end of the day after only a few years will find them irrelevant; and I think this is one of those bodies that will be soon over taken by time.  Presently there is the Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry, this body, the Minister correctly stresses is a very, very weak body and I agree with him.  Mainly because the members of the Chamber of Commerce or those who are involved in commerce and industry are the lower grade.  So, you do not expect the high calibre type of people to be in the Chamber as of now.  What the government should do is to encourage those who are highly placed to join the Chamber.  Previously in an attempt to form a strong Chamber, somehow, the numbers was such that the law grade outnumbered the high grade.  So, it was divided and the Chamber of Commerce remained and the Uganda Manufacturers Association was created -(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA:  Mr Chairman, I do not how the hon. Member holding the Floor categorises members of the National Chamber of Commerce to come up with a law level and also of the high level; I mean how does he differentiate between the two?

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, my view and which the Minister shares is that the membership of the Chamber of Commerce should really be graded on the basis of education and being able to -(Interruption).

MR KISAMBA-MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, the hon. Member is treading on a slippery ground and I would like to inform him through you that some of the Members in the Chamber of Commerce are highly educated, hon. Manzi is not here is one of the members of Chamber of Commerce, I know a member called Mr Tezikuba Ssajjabi who is highly educated and a retired civil servant and has quite a number of businesses.  Trade is not for education, trade is for management of business and you should not under rate people who are in trade.  If you find a senior four person manning his shop he, maybe, better than a graduate who does not know how to stock his shop and manage his funds and even eat away his profits. I think the hon. Member is insulting the people who are holding the business in this country and unless actually he substantiates, Mr Chairman, I may raise on other point to ask him to withdraw.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I am very sorry for the hon. Minister who has just been giving information.  First and foremost, the Member is citing like hon. Manzi is no longer in that body, he was sideline.  Number two; Tezikuba is not there anymore he is only a member not in the leadership.  (Interruption)

CAPT. BABU:  Mr Chairman, the basis of the elections in the Chamber of Commerce is based on their Constitution.  The Constitution at the moment allows people to participate at all levels and they are represented by districts and so on and so forth.  Therefore, Mr Chairman, it is a little bit an fair for us to really discuss the commerce when there is a council in that Chamber of Commerce which knows what the problems are and they can be the only ones to change their constitutions and, therefore change their leadership.  I just want to inform the hon. Member that their first leader when they first form that Chamber of Commerce was none other than a very senior lawyer in this country it was, Mr Kayondo.  He did leave and Mr Tiboyine did leave eventually, but at the moment the problem is the constitution must be changed and the only people who can change it are the traders themselves.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

AN. HON. MEMBER: The election is in the Chamber of Commerce are carried out democratically, but we know what democracy’s results can be at certain times.  I stated earlier on that the composition of people in Commerce is such that the vast majority is the lower rank this is what I stated.  So, what you get is what is present you cannot expect much, but it is a fact that the Uganda Manufacture’s Association was created as a result of that disagreement.  I was trying to drive at a point where this body that we are trying to create may soon be overtaken by time, we already know that, for example, the licensing traditionally all over the world is expected to be done by the National chamber of Commerce.  At the present moment there is a wrangle UCDA in licensing of coffee exporters, certain bodies do not recognize Uganda Coffee development Authority the would expect Uganda National Chamber of Commerce to be doing the licensing.  so, the Government should be finding or trying to put in place an organisation that can marry these in the private sector to handle exports when presenting the Bill, Mr Chairman, the Minister stress the need for “ a strong export promotion board to embark on export trade sector to avoid reliance on funds from outside.” So, this should be in my view private to handle their own finances using whatever method of generating these finances, it is going to eat on this other money we are talking about hon. Wasswa mentioned it, why would you deduct money from an importer to promote an exporter, what would be the wisdom?  I would personally object very, very strongly to get an importer sliced off his money or let the importers subsidize the exporter it would not make a lot of sense.  

We have heard previously this House did approve a one percent import tax to go to the promotion of Uganda export promotion Council and also to promote or rather to strengthen the National Bureau of Standards. For the last three years no money was ever released to help the promotion of exports nor to strengthen the Bureau of Standards.  Mainly because of the way money is handled when it goes to the Consolidated Fund, although we are saying this must go specifically to do this job I do not see why the money for imports should not go to strengthen the Bureau of Standards that one I would understand.  But, we want to subsidize the exporter I would very, very, strongly object -(Interruption)


CAPT. BABU: It is not only Uganda that exports, I want to quote a case in point were the flowers of Kenya are exported to Europe and they subsidize them these imports which come in by air from Europe into Nairobi are charged at four dollars a kilo.  The export of flowers is subsidized to an extent of 45 cents per kilo to make sure that those flowers go to Europe and bringing in the foreign exchange that is required by the country. Therefore, any country that would like it’s export to go out would charge the industrialised goods slightly more so that they can export the agricultural products and horticultural products to foreign countries so that the farmers can sell and, therefore, makes slightly more money.  This is a common thing all over not only that, even the industrialised countries have got something called dumping where the Export Promotion Councils in those countries have subsidized their industrialist to dump certain commodities in third world countries.  Thank you.

MRS MUGARURA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman -(Inaudible)- the exporter loses money on the commodities exported and as you know our shilling has been fluctuating all the time and unless we are ready to subsidize this exporter there is no way we are going to beat this challenge.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.
 
AN. HON. MEMBER: Thank you very much for that information.  I would like to know from the Minister or anybody for that matter, what the existence of this board will be vis-a-vis the liberalisation policy.  We are saying let us liberalize, let experts handle what you are trained to handle, if there is a farmer let him do farming, if there is a trader let him do trading.  Where will this board be when we form assuming it is going to be formed that strong Chamber of Commerce that the Minister is already predicting because he has already said that there is going to be a general meeting at the end of this year and he hopes the Chamber of Commerce will be strengthened.  What will happen to this board?  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.


MR RWAKAKOOKO: (Ruhawa County, Mbarara):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I support the establishment of this board, but I am afraid, Mr Chairman, I must give conditions.  Mr Chairman, we seem to have fallen in a habit always of thinking that when we create these legal boards our problems are solved no, more problems are created. I support this body because right now we are very, very, weak on the ground in terms of a number of avenues for exports which would be necessary to enhance our earnings, reduce our dependence on donor funds, increase our capacity for taxation and, therefore, also contribute towards our own local financing for development.  That is the major reason for which I support this body.  Mr Chairman, we have seemed to set up very many parallel structures, already UCDA has been mentioned, CDO has been mentioned, we have recently launched a private sector foundation we are tomorrow going to have a discussion about Uganda Investment Authority Project under Ministry of Finance and that private sector foundation is also under Ministry of Finance.  Yesterday there was a certification scheme under the National Bureau of Standards we have gained the voluntary boards which actually have incurred the cost in promote economic growth in this country namely; Uganda manufacture’s Association and many other bodies of that type which have actually buy themselves incurred the cost of developing the economic activities in which they are involved.  We are very, very, far behind in exports; we have these PAPSCA, Poverty Alleviation Programme.  Now we have so many, many, projects which are funded by IMF World Bank, but whose result you cannot see on the ground because the money does not go to support the farmers it remains on a macro level. (Applause)

I have said and let me, Mr Chairman, with your permission repeat, that you do not need so much money spent on a macro level if you can spend it on a micro level create self sustenance at the bottom because only then can you be sure that any money spent on the micro level will be - out of the micro level.  So, I think we need to change the way we plan strategically the inputs into our economy.  Mention has been made about incentives, some time back I carried out an experiment in Kenya about how the exporters are being treated, it is true they go out of their way and pay cash to the exporter who have exported so much value they exempt them from paying local duties that is how by the way that scheme was abused.  Do you remember gold exports in Kenya?  That is how it came about, in principle it was abused of course and I do not think and I hope that the Government did not support that, but there was a scheme to encourage exports.  Do you know even in countries of North America and Europe, there is a programme to meet expenses of those business men who go out to sell new lines to new consumers in Africa, we do not have this here.  Now, we do not have this here probably because we would like every little money to go into funding the Government budget, but that is not correct, that should not be the direction.  I think that the direction should be that some money should be voted in order to earn more money and the train should continue along those lines in other wards, I am supporting this body assuming and I gave the support conditionally that once this body comes in and performs the functions of promotion of exports then we will have exports increasing then that will bring in more production, that will also encourage a variety of crops so that we do not have when we make an attempt to grow certain crops to have them stunted here.  

I am supporting this body so that the hon. Minister if and I hope when we have passed this Bill he goes and works with the officials concerned so that there is a clear calender there is an action plan a practical action plan talking about sim-sim, talking about maize, talking about sorghum, talking about so many other things.  We have tended to be satisfied with a four traditional cash crops, coffee, cotton,tea, tobacco those are no longer as competitive for money regeneration as they were before, therefore, we need to break into a new field of exports.  Therefore, the challenge of this body is quite substantially different and higher than in the past. I believe that this is a macro body and, therefore, is going to have to relate it’s activities with the activities of this sectrol bodies, i.e. UCDA, CDO and all others in order to avoid the situation of duplication of laws.  I have looked at our Development Budget, we are pumping to much money outside of agriculture and yet every expert report which comes into this country zero is on agriculture.  In fact, yesterday I spent the whole day discussing with an advisor here in the Government who was saying that we are pre-occupied much more with macro economic expenditure than the micro, he brought me huge books to show me where we are wrong, I had already actually carried out research and when I brought the figures and asked him for comments he said he learnt as much as he give to me - (Laughter)  

So, I think that the committees of this House have been taking a lot of time articulating a direction giving recommendations which we bring here we discuss them we pass them.  I would like, Mr Chairman, to take this opportunity and request the Minister and other colleagues of his to look at the recommendations of this House, I am trying right now to do the final report so that we end up and the new people coming in next year start with those reports where I am summarizing all the recommendations we have made, all those recommendations that have been carried out and many, many, which have been left un attended to.  We are very bare in terms of food security area; reason we are not sensitized towards the food security issue, maybe, because we are so lucky that we have not sustained much hunger to the extent of probably everybody in this country waking up about that need.  We have not revived the question of granaries at farm level, which many of us found when we were growing up, what has happened?  I think we need to do a lot more there.  

The districts cannot raise enough revenue because they do not have surplus and they do not have surplus because they do not produce beyond their little consumption we must move away from that, we must move away to a level where we produce more than we consume so that the surplus is generated into income.  We cannot do that unless we have improved seed situation, we need to improve the seeds, we need that done deliberately at Government level.  I know that Kawanda Research Station is trying it’s level best to improve the seed varieties I think we need to multiply that in districts so that they improved seeds can reach the farmers much faster than it is a case now.  Because, if you put this into law if you are going to publicize or promote the exports, you must promote the exports which exist, you must promote the exports whose pricing is competitive, you must promote exports whose cost of production is minimal -(Interruption)

MR KAJUBI: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, if this Bill go through the farmers will be encouraged to grow more because they were giving up, why?  Because of lack of marketing facilities for their crops and the famine he is talking about was about to come because people were giving up growing things in a big way because the Ministry of Commerce was not really addressing the issue of looking for markets for farmers.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.


 AN. HON. MEMBER: I thank the hon. Member, Mr Chairman.  I will be very brief now, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I would like to emphasize and appeal to the Minister that beyond this Bill and immediately after it is passed, a strategic plan of action; I am not talking about an adhoc single plan; I am talking about a strategic plan that will involve all key players in the economy who will enlarge the level of exports in none traditional.  We are talking about none traditional we are not talking about traditional, I think coffee farmers, I think UCDA, I think the Tobacco Industry, I think the Cotton Industry, those really are already in place they just need a little bit of improvement, I am talking about the areas of those crops which can be taped in order to immediately increase our revenue immediately to fight against poverty immediately increase the capacity for local taxation as well as - tax, I am talking about sim-sim, I am talking about rice, I am talking about beans, I am talking about so many others.  

We have always had the danger when the Government goes out to talk about maize everybody grows maize that is not the correct way of doing things, because everybody grows maize naturally there is going to be an over supply and the price will fall so badly that everybody will lose I think there is need for a balance, there is need for zoning and the need for zoning in this country is not new we have got areas which we know are the source of animals, we have got areas which we know the source is of cotton, of coffee and so on and so forth.  So, I think if there is an additional attempt made to emphasize that in this area the most competitive crop to grow is sim-sim I think the Government should deliberately emphasize growing of that crop there.  If the cattle rearing is in the south and in the centre I think emphasis should be placed there so that emphasis is place where the production is at the lowest cost because the weather while very good in this country is not necessarily precisely the same in every district.  The research on production per acre I am very happy the - I think it was the Export Promotion Council which was beginning to put out the indicative levels of production for each type of crop and the prices, I think that should be enhanced that you should have correspondence informers world wide so that you give indications to farmers so that eventually the farmers know; they pick and specialise it is not enough for us to today you have grown tobacco, tomorrow you are growing beans, another day you are growing groundnuts you will never specialize and you will never have sufficient knowledge because you lack storage of the crop.  So, I think the challenge really is on the Ministry of Trade to give clear signals that in area X if you grow this crop you are likely to be better off than if you grow a variety of X,Y,and Z.  Mr Chairman, with those few remarks I would like to support the Bill.


MR MUKAMA (Kigulu County,Iganga): Thank you very, Mr Chairman.  I do stand to support this Bill because it has come at the right time. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform this that I had an opportunity to discuss with the people of my constituency of Kigulu last Sunday about activities and I told them that on our list we have a Bill which has to do with promotion of exports, I had to be put into a corner for panel- beating so that when I come here I speak on their behalf.  Mr Chairman, this is a good Bill and the people of Kigulu particularly say that, such a Bill this board has come at the right time because they have been suffering a lot without such a board.  They are producing a lot of maize and soya beans and other crops they get them, when our friend in Kenya tempt to buy a some of these products they produce more.  When we have a bit of something like that as you understand -(Interjection)- when the maize does not cross then we have a problem to store the maize and the soya beans now, which is within their houses without a buyer.  

So, I would like to see and request the hon. Minister to have this board to have a very direct linkage with the farmers so that they can be able to project what is coming out, what is the expected so that they can start looking for the market immediately because they will have an idea of what they are expecting.  I would like also to see the board looking in the areas of storage, we have built these big silos, there is one in Jinja, but these are white elephants these ordinary farmers do not normally reach there.  We would like to see this board and the hon. Minister concerned to see how we can improve on the storage facilities, so that even if the price falls there is somewhere where we can keep our products for a future date and after all as one hon. Member has said, we have a problem of food security.  If we have good system of storage even we can use that maize or others during the problem time -(Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  On the question of storage, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor, strictly in our country Kasese in the West, in the North it is Gulu, in the East it is Tororo, and in the Central it is Nalukolongo the Produce Marketing Board; we built big stores; if they are not completed they are empty they are not utilised, and the Minister is there with glasses -(Laughter)- and I doubt whether he has gone there to study what the thing is, particularly, Mr Chairman, I would like to inform my Colleague, since agriculture -  we have this strategy facilities in Gulu, Kasese, Nalukolongo, and Tororo, they do not go there -(Laughter)

MR MUKAMA: Mr Chairman, I think he is enhancing our concern that we need the Minister concerned has to look using the board now that we are setting up as to look for ways of identifying areas which would need good storage, do not build ivory towers of Jinja and so forth which are more or less empty, but let us set some of those storage so that we can also help on controlling the quality.  I would like to see that the board is properly set throughout the country where production is, let us not create a board for Kampala where the hon. Minister in his introductory remarks he mentioned that he will have a board of 20 members of staff, I agree with him the 20 members, but we want the board to work throughout the country.  Here I am saying, I want to propose that this money which the board want to save and taken to the Consolidated Funds that money can be utilised to employ more officers like; Export promotion officers in a given region for example; where I come from we can have one in Iganga  -(Interjection)- yes, because that is the gate way of exports to that far side towards the ocean we get one so that he can look after Kamuli, Jinja, and Iganga probably Pallisa which is very near and Tororo and so forth.  Then we get one from the board so that he is the one to give this information they are telling us they are going to gather there must be somebody on the ground so that even this exporter to be can come immediately to the area where the officer is and gets the information.  

But, those are the few comments I would like to make, Mr Chairman. I stand to support the Bill, but the Minister please, take a note of what the Kigulu people have said.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: With that we have come to the end of today’s Session we adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.

(The council rose at. 4.00 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 22 November, 1995 at 2.30 p.m.)

