Tuesday, 24 November 2009 

Parliament met at 2.38 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you and I want to report that on Friday at a retreat in Arusha, I witnessed the signing of the Protocol for the Common Market and this was a big achievement. (Applause) I also received very good reports about the performance of our parliamentary soccer team. Although they did not take the first position, their performance was excellent. They really earned us a good name. (Applause) That was the report that I received from the various Parliaments that witnessed the performance of our honourable members. I take this opportunity to welcome them back to Kampala. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LAND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007

(Debate continued)

2.41
MR PETER MUTULUUZA (NRM, Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I must confess that I have had very little time to consult the people of Mawokota North, reason being that when the group of hon. Madada came to our district, we agreed that His Excellency the President meets His Highness the Kabaka to discuss a way forward as far as this Land Amendment Bill is concerned. I was happy when the Kabaka met the President. 

Mr Speaker, you recall very well that we shelved that Bill for sometime especially we, the Members from Buganda, when the President told us that he was going to meet the people at Mengo. So we halted consultations only to find recently that the Bill had been brought back to Parliament even without the outcome from the consultations between the Kabaka and the President. Therefore, as far as I am concerned, I need more time to consult. 

Secondly -(Interruption)

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Mutuluuza for giving way. I thought I should stand up and give information, so that hon. Mutuluuza could speak from a point of strength and from a well-informed position. On our side as government, the Office of the Leader of Government Business received communication to the effect that the Katikkiro in Mengo had no problem with our proceeding with the debate on the Land (Amendment) Bill. Therefore, you should feel free to debate and discuss this Land (Amendment) Bill without inhibition or fear from any quarter. I thank you. 

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, hon. minister for that information. I am aware of that but as Peter Mutuluuza I did not have enough time to consult my people. Mr Speaker, it is true that there are rampant illegal evictions on land in Buganda – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you should make your stand clear. If you say you have not consulted your people and you want more time, you are entitled to say so, such that we give the opportunity to another person who has points to make to do so. You have been honest –

MR MUTULUUZA: But, Mr Speaker, I beg that you allow me to contribute.

THE SPEAKER: But you are the one who said you wanted more time. Okay, contribute then. 

MR MUTULUUZA: It is true that in Buganda especially in the constituency I represent, there are a lot of illegal evictions but where there are leaders who help these peasants to fight these illegal evictions, such evictions have not taken place. There are three categories of people who act with impunity to acquire land. The first category is the people with guns. People with guns have tried to come to Mawokota North and some even bought land. 

I am glad to inform you that none of those carrying guns forcefully evicted any tenant from land in my constituency and I can mention a few. There is col. Mugyenyi. He at one time bought land in Kiringente sub-county and he issued eviction notices to peasants. I requested for his contact - he was disarming the Karimojong at the time. I called him and referred him to the existing laws and convinced him to negotiate with tenants and he is now living peacefully with his neighbours. The second high-ranking officer is Brig. Tumukunde. He owns almost one square mile in my constituency but all the people who had Bibanja on his land sat with him and negotiated, and he compensated them. In fact recently, they asked him to contest for the Mawokota North County seat but good enough, he just said, “Please, I am a serving soldier, go on and support Mutuluuza.” (Laughter)

The same categories are those who claim to have orders from above. Those tried to evict people from a sub-county called Kamengo in Kanyike parish but I prevailed upon them and referred them to the existing laws. Those people were saved from eviction.

A third category is that which claims to be property developers and recently there was Jomayi. They came and bought a whole parish but I told them immediately I heard that information to sit with the tenants. Those who agreed to share and get a third of their Bibanja accepted and he issued them with certificates. Those who declined are still on the land.

Personally, I am reluctant to support any law, which will not be implemented. You remember very well the constitutional provision, which stipulates that Parliament should provide for the acquisition of registrable interest in land by occupants. This has not been done and I think that even this Land (Amendment Bill), if passed into law, will not work –(Member timed out_)

2.50
MR ERASMUS MAGULUMAALI (Independent, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I really thank you for this opportunity. I bring greetings from the people of Kooki County. My submissions are as follows. Personally, I also have a big problem. As far as I am concerned, I regard the President as a very important person and the one with the most executive powers. Incidentally, culturally I also believe that the Kabaka has a lot of influence on me. 

After learning from reliable sources that the two big people met and one of the items on the agenda was this Bill and they kept the talks secret, I also feel a bit deflated when contributing to this Bill.

However, I am one of those people who are fighting very hard in my constituency to make sure that people are not evicted from their Bibanja. I have been using the existing Land Law to advise the courts, lawyers and my people. One of the examples I have is Mukyala Kanyankole in Kyalulangira in Ndagga parish who had actually been removed from her land and for six years she was out of her kibanja. However, using the same law where it says you cannot evict a woman from her matrimonial land, the issue was reverted and she is back on her land. So, I have been fighting very hard and I am continuing to fight. I have a few observations. 

We are talking about Bibanja - let us say on registered land. Some of these Bibanja holders do not even know the size of their Bibanja, so even defining the boundary of my kibanja is a big problem. I thought it would be prudent if we started off with an express activity of registering these Bibanja and knowing where they start and end. That is where my interest is. The law is still quite loose.

I was a bit put off by the Government Chief Whip who says he got communication from the Katikkiro. I, Magulumaali from Buganda do not have it. Why aren’t we privy to that information so that that confidence that you are pushing to us is not isolated to you alone? We should also share it so that we feel confident. We know deep inside our minds that we have some sort of weakness.

I want to put a question: are we insuring the ownership of people sitting on these Bibanja? We may establish that they are secure but are they going to use their pieces of land to secure financing? What about the land owner on the same land? How do we play around with this dual ownership? 

I want to wind up by pointing out one thing. It is established in the Constitution that we have the District Land Tribunals and Sub-County Land Tribunal and they are not operating. If we are to follow decentralisation, which is taking services nearer to the people, I am of the strong opinion that if we were to fund these tribunals so that they can try the cases and listen to these land issues, it would be much easier than heaping the burden on the minister who is far away. 

These days, doing business is much easier if you can use information communication technology, which is very new. Why do you have to wait for somebody to refer to the minister and decide when the people involved in the districts and who are running the districts in the sub-counties are there? They also have wisdom to decide the market prices. Mr Speaker, thank you very much.

2.55
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will first and foremost report on the consultations that I held in respect to this Bill in Rwampara County.

In my constituency, I have three big Mailo land titles. One is owned by a one Mr Francis Mwebesa and his family, the second by the royal family of Prince Barigye and the third by Mr Peter Bibangamba. During the consultations, I called a lawyer and the land officer and we went through it clause by clause. My people’s main concern was the uncertainness about their ownership of the land especially under the titles I have mentioned above. Therefore, during the meeting, the people’s interest was for government to intervene and secure for them the land on which they sat.

I also consulted the owners of the titles. The two owners I talked to: Mr Francis Mwebesa and Mr Peter Bibangamba do agree that their land is now encumbered, that they cannot use it effectively and therefore agree and want government to pay and compensate them off so that the poor occupying that land can utilise it effectively.

Because of the agreements so far reached, my first submission and request is that government goes ahead to establish the land fund so that while the landlords agree to sell the land, government can come in and help our people. 

Secondly, from the historical perspective and looking at the 1900 Agreement in Buganda, I saw a list of those who obtained land at that time. The list was availed to us in this Parliament and it is a historical mistake that was made and these rampant evictions continue. The lady hon. Magulumaali has talked about is related to me. She was evicted from her land for six years. The whole family was chased away and they have just been living on the streets. It is hon. Kawanga’s wife who has been offering her free legal services in court because she could not meet the costs until recently when she is trying to regain her land.  

Therefore, from a broad perspective, if the current law is meant to stop the evictions, I will support it. However, I believe that this is in itself not enough. There are many historical perspectives, historic imbalances and there are many other laws and the land policy, which are not in place. So I support that we enact this law but go further to look into all other issues that are related to land management, land use and land ownership so that we can have meaningful development of the precious land that we have in this country, which we are otherwise not utilising fully because of the rampant conflicts. Mr Speaker, I beg to rest my case. I thank you.

2.59
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the intention and purpose of the Bill and to urge government to proceed to have this Bill put into proper perspective so that we can all go by it because its main objective is to stem off the massive evictions that are taking place. 

Lwemiyaga County is faced with many evictions and here the Bill talks of lawful evictions and evictions without using courts; but what is happening is that the common person on the ground may not have the ability to discern whether the eviction is lawful or just someone taking advantage of the situation.  

I have basically looked at the recommendations to say the law should provide for adequate compensation for the developments where the kibanja holder is to be evicted for failure to pay Busuulu. It does not say who should pay for this and more so when you add that ex parte judgement should not apply on land conflicts. It happens both ways; it could either be the landlord or the tenant failing to appear in court. So, would we be tying court? 

Certainly, this is an old principle that we could instead in one way or the other use the neutral office that is put up there to see how one can be notified about the court proceedings. Other than that, ex parte judgements are - what you have to do is to mitigate in order to ensure that no undue advantage is taken of these ex parte judgements. 

From the general observations, I would also like to put a question: who is responsible for land evictions? And that is where I really fall back to my colleagues in that it is always people with impunity; big persons in this country who are taking it for granted. Some of these people are assisted by the RDCs. I had a case in Lwemiyaga last week where powerful people were fencing off people’s Bibanja and when Police moved in, the RDC of Sembabule was the one protecting those who were fencing off people’s land. This time I commend Police for having taken decisive action because they uprooted the fences and barbed wires. But I tell you that it is the big people in this country who are really guilty; it is not the common man. So, I think we had better look at ourselves first and ensure that we really support government once it comes up with policies. 

There is another form of evictions in Lwemiyaga that is not mentioned here. One may not come with court brokers; one may not bring the kanyamas to evict people but use the same case I have mentioned – big men in government. Some have military escorts who come and drive their animals through peoples’ gardens, take them into extended legal battles and the poor men have no option other than giving way. 

So, I really think that there is a problem because evictions should not be seen as use of court brokers to evict. There are forms of eviction that are taking place and the poor men cannot afford the court battles. They start by framing them that they have injured their animals and are pushed into jail for six months and only called out to agree to sell off their property like Bibanja in order to be released and find their people landless and out there in the cold. 

About the Bill, I would like to address myself to clause 32(b). I see here that it is saying that you substitute the whole clause 32(b) with another new clause. This is replacing one which was saying, “A person claiming interest in land under customary tenure to be evicted only by court.”  Now, probably colleagues have raised important points to this by removing 32(b) as it is being proposed here, you are limiting the scope of the Bill. You will now be talking specifically about the Central region here because once you remove the North, East and all that, you are now leaving 32(a) about the lawful and bona fide occupants to be evicted for non-payment of ground rent. 

If we were enacting a national law, it should not be based on one region only. Let us expand it because why should we have to come over tomorrow and start legislating for other areas where the customary land tenure persists? I believe that by narrowing it, we shall not be taken as coming out to cure a problem. Short of this, we could be taken as if we intend to narrow it down to a particular region. I really find myself very uncomfortable with this. I propose that we leave the matter as it is and then we see how it suits the national perspective other than limiting it to a particular region. 

I would also like to look at the amendment under section 35 of the principal Act. It says in 3(a) (i) “A tenant by occupancy who purports to assign the tenancy by occupancy without giving the first option of assignment of the tenancy to the owner of the land commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding ninety six currency points or imprisonment not exceeding  four years or both.” With this, where a tenant comes to claim that the landlord sold, that transaction is nullified. But here where the tenant is the one who sells, you do not nullify the transaction –(Member timed out_)

3.06
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, when this Bill was brought to Parliament for the first reading, I objected to it and appealed to the House that the presentation of the Bill be deferred until comprehensive consultations are made. 

This Bill has created a lot of contention in the country. I have worked with other Members of Parliament from Lango sub-region on this matter; we held a meeting which was attended by all the stakeholders from the region including my brother hon. Omara Atubo. I am not saying that he was represented in the spirit in which he represents his constituency in Lango – therefore, his people were there. 

Land is a very precious commodity and our people hold it very dearly and they do not want any disturbance. We were given only two positions to support. One position which is very clear is that Article 32(b) be completely deleted in the Bill. And it should not appear anywhere in the Bill. Our people are worried because they have just returned home and other people are very rich. So, the rich people will tread on the poor and buy all the land they have. 

Therefore, I am standing here to speak on behalf of my people; but also I am the Chairman of the Greater North Parliamentary Forum –(Applause)– we have consulted widely: West Nile, Acholi, Lango, Karamoja, Teso, Bukedi and Elgon. Our position is very clear on customary land system. Our people are very poor; they are very sceptical and we need to reduce the pressure on them. We appeal to this Parliament to remove clause 32(b) completely and any other clause regarding customary land system should not appear in this Bill. 

I want to thank Government and Members of Parliament. We met in the caucus and we have unanimously agreed that 32(b) be deleted. I also want to thank hon. Omara Atubo for agreeing that it be deleted.

I know that land is very important. But it appears that we are amending our laws to please some people. I have been informed that the Kabaka of Buganda met with the President and the issue of land was part of the discussions they had. The Lukiiko, which represents all the clans in Buganda met and agreed that as long as these discussions are going on, the issue of land amendment be stayed until a common position on land is reached. 

I think they are doing this in the best interests of our country. Land has been a problem in this country especially when the colonial government tampered with land in Buganda. Some sections of land in Buganda were not in the hands of the people. This created a gap and this gap cannot be handled without consulting the people for whom these laws are being made. 

Mr Speaker, in Buganda, we need to unite the people. The tenants and the land owners must be united. Once we divide our people, we are dividing our country and creating future problems for our children. Therefore, as we debate this Land (Amendment) Bill, I want to appeal to this Parliament that let everybody be involved. Let Buganda Kingdom and its people be involved and that way we shall be able to make laws that can stand the test of time and that will not create problems for our country. 

I want to inform you, as the Chairman of the Greater North that we are together in this and we appeal to government to reduce friction in our country so that we can have permanent and sustainable peace in our country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the gallery this afternoon, we have the Uganda National Bibanja Tenants Association representing people from Wakiso, Kampala, Mukono, Kayunga, Mubende and Nakaseke. They have come to observe the proceedings in the House. You are to welcome Parliament. (Applause)

We also have 26 women from the Forum for Women in Democracy. They have also come to watch the proceedings. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.14
MRS SYLIVIA SSINABULYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. No one denies the fact that there are evictions in this country, and I believe that government has a legitimate mandate and right to make laws which protect its citizens. But what is best is to enact a law which would be a good solution to the problems. 

When I look at the problem of land evictions in Uganda, I try to establish what the causes of these evictions are. Land is an asset and a factor of production and most times, it may be the only asset the person has. Therefore, when people are selling this land, they sell it because they want to get an economic benefit out of it. I look at this Bill as not being a permanent solution to the problem of land evictions and even the bigger problems of land in this country. 

I would have been comfortable if the Bill we have here proposes a win-win situation and strategic solution to the problem. It is true the peasants need land and they must be protected and secured in their security of occupancy. I think as we give them security of occupancy, it is better if it became permanent security because as long as this land remains in someone’s names – the title holder, then you never know at what particular time we may get a government which is not sensitive to the needs of the tenants and do away with this law. What would happen to the tenants then? 

Therefore, I join my colleagues who have called for a meaningful land fund. I do not really know why we have failed to have a land fund as proposed by the Constitution because the landlord will sell his land and get the money and the tenant will also be able to buy land. I am informed that government has a facility in Post Bank called Kyapa loan but we do not popularise it, yet it would go a long way in solving the problems before us. I request the Minister of Lands to inform us - because I am informed that government has so far used the land fund to buy off 300 titles. I want to know whether those titles were bought in Buganda or elsewhere because the major problem is in Buganda. 

I know that one of the areas that government bought off was the land of Prince Barigye. This was given out to the occupants. That was good. What about the so many – because I see Buganda region as the area most affected by these evictions and I would be comfortable if we could also know whether out of these 300 titles that have been bought, part of them are in Buganda. So I need to seek clarification from the minister on that. I request government to ensure that the land fund is operationalised because there is no way we can insure that our tenants, our peasants benefit until they have security of occupancy by having the land titles in their hands rather than being promised that they are safe and yet actually in the long run they are not. I thank you. 

3.19
MR AKBAR GODI (FDC, Arua Municipality, Arua): I would like to disagree officially with positions in this Bill. The Bill as it is right now is not helping either the landlord or the tenant and instead it is entrenching the two over the same piece of land and that is the contemporaneous aspect of this Bill. The question is: who benefits from this Bill if it is passed in the current form? That question should be asked. 

As many have already said, land is a very precious asset and according to this Bill, if it is passed in the current form, you will find that the landlord cannot even develop the land because it is occupied, they cannot use it to borrow, they cannot mortgage it, they cannot even easily sell it because it is encumbered because of the numerous equitable interests created on it. By this, it would mean that having a genuine land title will just be like carrying a mere paper. The tenant cannot even do anything meaningful because of the constant fear that the land belongs to the landlord. Part of the problem is not the letter of the Bill but the fear of the unknown and the perceptions. 

I am happy that it has already been resolved that section 32(b) of the Bill is going to be deleted but there are fears that it can resurface any time. It has already been indicated that it can resurface in section 59 of the current Land Act and we want assurance from the government position that if somebody will move a motion and be supported that the whole section 32(b) has been sealed forever and cannot resurface anywhere, it will allay fears of other Ugandans. 

As leaders, we should always resolve such matters peacefully other than rushing for quick fixes because at the end of the day, we are doing all this not for the Uganda of today but for posterity purposes. Let us have one bona fide owner on a piece of that that cannot entrench two equal or unmovable ones on the same contentious land. I would like to urge Members that when we are debating this Land Bill, we should desist from notions that we are trying to appease voters, personalities or our party position. Posterity should be the guiding position in this matter. I rest my case.   

3.23
PROF. WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): I thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me the opportunity to contribute to this Bill. I would also like to thank the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development for bringing the Bill and the chairman of the committee for presenting the report. 

Different views have been expressed on this Bill, some are negative, others positive. In my case, I find some parts of this Bill very amorphous; they are not clear. To some extent, it is discriminatory; discriminating between the tenant and the registered land owner. It would have been good - although we hear that there are rampant evictions - for the honourable minister and the committee to have carried out statistical analysis of the evictees and the evictors to support this Bill. That evidence is lacking because we are given this information verbally. 

The second point is that the minister may have to explain to this House how this Bill, when passed into law, will affect the bona fide tenants of slum areas in the city and urban sites.

I would now like to address myself to some of the amorphous areas in the Bill. In clause 32(a)(1), the Bill states that: “A lawful or bona fide occupant shall not be evicted from registered land except upon an order of eviction issued by a court and only for non payment of the annual nominal ground rent”. Mr Speaker, suppose that bona fide tenant has become a nuisance on the land, would he or she be left there at the indignation of the land owner; because as it stands now, the Bill protects that nuisance occupier? 

In section 32(b), there is an amorphous statement as well that: “A person claiming an interest in land under customary tenure shall not be evicted except upon an order of eviction issued by the court.” The “the court” is not specified although it is a definite statement. 

In the case of ordinary people, some big person goes there and claims interest in the land and produces a court order, what would be the fate of this helpless land owner? This I find very interesting. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister has assured this House that this will not appear in the Bill, and of course I agree with him and with all those who articulated the stand of the Lango sub-region on land, and I support their views. 

The other section which I think is very intriguing is sub-section (2) of 32(b) and (a), the court has heard the person claiming interest on the land on the matter, but what about the owner of the land? The owner of the land is left in limbo without being heard. The court is only hearing the person claiming the land. In (b) of that section, adequate compensation has been paid to the person claiming the interest on the land except where the person has abandoned the occupancy. 

As I said before, if an important personality goes and claims interest in the land of a poor person, how can the owner of the land request the court to go and hear the case? I think we are putting helpless people in a predicament which they cannot solve.

Finally, it is my appeal to this House not to put ourselves in a situation of a time bomb. For me, if this Bill is passed into law, it will represent a time bomb -(Member timed out_)

3.30
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you. Mr Speaker, any law that this Parliament makes is intended to cure a mischief; a mischief that should not be existing in any other law. So I want to read the Land Act of 1998, section 32, and it reads: “A tenant by occupancy or registered land shall enjoy security of occupancy on the land.” 

Section 32(3) reads: “The tenant by occupancy shall pay to the registered owner an annual nominal ground rent as shall be determined by the board.”

In 2003, we amended this Land Act. Section 14 amending section 31 states: “The tenant by occupancy shall pay to the registered owner an annual nominal ground rent as shall, with the approval of the minister, be determined by the board.” 

3(a) “The minister shall within 60 days after receipt of a request for approval under sub-section 3, communicate his or her decision in writing to the board.” 

My question is what mischief are we curing by making this law? The law exists. What the minister should have done was to come and tell us what has failed in the implementation of this law, but not to come and bring a new law. You should come and tell us why the land tribunal has failed? Why has the land board failed? Lay the report because in the law, security of tenancy is guaranteed and nominal ground rent is provided for. So, why are we wasting our time in debating this Bill? 

The assumption of this Bill is that evictions are there because there is no law and that people should pay nominal ground rent. Mr Speaker, I sympathise with the people who represent the poor people from Buganda and Bunyoro who were historically treated unjustly, while we sit here to talk about a law, to talk about court. 

This Parliament should be addressing the root causes of the problem and the right solutions to the problem. The right solution to the problem is not to make another law because institutions have failed. That is not right; it does not help you. The right solution is to tell us why the evictions - because previously we did not hear of evictions in Buganda. What social order has changed now for evictions to start? 

What has changed? It is in the last ten or so years that rampant evictions have come up. What social order has changed? It means, therefore, in the 1900 Agreement, the tenants and landlord relationship in Buganda existed within a social order, which they obeyed, which they were comfortable with, but a certain social order changed. What is that which you are not telling us which we should address, not by making another law?

It is wrong for this Parliament to sit here to make a law to determine nominal ground rent for people who were historically treated unjustly. I would even tell them, “Do not pay like you have not been paying”. Why should you pay? This is someone whom the 1900 Agreement gave land and that one is an absentee landlord, but this is the land you have lived on all your life from time immemorial and you tell me to pay nominal ground rent! A representative of the poor people comes, sits and tells me that you want to put nominal ground rent for your poor voter to pay! Surely, I who represents the people of Apac, have fought for customary land because I know my forefathers, my fore grandfathers, mothers and grand mothers lived there. I cannot allow you to tamper with it.

Fight for your people; you cannot sit here and make them pay. Why have the district land boards failed to collect nominal ground rent? Ask yourself why have they failed? Why can’t you ask yourself? They have failed because these people cannot afford it. You will determine the ground rent here; they will fail to pay; the rich people will go to court then you have to pay Shs 1 million for the lawyer. This local person poor as he or she is, cannot pay the lawyer. Who in the end will benefit? Tell me. Who will benefit? Is it your local person, the poor one? Can that person pay the Shs 1 million fee to the lawyer? (Interruption)

MS KAMYA: Thank you, honourable colleague for giving way. There has been a lot of talk about the injustices formed by colonialism after the 1900 Agreement or during. I want to inform the hon. Member of Parliament holding the Floor and Members of Parliament here that before colonialism the customary land in Buganda was always attached to offices. That is why you hear, Kalibbala e Nsisi, that land belongs to the people of ensenene who live in Nsisi and that is why you hear Obukaago e Kyandondo and Pokino e Masaka. Land was always attached to an office and all the land in Buganda was divided between the clans of Buganda held in trust by the clan head and all of them reporting to the Kabaka. In those days people used to pay homage to this; they would cultivate their simsim or their maize and take some to this man who is looking after them.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, join me to welcome pupils of St. Margaret Girls Primary School coming from the constituency of Prof. Anokbonggo. You are welcome. (Applause) Also join me to welcome Mr Tim Welbeck, retired member of the American Congress who is also here. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.40
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I stand to oppose the Bill because it is not going to cure any problems regarding land in Uganda, and because of this, that is why you are hearing that the minister who is responsible for this Bill went to Lango sub-region and sat with elders there and they decided to expunge clause 32(b) from the Bill. What does it mean? It means the whole thing is paralysed against the centre. It is a dangerous precedent to make a Bill where other areas are going to be excluded and then others are included. In essence, we are making a law which has eyes targeted for particular areas. I am posing a question to the minister through you, Mr Speaker.

The other people are coming to buy land from here, what about if it gets exhausted, will the people from this area have access there? The answer you have heard is “no”, which means this is a recipe for disaster. We are going to fight these wars using guns, spears and machetes to make sure that we get some order in this law. Why? Because you cannot confine one group here and others are coming to get and then you legislate only in one area.

I have heard people even talking about the land fund. Take it from me, it is not going to work the way I see things. Hon. Beti Kamya has been talking about the new dispensation which is here; in Zimbabwe they fought for the common man. What happened? It is the generals who got the land. 

We were in South Africa recently, there was a land fund. At the end of the day, there is a commission of inquiry. The people who are accessing the money for the land fund are the well placed and I am telling you this is a recent phenomenon. It is because the Western Europeans have put a caveat on whoever walks with money in their streets; he is going to be put in. These corrupt tendencies of Ugandans, having been blocked from going with monies abroad and banking it there, are now lording it over the people here, buying the land and securing land titles and evicting people using guns.

The people who have been evicting people from land in my area are people who have been having guns; but the bottom line is, even if the laws are very weak, who has been targeted? Who has been put in to prove at least that this law is weak? Even if it is weak, we would have proved and said, “This is weak, let us improve on that”. That is why where we come from, particularly we people from the centre here, we are between the hammer and the anvil; on one side there is government and the other side there is the Kabaka.

The Kabaka said - and I was surprised hon. Migereko was saying that the Katikkiro has said - the Lukiiko refused this Land Bill and they said let the Kabaka talk with the President and then we can come out amicably with a common ground such that we can amicably debate about this law. That is why you see some of our colleagues even hiding like Nandala-Mafabi said. It is not that they fear to come and debate, they have got divided loyalty.

Therefore, this thing is not going to cure, and that is why hon. Njuba talked about the spirit under which this law was brought. The spirit was wanting. If it was really in good spirit, all of us, NRM and the Opposition, would be together. It would be a cocktail; but you can see even from the statistics in the newspapers, which they have extracted from the Hansard, you it is NRM against the Opposition; and the Opposition against NRM; which means it is mere politics other than solving the land problem.

Mr Speaker, you are much older than some of us; you are from here and you know what kibanja means. Kibanja means ebanja. Ebanja is a debt. Whoever went to somebody’s land, he was told that is a kibanja meaning you are indebted where you are. So, you must work, either you pay busuulu or envujjo or work to get a kanzu or something to extricate yourself from the problem you have. Now, how are you going to say to a loan holder; they are going to change your portfolio through legislation, when actually asset ownership is embedded in our Constitution. We want to protect the people, but let there be harmony.

Parliament should pronounce itself to create harmony between the landlords and the tenants such that we move together in this 21st century knowing how we can extricate ourselves and look at all solutions amicably where we can agree to be together. But creating a dual regime, like other Members have said, is not going to solve anything. If anything, after 2011, most people are going to find it harder because at the end of the day - you remember the President said, “I encourage the people to come to towns and I encourage people to come and invest here in the towns and they produce more”. Now the situation is coming. They have sold their Bibanja; they have got their boda bodas; the boda bodas have been confiscated; now whom are you defending? These are the economies of scale we are talking about.

Let people who have vested interests in land be aided not only by creating the land fund, but also by the landlords themselves amicably sitting together to find a solution. I pose a question to all Members of Parliament here; in Europe where you have visited and are fond of travelling to, how many people live on land? How many produce from land? In Europe they tell us, it is only four percent who are producing for the entire nation. So, whom are you going to push to forcefully stay on land because you want everybody to acquire land? How many people here own cows? How many people here own cars? How many people here have got accounts in the bank? Are you going to make sure that you distribute all the property because some people do not have? Let us find a way —

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have been listening and I have read this Bill. How many issues are in the provisions in the Bill? The issue that I have identified is that if you want to evict for a reason, you go to court. Another issue is that Busuulu must be paid. That is the position of the Bill. 

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, we are going to this extent because of the spirit in which this law was brought. That is why we are even divided. I know what you are talking about. You are talking about court, due diligence and the rest but the spirit in which this Bill was brought, and even how we have been moving, is perverted. That is what I feel. And that is why we are not looking at the entire law technically, section by section, but we are looking at the way it has been presented. 

When the person who is supposed to bring this Bill goes to Lango sub-region and sits with the elders and says, “I am going to expunge this section,” if he expunges that section, that is what you learned friends call a lacuna. So, if there is a lacuna and it remains with us only, who is going to apply that law in only one region? -(Member timed out_)

3.47
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to talk about this issue that is pertinent to my country. I have been listening and I read the Bill. I thank the minister for coming up with this because we would probably not have had an opportunity to contribute to what matters to this country. 

I am puzzled by the question which I want to pose, that is, who is evicting who in reference to the Bill? And two, in whose interest is this Bill? Who are the beneficiaries of this Bill? 

With that in mind, I proceed to submit that I oppose this Bill for the sake of this country living in peace and harmony. As a country we must move together; we must pass laws that are all inclusive. 

With this Bill, right from the day we received the communication from the committee, there was a lot of discomfort right from the House. As you give us the opportunity to speak, you can see how we are boiling up. What about out there? 

I am happy to stand here to be counted by this country for what I am going to say, and that is, any Bill or any law made in a country, and which is sustainable, should be pro-people in a sense that they must know why that law is being enacted; they must be consulted and their input taken seriously. That law is one of those they will term a good law. 

This law has an element which has created a lot of discomfort and suspicion right from the beginning. The committee members who were supposed to have made input to the Bill were not all comfortable. They did not own the report from the committee. That was the beginning of the discomfort - not being inclusive. That has actually also rolled out to the public. There is a section of people that are complaining that they have not been able to make their input on this very vital matter. 

Land is the only resource - especially when I talk about Kitgum District which I represent - it is the only remaining resource that we are holding on to. Cows went a long time ago and probably life too, during the war. We think the land should help us recover and that is why we look at it very critically. And we shall talk without fear or favour and the interests of the people of Kitgum and Uganda at large must be listened to.

Mr Speaker, the suspicion which has come up - I am wondering when I look at the Bill, the government seems to be very interested in helping out the tenants rather than the landlords. What do I mean? If you are already making a proposal to the land fund, that any tenant who has interest can pay off the landlord, my view is, why can’t government get interested in helping the landlords to develop their land in a way that makes economic sense, unless they have defeated all their interests? 

And when I pose the first question, who is evicting who, colleagues have already alluded to - we have just heard about this land bonanza and it has fuelled all these evictions. Should I say in quotes, “Why now?” I think that suspicion and some uncovered interest which makes the government be seen not to be transparent, must be explained in order to iron out this problem. A Bill that is rushed and is seen as being forced on the people makes that suspicion a reality.

And, therefore, my submission is that the government is going an extra mile to criminalise this Bill. This is a civil matter. How can this be implemented? And what is the interest behind that? Whom are we protecting most? In whose interest is the Bill? 

As my colleagues have already said, the land tribunals are not functioning. It is the same Parliament and the same government putting it in place and rendering it idle. Is it strategic so that other Bills can be brought in? I do not think we need a Bill.

I would want to say that for the honourable minister to think that he will determine nominal ground rent from Kampala when even the computerisation of land titles has failed at his office is just a joke. And on whose land will you determine the money? Is it on my father’s land in Kitgum, in Lamola? It is going to be ridiculous -(Member timed out_)

3.55
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am one of the four Members of Parliament - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mabikke I have just been reminded that you are a member of the committee and if that is the case – yes, but he is part of the committee. I think hon. Onzima, let me consider your case but both of you are members of the committee. Okay, give me time, please, I will consider your case.  I have already taken five, now six, members from this side. I will now move to the other side. That is how I will be moving. And hon. Onzima has been here. If you are not ready then I will get another person. Hon. Balikuddembe was declared as one of the best performers in Arusha.

3.57
MR ALEX ONZIMA (FDC, Maracha County, Arua): I stand on this Floor, Mr Speaker, to support the Bill. Only two days ago, a lady called me and said that she was working with The Monitor newspaper. I held an interview with her and told her that I would support this Bill. But when I saw the newspaper yesterday, I was among those Members of Parliament that are undecided. A person of my calibre, the longest serving Member of Parliament in the entire region of West Nile, and at my age, to be among those who are undecided is an insult to me.

A few days ago, I heard hon. John Odit saying that Christians have to date not forgiven Pontius Pilate for making the crucifixion of our Lord Jesus Christ possible. My understanding of the Bible in the one Holy Catholic Apostolic Church is that Christianity is about forgiveness. Any Christian who does not forgive, he/she should be sure of going to hell. So, the hon. Omara Atubo should be assured that nobody is going to crucify him in my view. 

Mine is the issue of honesty as far as this Bill is concerned. The question is, is there a land problem in Uganda? Is there a land problem specifically in Buganda and the other kingdoms? My honest answer is that even before Uganda’s independence, these problems have been here and they are really immense. So, if government is making any attempt to get a solution - at least a solution that will benefit a few Ugandans - my position as the representative of the people of Maracha is that we should support such a position.

I have said time and again on the Floor of this House that it is the responsibility of Government to attend to the problems and more so of the common Ugandans. If we agree that there is a land problem in this country, which category of Ugandans is evicted? Is it people like Onzima who are MPs? Is it the ministers? Is it the generals? Who are these? So, it is the common Ugandans who are suffering most, and if this Bill is going to solve the problem of the common Ugandans I am for that.

I want to go on record that people like hon. Anthony Yiga who stood here firmly and said that there was a problem, and more so in Buganda, such people deserve a pat on the back. I support him. People who are going to sit on the fence and pretend that there is no problem in Buganda because of votes? I do not know.

People are talking of consultations; the Kabaka should be consulted; so and so should be consulted. My view is that if it comes to consultations, the best thing the government of President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni should do it is to organise a referendum where ordinary Ugandans would be able to vote on whether there is a problem and what should be done by government. I am sure that way, ordinary Ugandans would vote for this kind of law so that they are protected like any other Ugandans who are in high circles of government or business.

It is good that when we are making laws, a minister has to come up and read that Bill as we call it the First Reading. Then we are given an opportunity during the Second Reading of the Bill where members exhaustively debate the Bill, and then dissolve into a committee. The essence of all these stages is that whatever government comes up with can be improved as we go along and debate, and as we make amendments in the committee stage, and that is really perfect. 

Government is not saying that you pass this Bill the way it is. They are saying, you debate it, go to the committee stage, bring your good ideas; and improve on the Bill. What is wrong with that, and that is what we are going through.

Like all other members who have spoken before me, I also did consult; I am not a Kampala-based Member of Parliament. I did consult in my constituency in Maracha, and our position was that the intention of the Bill for government to attempt a section of the problems must be supported.

4.06
MS ROSEMARY NAJJEMBA (NRM, Gomba County, Mpigi): Thank you –(Interjection)- Mr Speaker, I seek your protection. I would like to say that Gomba is one of those areas that have been affected by rampant evictions. My constituency office is always flooded with petitions from people who are evicted from their Bibanja. When you go to the RDC’s office at Mpigi, you find many people there who are seeking solutions to land disputes. The RDC’s office has now actually become a land office in one way or the other.

I had not yet got the chance to speak on this matter because I am a landlord, but I am also a tenant. But as a landlord, first of all, I need protection because I own land – I know most of you people also own land. My position is that we need to sort out this whole mess. 

I would like to ask you honourable members to bear with us as NRM – this is not our making; this is not our problem. We are just trying to sort out a problem that was created by history. This is not a problem of this government; this government just inherited this problem and it is just trying to sort it out; please support us.

As I said, I am a landlord and that is why I am appealing to government to provide us with a land fund to pay us off and we leave the tenants to occupy their land. I would like to strongly believe that if the land fund is provided and the landlords are paid off, we shall have sorted out this whole mess.

Mr Speaker, over the weekend –(Interjection)– I am not allowing you. I have enough information on this matter. I have moved around and consulted my constituents and I would like to say that the people of Gomba have told me that we should have passed this amendment yesterday. (Applause) I am speaking from the bottom of my heart. I speak because I was sent here to speak for them. 

Most of my constituents do not own land. Actually 90 percent of the people in my constituency have no land titles. Whenever I hold meetings with these people, I always ask those with land titles to put up their arms. I want tell you that it is usually few who put up their hands. (Laughter) That is why I am saying I am speaking for the people who sent me to this Parliament; those people want to be safe on their Bibanja. 

For that matter, I would like to stand out and be counted among those who support this Bill because it is going to sort out the problems in my constituency. Do not forget that I am a landlord and I need that money to be paid off so that I can leave the Bugerere people alone.

I know very well that we do not have a lot of time to handle this matter, but my position is very clear. However, much as I support the Bill, I want to ask government to put the land fund into consideration. 

Further, I would like to point out that people have got some reservations when it comes to the minister making the final position on the ground rent. They think the minister is too big and too far, and is not approachable, which I think is an issue we can improve upon; we should not throw away the whole thing.

Evictions on ground of non-payment of ground rent only is another problem that people have cited, but still, we can sort this out during the committee stage. So in my view, the issue of throwing the entire Bill out is very unbecoming. We have to talk for these people because majority of them do not own land. Where do you want us to put them? Many of you own land, but these people do not have any land. What do you want us to do? Where do you want these people to go? Like I said, I came here to speak for 70 percent of the people who voted for me. Now that they supported me to that extent, I support them by tabling their issues here because I am their voice. Thank you.

4.13
DR LASTUS KATENDE (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also stand to support the amendment Bill. I would like to observe that the social and economic set ups in Uganda are changing. We are moving from the peasantry subsistence agriculture to commercialised agriculture, industrialisation and urbanisation. As such, the use to which land is put is changing too. It is no longer static and thus the pressure on land acquisition and ownership. This is what is causing social ills such as land grabbing and evictions. So inevitably, this amendment is coming to contain such social ills. That is why I would like to say the amendment is justifiable.

In analysing this Bill, I looked at its objectives. The main objective is to curb the rampant evictions. So, the question is: is the amendment addressing this problem? I think that is true, especially when you look at the punitive action – this can be one of the attributes of this amendment. 

That aside, there is another question. And that question is: will evictions be carried out only in circumstances where there is non-payment of nominal ground rent? I would like to say that there is some shortage there and we may need to strengthen this amendment along those lines. For example, we can always invoke the cross-referencing laws, which may say that subject to other national laws, the reasons for the evictions can be determined.

Secondly, are the magnitudes of these punitive measures adequate? Are they covering all those involved? For example, I realise that we are only looking at a landlord evicting tenants. How about in cases where a landlord is selling? Will the buyer be affected by this law? The law needs to look at all the parties involved in the evictions.

Thirdly, I would like to say that the amendment is only looking at the people who are living. How about evictions of the dead? The amendment is silent on that yet we are aware that in our social set-ups, we have got clan burial grounds; we have got family burial grounds and there are many cases where administrators of a deceased’s estates sell off the burial grounds leaving the poor widows and children with no land for burial. 

This aspect of evicting the dead is not addressed by this amendment. So it becomes a meaningless slogan when we keep saying, “May his soul rest in eternal peace” while burying our people – how can their souls rest in eternal peace when their bones will tomorrow be removed from that burial ground after the sale of that piece of land? These are some of the aspects, which need to be considered in this amendment.

In our land policy, we lack a guideline for disposing of the dead. If we lack it and we are still using our family burial grounds, then what I am saying is important. 

I am glad that other than cross-referencing laws, there are other provisions put in place by government. These include the district land boards, the land tribunals and now the Land Fund. What the government needs to do is to operationalise these institutions and the fund so that we use them to abate the evictions. 

There is concern over lack of a land policy. We need a land policy and a land use policy so that the Land Act implements them. The law is there, yet there are evictions. If there is no land policy and no land use policy that is wrong. If evictions are also taking place, that is still wrong and we cannot let the evictions go on. Two wrongs cannot make a right. For the time being, let us use this amendment to contain the rampant evictions. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

4.13
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Masindi): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. The Eighth Parliament and the Government of Uganda are on spot to see if we can be relevant to the big challenge of our times. We have to come out clearly and see if we are comfortable with the status quo. The next generation is counting on us. If we think the current stand-off between landlords and tenants is what we want our grandchildren to inherit, we should pronounce ourselves - today, even if government got money for roads, it would have to first look for money to compensate those who are claiming that land. 

We have people who own land in square miles and they do not have plans of using it. Therefore, I would like to state my position that I support radical land reforms. I only accept the Land Bill as a Panadol, a temporary stop-gap to deal with the evictions. Nobody has the guts to stand here and say there are no evictions.

Uganda’s population is going to double by 2030. Land is an instrument for planning. The country is now labouring with a national development plan. But without the reforms, all we are doing in the national development plan will be a waste of time. 

As Parliament, we should be more committed to financing the land sector. All that is in the Land Act today, without financing systematic demarcation of land, improvement of the Land Registry, land use planning, physical planning and if possible urbanising the whole country, we are wasting our time. Can we, as Parliament, approve more appropriation to the land sector because it is a foundation for this country to take off?   

Today, if you want to bring an investor to work with the communities, until the land is registered and we have data of how much land we have in this country and allow others use it, we shall have a problem. 

The injustice we are talking about is a one-century, one-decade old problem. It is a shame that 110 years after the 1900 Agreement, we are still subjects of that colonial legacy. That is unfortunate. The Parliament I belong to should not accept this. 

Immediately after passing this Bill, we should go into the fundamentals of financing the sector; the Land Fund. 

I would have no problem if government seized all the land of absentee landlords and offered a promissory note to those who were donated that land. We must disengage these people. The absentee landlord will not use it.
 
My good friend Hussein Kyanjo, I come from a constituency, which has the largest part of the land as customary land. By 2005, 50 people had applied to the Masindi District Land Board where we then belonged to own the rift valley, which had close to 100,000 people. About 14 had got the lease offers from the Masindi District Land Board. 

I appeal to Members who have customary land and are still preserving it as customary land but have not yet got what Buliisa and possibly what Amuru is getting, that people who will get to know the resources in your land before you can use the district offices to fraudulently register this land. This Bill must provide a cure for an incidence like Buliisa where 50 people were going to repeat a 1900 Agreement and turn the 80,000 people into squatters. That is why 32(b) as amended is important.

Hon. Hussein Kyanjo, you are my good friend but this is a dangerous time. (Laughter) I appeal to honourable colleagues that let us not only support this Bill as a stop-gap to dealing with the rampant evictions because in the original African sense, landlords never evicted people. People have become so commercialised and the landlords cannot be allowed to enslave our people; more so those who are legitimate ancestral owners. We are dealing with a problem of those who illegally own the land when actually there are legitimate owners of the land. This Bill intends to do that and it is in the old spirit of the Busuulu and Envujjo law. We should not continue preserving this bad status quo. We must stop this and see this country using land for productivity. 

When we are legislating and we come up with the policy very fast, we should borrow a lot from Amin’s Land Decree of 1975 where land was for production and if you have a lease and do not use it for five years, you cede it to those who are going to use it. 

The next generation is looking at us. Should we fail to administer the necessary cures in the Eighth Parliament, we are going to be held responsible for all the failures in this problem of the land. We are responsible for financing and for appropriation of the budget. If the Land Registry is lacking money, if systematic demarcation is not done in Buliisa where you expect your oil to come from and you are waiting for my peasants to do that for themselves, then you are causing chaos in an area which is pregnant –(Member timed out_)

4.24
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When the debate for this Bill started, I was not here. I was in Addis Ababa attending the South-East African Investment Forum and later on I went to Arusha to witness the signing of the East African Community Common Market Protocol. 

As I was coming from my constituency to here, I switched on my phone just after Mityana, to attend the debate, which was sparked off by hon. Mutuluuza. My constituents were already complaining that I am not on record; that I have not expressed my stand on the Bill and yet in my consultative meetings that I held with them, they actually agreed that I support this Bill. They wondered why I was not yet on the Hansard. 

I rise to strongly support this Bill and I look at this Bill as a prescription made by a doctor who examines a patient and finds that this patient has got an intestinal obstruction and the only remedy is to carry out a surgical operation. But many times, the relatives of this patient get worried that if the patient undergoes an operation, the patient might die. But I want to assure the House that for the many times that a doctor decides to carry out a surgical operation on a patient, he really has no ill intentions. He does not want to kill the patient but rather to save him and therefore, this Bill is coming to solve a problem. 

I listened to hon. Betty Amongi who said that there was no problem and wondered why this Bill was coming up. There is a problem. Surely, if someone says that there is no problem to do with land evictions in this country, then that person is not sincere –(Interruption)

MR OYET: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Hon. Betty Amongi said that the Land Act, 1998 amended in 2003 provided for the security of the sitting tenant and she said that the law is there but wondered why that law has not been implemented. She talked of enforcement of the law; she did not say that there was no problem. Is the honourable member in order to misquote hon. Betty Amongi who is not even here, yet she put the record very clearly on our Hansard? 

THE SPEAKER: I think you have helped him to know exactly what hon. Amongi said.

MR KALIBA: Mr Speaker, I thank you for your wise ruling but what I was saying is that this Land (Amendment) Bill is really going to help us a lot to solve the problem of evictions. In my constituency, of Fort Portal Municipality, we have this great problem and the peasants have been waiting for this Bill. I would really like to appeal to the House to pass this Land (Amendment) Bill so that we solve the problem of massive land evictions. I have tried to intervene whenever there are land evictions but I have not succeeded but I am happy that this Bill is going to enhance the security of occupancy of the lawful and bona fide occupants.

Mr Speaker, when we come to the committee stage, there are some amendments which we shall propose and I am sure that when we reach that stage, we shall make these proposals. I thank you, for giving me this opportunity. 

4.31
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issues of Sembabule District as far as land is concerned are so pathetic. So, I strongly stand here to add my voice to those who strongly support the Bill. Issues and matters of land are for all of us here. We know that land is a fundamental basic right to each person and we are here to represent more so those who are voiceless and these are the people that do not have a right to land. The issues of land in all communities in this country cut across no matter the political line, no matter the personalities, no matter the religion; we are all affected in one way or the other. So, when debating issues of land, we should look at our communities and see what is embedded in them. What are the problems faced with our communities? I concur with hon. Ssekikubo that issues of land in Sembabule District especially evictions are so rampant to the extent that the people of Sembabule District especially Lwemiyaga County have lost their lives. They presented their petition to this Parliament on land evictions through hon. Ssekikubo and this august House sent it to the relevant committee. Therefore, we do not want to be seen that we are not protecting the poor because each of us has the people’s mandate. 

All of us representatives from Sembabule District concur that this Bill should have been passed yesterday. It cures the problems of our people; it gives them hope; it gives them reassurance; it gives them a livelihood and it gives them the best right to land. I am here strongly mandated to say that whereas my colleagues and I may have differences but on this land issue, we historically all know that the land tenure systems have not solved our problems. But this Bill is going to cure the land problem for our people in order for them to own land and know that we care for them. 

On the issue of the land fund, I have heard that it does not cure the problem and only works for the rich. I am happy to stand before you and say – (Interruption)

MR GODI: Mr Speaker, our rules are very clear that you do not use a mobile phone in this House. Is the Minister of Energy, hon. Onek, in order to continue using a mobile phone when proceedings are going on? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Is it in order to complain about a mobile phone when you are exhibiting one? (Laughter) 

MS KAWOOYA: Mr Speaker, we are really debating a serious issue regarding the Land Fund. I really urge government that they should extend this to the Buganda Region because the problems of land eviction in Buganda are so rampant. I would, for example, like to mention that the people of Sembabule and Lwemiyaga County in particular are very happy that the government is in the process of securing land with land titles for about 2,000 families that were being evicted. I have been quietly praying here that you all come and we speak for the voiceless. I, therefore, urge all of you Members to support the Bill and pass it. I thank you. 

4.37
MR BARTILLE TOSKIN (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I was a Member of this House in 1998 when we debated and enacted the land law and we put in provisions, which we thought were going to protect our people on their land. But experience has shown that what we did at that time needed some amendment and this is the reason why we are debating this amendment. It is like when you go to a shop and get a dress and when you go to put it on and find that it does not fit well, you have to find a tailor to put it right. This is what exactly we are trying to do. 

The debate we are having today is very important; it is actually crosscutting. I do not see any reason why we should even have opposite views from the other side of the House because this is something which is crosscutting; it is affecting all of us. We cannot sit down and allow our people to continue suffering.

As we speak now, most of economies in Africa are still depending on land and it is therefore important that those who have the responsibility, like the MPs, should come out with laws which will regulate the use of this land which is to bring the harmony between the various people. The case in Uganda as has already been said is a bit different because some of the provinces we are having now were inherited historically. People found themselves being the landlords and others tenants on the land where they are; they did not choose it. Therefore, it is our responsibility to put right all these things. 

We know of evictions; they are well spread and are not only in Buganda here. We have heard from our friends in Kibaale and also in other parts of Uganda. Now the conflict between the rich and the poor; the rich are taking advantage of the poor and it is us to correct these situations. Even in my own constituency we are having the same problem; we left land because we had problems of conflicts. But now the rich are taking advantage of the poor coming to evict people from their land and this is a problem which must be solved by this Bill. 

I do not see any reason why we should spend a lot of time to say the correctness of the Bill. We should instead go ahead and look at the specific amendments that should be done so that we can move ahead. I support this motion and I appeal to all of you to support it. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

4.40
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): The Speaker of Parliament, hon. Members of Parliament, I strongly support this motion. I have a written statement which should enable all of us to internalise the points being made. I have made 330 copies. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, proceed with your statement.  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Illegal evictions of lawful and bona fide occupants of land commonly known as tenants or Bibanja holders has denied them of land, shelter and food. These are basic requirements for the survival of human beings. Some Bibanja holders had their ancestral burial grounds destroyed; a brutal measure which traumatised them!

Prof. Samwiri Lwanga Lunyigo has rightly observed that the illegally evicted Bibanja holders soon come to town and join the army of the unemployed, waiting for anyone to command them in any venture; good or evil. These observations appear in his book entitled, The Struggle for Land in Buganda; 1888-2005 page 129. We must remember that while land is finite, the population is increasing and the level of industrialisation is still very low and does not provide enough jobs for Ugandans. 

Government has taken urgent measures to avoid a major war from taking place between landlords and landless peasants. Ultimately, this problem will be solved through a land fund, which should enable Bibanja holders to acquire certificates of title.

According to a study commissioned by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Government will require Shs 1.767 trillion for land compensations to be able to sort out the entire problem on all tenanted land in Uganda, which comprises 6,638 square miles in Buganda, 163 square miles in Toro, 222 square miles in Ankole, 80 square miles in Bugisu and 697 square miles in Kibaale.

Meanwhile, government must deal urgently with the rampant illegal evictions of Bibanja holders by enacting the Land (Amendment) Bill. 

I now wish to make responses to some issues raised by honourable members on the debate on the proposed Land (Amendment) Bill and specifically on why the National Land Policy is not yet ready. This document is in advanced stages and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development has carried out nationwide consultations throughout the country. Ten regional consultative workshops have been held since 2007 and 23 special interest groups have also given their views. 

Memoranda are still being collected from stakeholders interested in contributing to this noble process and Parliament and Cabinet are scheduled to be consulted before the end of December 2009. Dates will be communicated to you after the hon. Minister of Lands liaises with the Office of the Speaker of Parliament. The Minister responsible for Lands will also make a statement to Parliament and provide copies of the current draft form of the National Land Policy for your input. 

After consultations with Cabinet and Parliament, a national land conference is scheduled to take place in February 2010 where stakeholders will be called to discuss the land policy. The policy will then be submitted to Cabinet for consideration and approval. 

On why district land tribunals are not operational, it was largely because of inadequate funding, a problem which government will endeavour to address. Under the proposed National Land Policy, each district will have –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I thank you. I rise on a procedural question. Judging from the text that the Prime Minister is reading from, it is clear that he is responding to questions raised by Members of Parliament. I would like to find out whether, at this stage, it is procedurally right for the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to begin to respond before debate is concluded and as a result, usurping the powers of the ministers of Lands who are actually present in the House. Is this procedurally right, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Lands and owner of the Bill will be given the opportunity to conclude. He is the Leader of Government Business and is trying to help you but the minister in charge of the Bill will definitely come in to wind up the debate. Honourable, you will be given an opportunity to make your contribution. I think it is in your interest that you know the policy.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you. This arrangement will ease the work of the tribunals and avoid the problem of land tribunals handling several districts and circuiting. 

Other Members of Parliament asked why the Uganda Land Commission cannot set Busuulu. I wish to refer honourable members of Parliament to the Land Act cap 227 section 49, which stipulates the main function of the Uganda Land Commission. This is also clearly stated in Article 239 of the Constitution that its main function is to hold and manage any land in Uganda vested in or acquired by Government of Uganda. Therefore, to assign the Uganda Land Commission the task of managing private property or setting Busuulu on private property would require amending Article 239 of the Constitution. 

On why the ministry has not issued certificates of occupancy to tenants, I wish to clarify that this is the responsibility of two parties; the tenant and the registered owner. The tenant must apply to the registered land owner and must have paid ground rent. Furthermore, the registered land owner must be willing to grant a certificate of occupancy as stipulated in section 32 of the Land Act cap 227. 

In view of the fact that the district land boards have not determined Busuulu as per Land (Amendment Bill) 2004, landlords cannot give consent to tenants to acquire certificates of occupancy. District land boards should be given adequate guidelines on setting the annual nominal ground rent -(Interruption) 

MR MABIKKE: Mr Speaker, rule 63(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament states as follows: “A member shall not read his or her speech but may read extracts from written or printed documents in support of his or her arguments and may refresh his or her memory by reference to notes”. Is the hon. Prime Minister in order to read a speech in guise of debating? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: The person on the Floor is the Leader of Government Business and I think he is giving us the benefit of knowing the government policy on the matter. Let him proceed.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I thank you, Mr Speaker. Districts land boards should be given adequate guidelines on setting the annual ground rent. Furthermore, according to the Land (Amendment) Bill, 2007, where the board determines the annual nominal ground rent payable by the tenant by occupancy within six months, within the commencement of the Act, the rent may be determined by the minister. 

Hon. Members ask why clause 32(b) of the Land (Amendment) Bill, 2007 was dropped. Government, after nationwide consultations on the Bill, listened to the views of the public. The public was not happy with the phrase, “Persons claiming interest in land under customary tenure to be evicted only by court.” 

In addition, concerns were raised on the disregard of the customary dispute settlement and the mediation mechanisms as provided under Section 88 of the Land Act. Because government listens, Cabinet dropped this clause. 

Hon. Members of this august House asked, “Who set the ground rent to be nominal?” I wish to inform the House that it was Parliament which passed the law providing for annual ground rent to be nominal. This is Section 14 of the Land (Amendment) Act, 2004.

Hon. Members of Parliament have argued that the Bill will weaken the powers of the landlords. This is not true. On the contrary, landlords will now know their tenants so that there is no influx of squatters on their land as used to be the case under The Busuulu and Envujjo law of 1928.

Furthermore, the proposed Land Bill 2007 forbids tenants from selling their Bibanjas without giving the owner of the land the first option to buy the kibanja. If tenants purport to do so, they commit an offence and are liable on conviction a fine not exceeding 96 currency points; that is Shs 192,000 or imprisonment not exceeding four years or both. 

Government intends to add an amendment making such transactions invalid as is the case if the landlord does not give the first option to the sitting tenant when the landlord is selling her registrable interests. 

Whereas the landlords have not been getting any income since 1975 when the Land Reform Decree abolished Busuulu, this time round, they will be able to collect ground rent from their tenanted land. 

After the enactment of this new law, the Minister of Lands will develop a training manual for enacting all land boards and area land committees on their roles and functions under the law.

Regarding annual ground rent, guidelines will be developed for district land boards on procedures to determine annual nominal rent. The new law and the guidelines will be translated into major local languages. The ministry responsible for lands will carry out a nationwide sensitisation and also provide copies of the new law from the local governments up to sub-county LC III. 

Some hon. Members of Parliament have argued that the Bill is not the cure for the existing rampant evictions since there already exists various provisions in the Penal Code which address the problem of illegal evictions. The hon. Deputy Attorney-General of Uganda, hon. Freddie Ruhindi, was requested by the Rt hon. Prime Minister to respond to the Buganda Attorney-General. 

In his reply of 22 March 2008, addressed to the Prime Minister, which was published in the mass media, he disagreed with the Attorney-General of Buganda. To use hon. Ruhindi’s words, “As noted by the Attorney-General of Buganda Kingdom, the Penal Code provides for various offences, like section 76 of the Penal Code Act relating to going armed in public punishable with imprisonment for five years; Section 77, relating to forcible entry, a misdemeanour; Section 78, relating to forcible detainer, a misdemeanour; Section 120, relating to trespassing on burial places, a misdemeanour; Section 235, relating to common assault, a misdemeanour; Section 236, relating to assaults causing actual bodily harm, punishable with imprisonment for five years; Section 302, relating to criminal trespass, punishable with imprisonment for one year; Section 335, relating to punishment for malicious injuries in general. 

However, whereas all these provisions exist in the Penal Code, there are numerous provisions; they are all criminal provisions providing for imprisonment without the option of a fine. With the exception of the offence of going armed in public and that of assaulting, causing acts of bodily harm which are punishable with imprisonment not exceeding five years, the rest of these offences are misdemeanours. Section 22 of the Penal Code provides for the punishment of misdemeanours as imprisonment not exceeding two years.

The Bill, therefore, seeks to create a focused offence, by proving both criminal and civil penalties and remedies in respect of the illegal evictions on land in one law. As provided in clause 32(b) (v) of the Bill, while persons convicted under section 4, the court may order that person to pay compensation or damages to the person who was evicted. Or make an order for restitution in favour of the person who was evicted. This means that the court may sentence the convicted person and also make appropriate orders under the same transactions. Under the current legal regime, this will be in different court proceedings, criminal and civil.” 

Finally, I wish to inform you that as a landlord, I have never evicted any tenant from my land. I have allowed them to become landlords, by giving them an opportunity to acquire certificates of title. In the end, both of us are landlords. 

I beg to support the motion. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Amuriat, are you not a member of the committee?  

5.02
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Much as I as I am a member of the committee, I did not sign the committee report together with my other colleagues. We also wrote a minority report but we have not had an opportunity to explain to the House and so we would like to seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker, to be allowed to debate or clarify matters relating to the minority report. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let me see what I can do with your case and hon. Mabikke’s. Please, give me time to think about your case. 

5.03
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you. I just wonder why the proponents of this Bill are really insisting on being very dishonest to this country. I say this because I do not trust a Bill that sets annual nominal ground rent and a Bill that sets the reasons and processes for evictions as suggested in section 35. 

A Bill that bans punishment of the landlords and tenants alike can never offer solutions to the existing land problems in Uganda. In my view, this is the reason I want to strongly say the proponents of this Bill are not being honest to themselves, Ugandans and to me. (Laughter) I want to call upon members of Parliament to be very sober as we debate this Bill. 

Some people are employing a lot of emotion and so on. All of us in this Parliament have been elected and are here through the mandate of the people – there is nobody who ever came here otherwise because they would be in court or out of this House or they would be sent out of the House through court as it has happened to some. But by the fact that all of us are here and we are speaking for the interests of this country, I do not have to speak because I come from Northern Uganda and so I should not speak without caring for the interests of Buganda. I am also a tenant in Buganda and I must recognise whether you like it or not that there are landlords who must be recognised and in Buganda - the land belongs to them. So why should we impose? 

Members have alluded before this House that we already have the laws in place and this Parliament by the virtue of the powers given to it, set land tribunals and land boards. The ministry in charge of these boards has not empowered these boards to execute their duties and prevent evictions. How sure are we that by enacting this Bill we are going to stop evictions? Are we being faithful to ourselves that immediately we pass this Bill, tomorrow there will be no evictions? Unless somebody can challenge me, I do not see anything in the Bill that suggests that there is going to be a final end to evictions. To be honest to this country, it is not there. If you give me the information, I will be grateful –(Interjections)- yes, let him give me the information –(Interjections)- tell me!

MR BARTILLE: I just want to get clarification from the Member on the Floor. The law is giving provisions of what is to be done if somebody is evicted. That has been given and it does not say nobody is going to evict but in case you evict illegally, then you will suffer the consequences.

MS AKELLO: I think that is not very far away from what I was saying about the law we are trying to pass today, which is suggesting processes and procedures that will lead to evictions. We are not finding a final end to evictions – we are not! If the people of central Uganda think that by passing this Bill we are going to stop evictions, forget and relax because this is the truth of the matter.

Secondly and finally, I am not yet very sure, much as the minister has told us he has completely deleted section 32(b), which affects customary tenure system of land ownership which affects the part from which I come - I am not sure whether the current proposal in section 59 will allow me - even the statement of the Prime Minister still quotes a doubt on this. I am not sure because it still says, “That for the avoidance of doubt, no transaction of any kind in respect of land or any part of land not falling within sub-section 1(a) including land held under customary tenure shall be entered into … until it shall not give rise to any rights or interests in land.” I do not fully believe that he has completely deleted –(Interruption)  

MR WADRI: Thank you, hon. Franca Akello. The information I would like to give you is that I have formally written to the committee chairperson and sent a copy to the lands minister such that when we get to the appropriate stage, I intend to move an amendment to that effect. So, that is the point I wanted to share with you. I thank you.

MS AKELLO: I hope the amendments that will come during the committee stage will take care of 59 to avoid the doubts -(Interjections)- can I please have some protection, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Order, please.  

MS AKELLO: I believe that if this is deleted, some of us from Northern Uganda may not have a problem with the Bill but I still want to say that we do not have to legislate in this House because I come from Northern Uganda or whatever part of Uganda. We are all legislators of this country and we must take care of the interests of everyone –(Member timed out_)

5.10
MS AGNES AKIROR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you for giving me this opportunity. I rise to oppose the Bill and I oppose it even more than ever before because I am totally disappointed with the way the Leader of Government Business is handling business on the Floor of the House. (Applause) 

The Leader of Government Business –(Interjections)- I will come to you later. Let me start with the Leader of Government Business. He stood on the Floor of the House and said Article 32(b) had been deleted but in the statement that he has just given, he has provisions of 32(b), clause 5 and he goes on to say, “Where a person is convicted under sub-section 4 …” then he tells us what the court may do. I think this is dishonesty on the part of government and it is not acceptable at all. 

I want to stand here and tell this House that I come from Teso sub-region and we people from Teso, even when it was just mere cows, our men decided to lay their chests down but for our land, we shall not waiver. We told you that people from Teso sub-region –(Interjections)- excuse me, honourable minister, you already spoke for your people. I am speaking on behalf of the people of Kumi whom I represent. 

Land is the only asset we have in this country. And I have the mandate of my people who said that 32(b) should be deleted; it should not be substituted. Honourable minister, you went to Teso; you left us behind and went to try to confuse our people but you remember what they told you: “Come with our leaders.” You went to the radio station but you failed with the first radio station and then you went to the television station and our ancestors spoke; thunder and hailstorms struck and there was lightening and you had to run. I am shocked that you are encouraging this kind of smuggling. For us, when it comes to 32(b), and our ancestors have spoken, we shall not discuss it in this Parliament with the Government side. 

We do not trust the NRM Government. We do not think the Bill is being brought in good faith. I am surprised that my honourable uncle, the Minister of Lands, is talking about forceful land evictions. He has not brought in his Bill anything to do with the forceful settlements on our land and yet that is the problem that we are having. 

My question to the honourable minister is; when are you going to bring a Bill to address the issue of forceful settlements by these people who are still migrating in the 21st century? Migrations stopped some ages ago. The honourable minister should be very mindful that the problem we are having is of forceful people who are now settling on our land. 

I want to inform the honourable minister that we have many other laws in place but you are bringing this land amendment; can my uncle, hon. Omara Atubo, the Minister of Lands, who is a senior politician in this House, tell us whether his amendment will stand the test of time or are we now going to start passing regime amendments, which will be changed with the next regime which is just around the corner or come power sharing in 2011? What are we trying to cure? 

To me when it comes to problems of the central region; there was an honourable colleague who said that we should not discuss amendments that focus only on one region. But for us, people from the greater North, we have come out clearly to say 32(b) must be deleted. 

What is wrong with you people from central region that you cannot have a common position? What is the problem? You are the ones who are making -(Interjections)- can you fail to sit and come up with a common position to guide the House? Some of you have instead decided to be perpetually absent from the House -(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, can I be protected from the honourable minister?

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order to the honourable Member holding the Floor. She is trying to force a representative of Kiboga to have a common ground on this matter with a representative of Kampala Central where there are no evictions. In Kiboga we have evictions and people of Kiboga probably have different views from those of Kampala Central. Is the honourable Member on the Floor in order to insinuate that – 

THE SPEAKER: What we can do is to invite her to visit you in Kiboga. (Laughter)

MS AKIROR: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. 

Lastly, the question I would like to ask the hon. Minister of Lands is that most of the evictions are carried out by untouchables in this government - the generals. What do you hope to achieve with this amendment bearing in mind that these are untouchables and you have not talked about how the law is going to protect the common people from these untouchables? 

I am not from the central region but I believe that since His Excellency is busy discussing with the Kabaka, and I believe the Kabaka of Buganda has interests, before we pass this Bill I think we should wait for the outcome of their discussions. They always say the minorities today might be the majorities tomorrow. I thank you.

5.17
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you. I want to put my case against this Bill and then try to analyse one word which has been the cause of this Bill, that is, the evictions.  

I have reliably learnt that fake evictions were planned to coincide with the Bill. In Lango sub-region and I want to sympathise with this House because the victim is going to be hon. Daniel Omara Atubo. (Laughter) We are evicting people, that is, if they were evicted at all but if we do not delete this section on customary land, then we are also going to evict hon. Omara Atubo. (Laughter) And that is going to be very unfortunate. That is my first sympathy. We do not care about others. Down there they do not know that hon. Omara Atubo is implementing government policy. They do not understand that. When we explained to them, what we were told was very clear.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I want to repeat my appeal to you that let us not personalise this Bill. (Laughter) Just talk about the merits of the Bill. If you think the punishment prescribed is very tough, suggest a lesser one but let us not personalise things. 

MR ANGIRO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, but we, in Lango tell the truth and there is no way that you can convince me against that. (Laughter) And the truth is the way forward because when I sympathise with my brother, I think I have the right to do so.

Regarding customary land, we in Lango know that we have customary land and customary marriages. Therefore, we do not see the reason why, after advising that this be deleted, it still appears here. Now, that is one serious case against this Bill. I am appealing to my honourable colleagues that we delete 32(b) in totality. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, one thing that is clear is that when we started handling this Bill, the Prime Minister categorically said, “Consider 32(b) deleted.” It is not going to be there. This was said in broad day light.

MR ANGIRO: Deleting 32(b) is the position of Lango sub-region so there is no way we can miss mentioning it here for it to be on record. When we do not mention it and then it goes on, then we are to blame because when you go down in analysing 32(b), that person claiming interest in the land under customary tenure is to be evicted only by court. If somebody is also claiming interest of love in the married customary wife, how do you handle this one again - because these are procedures leading to our system? That is why we opted that it should be deleted because they are interrelated and then when the part of the Bill in (2) says that “…Until the court has heard the person claiming the interest in the land on the matter…” What is the use our people trying to question? 

We have the customary leaders; the cultural leaders; we have also courts at LC I and we have courts at LC III, which court are we talking about? 

Then when we talk about adequate compensation, what do we mean by adequate compensation? There is nowhere in the Bill where adequate compensation has been put so that we analyse it. The reason for us to reject this Bill is that there is no confidence in the court because in Lango, we are saying that all the poor already have cases defeating them. You go to court, you are poor and nobody can listen to you.

About the land issues in Lango, there are so many pending cases which have not been resolved and now if this one in the interest of somebody, they are asking “What are you looking for in the customary land in the first place?” What interest are we talking about? What I know is that the only say of a poor man is in his land and should be given a right either to give it away to his descendants or to give it to a developer whom we call the investor. I think this is a case where we shall walk out of this House very proud when this House honours the position of Lango sub-region by deleting this 32(b) in totality.

In case of the central region, I think you can also see a case where we are favouring the tenants. There is a problem with the landlords. If people want land for others who do not have land - we have been saying here and again that a land fund be put somewhere to buy land for those who do not have land and this has been a song which will be sung until the end of the world. Where is this money? For those who have land like I also bought land here and I want to give it away because I can see danger; somebody coming with his interest or her interest to settle in the land and giving reasons that I do not understand. This one therefore should be avoided because —(Member timed out_)

5.25
MR JOSEPH BALIKUDDEMBE (DP, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I come from an area which by the year 2005 had the biggest number of evictions and on the Floor of Parliament today, I want to speak from such an experience regarding this Bill.

The Land (Amendment) Bill, 2007 - I frankly tell you Members of Parliament, this is not the right medicine for security of occupancy for our people. This I tell you from an experience I have had as a Member of Parliament from the year 2005 and as a lawyer of all courts of judicature. This is not going to help us colleagues. What is really going to help us?

I will give you my own experience. From the areas of Kajjansi, to Bwebajja, to Namulanda, to Kisubi, to Kitala and to all those areas from Kasenyi, people are being evicted day in and day out. I am part of this problem. I am part of helping the Bibanja holders but what I have come to find out is that what is put in the Bill - like I placed it last year before His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda - I told him that it is not through this that we are going to get the best solutions for our people and the President placed a question to the Attorney-General. He asked him, “From what Balikuddembe has enumerated today, is it true that we are going to be helped or not helped by the Bill?” From the Attorney-General’s mouth, he said “We may not need the Land (Amendment) Bill, 2007; all we need are clear-cut routes to help my line ministry to help it have a smooth flow if it is given the adequate finances”.

Hon. Prime Minister and my senior colleagues as the Executive, I sit with a number of Bibanja holders and look at how I have helped them. I help them by sitting with them and looking for amicable settlements. The best amicable settlement I have got is to ensure that I draw my own ratios because in the law, it is clearly stipulated that registered proprietors have got unimpeachable rights, which rights cannot be impeached whereas the Bibanja holders have got equitable rights.

So, how best can I marry the two? I get to understand that a Kibanja holder has got an interest and he is called an equitable owner. I get to understand a registered proprietor has got a legal interest and has got legal liabilities. How do I marry the two? I sit them down as a person going to reach a final settlement and believe you me, from the year 2005 to date, this is what I do as a person. I am called honourable Ttaka. I am called lawyer oweby’ettaka. Why - because I am there for the Kibanja holders. 

This debate has been swayed politically. You as my senior colleague, hon. Atubo, this is not going to help us as lawyers and it is not going to help our nationals. It will not. It is just cosmetic. As Parliament, my brothers and sisters, we should have a sincere Parliament that is ready to legislate and bring out clear cut legislations for posterity. This one is not going to help us -(Interjections)- the Minister of Internal Affairs, this one will not be there for posterity. It lacks something and it is against that background that I call upon this honourable Parliament, my dear colleagues - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Balikuddembe, you were not here but I requested Members to look at other laws that have been controlling Bibanja holding and Mailo holding in Buganda. I appealed to them to look at the Busuulu and Envujjo Law of 1928. Even in that law of 1928, in section 11, they were providing for going to court if you were evicted. It is here in section 11 where it says that “No tenant may be evicted by the Mailo owner from his kibanja save for public purposes, for that good sufficient cause and unless a court having jurisdiction shall have tried a case and made an order of eviction.” So, this thing is not new. But I think what you people who are debating it have to do is to make it reasonable and perhaps expand the reason but not to tie it on non-payment of Busuulu and bring out other good causes. This provision is not new.

MR BALIKUDDEMBE: Thank you, Mr Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: This is the Envujjo and Busuulu law. You can look in the old volumes at page 5166. That is where you can find this particular provision.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that guidance. The worry that some of us continue to have is that the quotation you have made really indicates that the courts will use reasonable cause and in this case there has been a fencing of the jurisdiction of court to the effect that there are no other grounds -

THE SPEAKER: But this is a Bill. This is a Bill and there is no reason why you, as legislators, cannot improve on it. These are working documents - yes. You are free, hon. Members, to bring in amendments.

MR BALIKUDDEMBE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Like you have clearly enumerated, I happen to be an officer with all courts of judicature and I have looked at all those avenues but believe you me, land cases are very involving -(Member timed out_) 

THE SPEAKER: There has been an appeal that he be given two minutes -(Laughter)- but I am not going to repeat this. I think Members are also appreciating your deeds in Arusha. (Laughter)

MR BALIKUDDEMBE: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I was voted the best player in Arusha during the East African Summit so -(Laughter)

Mr Speaker, like I was clearly enumerating, land cases are very involving and the basic solution that I have looked at personally is to sit down with these people. I have drawn my own ratios; a ratio of 25 percent to 75 percent and when we sit down with these people, I want to tell you for a fact that we have clear cut solutions and with the office of the Ministry of Lands, I have looked at some of their reports and they have clearly reported that I am handling all these cases very well. 

So, I call on hon. Atubo and honourable colleagues, hon. Kiyingi and the hon. Attorney-General, like I always tell you, we are not going to be helped with this. This is cosmetic; it is only going to handle something at the very top. It is not going to handle the mantle of the basic problem which is land evictions. I humbly pray that we go back and review this Bill and add a number of things because as it stands, I object to it. Thank you.

5.35
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker for the opportunity. I am also here to oppose the Bill in its totality. My prayer is that the customary land should be completely removed from this Bill and that section 32(b) should not be substituted or replaced but be removed completely. 

My submission is also that when we make laws here, the laws should be able to respond to people’s problems but not to window dress. We know that we are still a developing country and as a developing country, we rely a lot on land as a factor of development. This Bill stands to completely reduce the value of land. Which financial institution will be able to give loans to land titles when they know that the authorities on land are many and not one? If we want to really help our people - even those tenants, if they are supported, helped and if they are treated in this law only, then we are deceiving our people. We are disempowering them. Let us not deceive our people. When we are trying to handle something we should handle it comprehensively and not just to say that “Okay you are going to remain on the land with no land title.” And then not to be secured - you see you can be secured when you are very sure but the Land (Amendment) Bill is not going to address that problem. 

I want to pose a question to the honourable minister. In a scenario which is present where a brother struggles with a brother over land, how can this Bill address their problem? This Bill does not address it completely and that means that the Bill is shallow. It is very shallow and it has to be worked on better. All that is in the Bill here - we have not been prioritising land right from the Seventh Parliament and the Eighth Parliament. We had land tribunals but they have never been supported financially. Even the land boards have never been given enough funding. This shows that we have not been taking land seriously. Let us try to give the present Land Act a chance and let us prioritise land. Let us try to give enough funding to land matters. 

The land policy should also come in place and we see the gaps. But right now we are talking about the gaps when we have not implemented what was put in the law. How do you talk about the gaps when you have not been funding the land tribunals, and sub-county land committees? These committees are operating on people who have money. If I have money and the sub-county is called, I just give them tips and they will always try to be on my side. It is because we have not funded those structures - let us fund land structures and we see how it moves.

If we have to come with amendment of the present Land Act, it is better to do it comprehensively not to give Aspirin and then you continue giving Aspirin and the person dies. We are “killing” our people. Let us help our people better by getting back on the ground and we talk to them. We talk about land grabbing; what is in this Bill is not even able to answer the problem of land grabbing. I once said that if we do not treat this one very well, it is going to bring a lot of conflicts and you will see people taking up arms against each other because it is shallow and it cannot help. Let us go down, talk to the people and get right solution, when we have identified the right problems. 

I would say the best to do is to work on this land policy. Bring the land policy, let us see how it works and prioritise land and then see whether the land tribunal works. If land boards are given better opportunities by funding them; if sub-county land committees are enabled by funding them, then we see the gaps. But right now, we are bringing in a Bill prematurely without implementing what should have been implemented simply because we have not given enough funds to land matters. 

We have actually not thought about land as a factor of development in our economy. We have always thought about other things but ignored land. I believe that if we do this, then we will have helped our people better. Right now, if you try to improve on the present (Amendment) Bill, I am sure that we are not going to make headway. 

5.44
MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): For sure and for real, this Bill was not proposed in good faith. Even if it is forcibly passed, it will not work and it will fail to serve its purpose. We have a motto in CP which says that “Land of my birth I pledge to thee” meaning that I am prepared to die in defence of people’s right to own land in this country.

Any good law should be fair and equitable; as far as this Bill is concerned, it will not promote equality and fairness between the landlord and the kibanja holder. The unfairness I am talking about here will result into mass evictions which will cause civil strife and unrest in this country. You remember what happened in Harare in Zimbabwe; we do not want to experience that. We do not want war in this country; we do not want to go back to those days of Amin. 

Therefore, I propose that these amendments be rejected. There is nothing good in this Bill; it is not even a pain killer to the illness. This government should respect people’s demands and will. We are all Ugandans and we need to be respected.
 
On page 7 of the committee report, the committee observed that the people of Northern and Eastern Uganda demanded that section 32(b) be deleted. I did not see any statement that talks about the interests of Buganda. We are not catered for in this report. Is Buganda part of Uganda? The interests of the people of Buganda should be catered for and respected.

This Bill gives too much authority to the minister who is capable of misusing it for self interest. If district land boards have failed, we should not attribute it to the incompetence of the boards but let us go back and look at the whole sector of land, the problems in the sector and first address the problems before we even pass this Kangaroo Bill in this House.

I totally oppose the Bill and it will be unfair to the people of Uganda and Buganda if passed. Hon. Members, we need to reject these amendments because there is nothing good in this Bill.

I disagree again with the committee that the intention of this Bill is to protect customary occupants and Bibanja holders. There is a hidden agenda by Government - to use Minister Atubo to reject the district proposed Busuulu in preference of Shs 1,000 which was rejected by landlords and Bibanja holders. It was rejected and it did not work; it is now 11 years. There is no reason that Government is giving us as to why it did not implement the land law and now they are telling us that they are very concerned about the Bibanja holders. How? You are not concerned! Why are you coming out now? Why is it happening now? What have you been doing in the 11 years since 1998? No, no, this is unfair, Mr Speaker. We are ready and prepared to die –(Laughter)- for the cause of protecting our land in Buganda. 

On page 9 of the committee report, I do not agree with their proposal that ex parte judgment should not apply. This is equivalent to denying the courts of law the jurisdiction to rule on land matters. Article 128 of the Constitution says that there is no person or authority that can order, control and direct court. That is why I am saying the courts should be left to act independently. This part of the report undermines Article 128 of the Constitution.

Finally, I would like to say this Bill does not promote democracy. We need a law, which will meet the needs of this generation –(Member timed out_)

5.53
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was one of the Members of Parliament who wrote a minority report and I would like to say that there have been two developments ever since. As you are aware, the committee concluded its work in December 2008 and it is now 11 months after the committee concluded its work that we are debating this Bill. This is because this Bill has been daunted by very serious setbacks. Allow me limit my contribution to three issues, which concern developments that have occurred since we wrote our minority report.

The first is the deletion of Section 32(b) from the Bill. I am not opposed to the deletion of this section because it affected communal land in some parts of the country. What I am opposed to is the selective treatment of communal land in Uganda. It is common knowledge that in the part of Uganda where I come from – Buganda – our communal land is the 9,000 square miles. (Applause) 

The 9,000 square miles of land continue to be given away by the Uganda Land Commission, the district land boards and the big fish in the NRM especially those who are continuing to parcel out large chunks of this particular land at give-away prices to themselves. They own square miles of this land. They have taken our communal land, the 9,000 square miles. This is what I am opposed to. Mr Speaker, even Section 59(1) of the Land Act of 1998 continues to be abused. So, if we have deleted section 32(b), we must now introduce a section to deal with our communal land, the 9,000 square miles. (Applause)

Further, when you delete section 32(b), which –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I did not want to interfere with your contribution –

MR MABIKKE: You will compensate my time, Mr Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: I want to help you understand the issue of the 9,000 square miles. In 2005 when we amended the Constitution - if you look at Section 10 of Schedule 5 - you realise that we re-established the Buganda Land Board, which was the owner of the 9,000 square miles by 1967. That land was eventually taken to the Uganda Land Commission and in 1995 when we wrote the Constitution, the 9,000 square miles were shifted from the Uganda Land Board and vested in the district land boards within Buganda. 

In 2005, we recall that the Buganda Land Board was re-established with powers which are outlined in Section 10 of Schedule 5. We also went further to give them constitutional provisions to control land use in the region of their operation. We again said that the land board which was established would participate in activities of the district land boards. Therefore, this is an opportunity for you. When you are dealing with this Land (Amendment) Act that mentions the assessment of Busuulu by the district land boards, this is intended to ensure Buganda Land Board, which was re-established, remains part and parcel of the district land boards and remains responsible for handling land issues. 

Giving back land does not mean putting it into a basket; it means giving control. There are sufficient constitutional provisions that have returned that land to the Buganda Land Board, which of course we have not created but as I said, there are enabling constitutional provisions for handling it.

MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. One, I – 

THE SPEAKER: Read Section 10 of Schedule 5. You may find that it may be necessary for you to amend section 57, which prescribes the composition of the district land boards and you will have succeeded.

MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. One, I beg that you compensate me for the time you have used while advising me. (Laughter)

Two, Mr Speaker, I would like to say that we seem to be talking at the same wavelength because what I am saying is that if you are deleting section 32(b), then you must introduce –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I am saying there are constitutional provisions that will give us control of the 9,000 square miles of land you are talking about and they will be in the hands of the Buganda Land Board.

MR MABIKKE: Absolutely! I concur with you in many respects, but your submission buttresses –

THE SPEAKER: What I am telling you is not imaginary; I have been reading bwino (Laughter).

MR MABIKKE: On this particular point, when we delete section 32(b), Mr Speaker, the Bill remains majorly one to regulate land relations in central Uganda. It means, therefore, that we change the name to Busuulu and Envujjo Bill because this Bill will be majorly regulating relations in central Uganda.

The second development after our report was the sad events of September 10th. I have a problem in my constituency; all of us know there were riots in many parts of Buganda and after the riots, we were told there would be talks between the Mengo establishment, headed by the Kabaka, and the President. These talks took place. We were told that the central issue in these talks was this Land (Amendment) Bill. We were also told at the conclusion of the talks in Entebbe that the talks were breaking the ice and there would be round two of the talks. 

Do not forget, hon. Members, that at the height of these riots, we were stunned by the revelation of the President that he had been calling his Highness the Kabaka for three years without His Highness responding to the calls of the revolutionary President of Uganda. Even if we go to round two of the talks and we have convened here as Parliament to pass this Bill, are we in essence saying the talks have collapsed? Are we sure that when the revolutionary President of Uganda calls His Highness the Kabaka after the passing of this Bill the Kabaka will be able to pick his call? These are some of the challenges that we are faced with as Parliament -(Member timed out_)

6.03
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I applaud the spirit with which Members have debated this motion. I come as a messenger of my people. Last weekend, my people in Galamba, Mwerere and Kavule in Gombe sub-counties organised Christmas carols. They organised the Christmas carols in the home of an ordinary member of society, not at the church. At this meeting, members wined and dined and sang in praise of God. Amidst the feast, all the men stood in support of my being in Parliament and representing them but also said I should not kill them before their time. 

That constituency is the origin of the Bibanja associations and is therefore the headquarters. This shows that there are many big landlords in that area. However, the relationship between the landlords and the tenants, according to this Bill, is going to be regulated and harmonised. This Bill, they say, is the only sustaining medicine, not permanent but sustaining, that will help them to live longer. Even if they died, they would know that their grandsons are going to live on these Bibanja. They said I should support this Bill or else I should not go back as a Member of Parliament seeking re-election. (Applause) In the circumstances, I am too young to abandon duty. 

Even before I came to Parliament, this talk of Bibanja holders versus landlords’ vis-à-vis relationships was being debated. My late father became a star in that area because he always defended Bibanja holders. I have friends, both old and young, who I acquired because of my position and they are landlords; they are crying out saying, “What shall my predicament be after this decision?” My answer is, “You have your mile and nobody is going to forcefully take it away from you. It will depend on how you develop a relationship between you and your Bibanja holders.” 

We are not creating war between these two. I have one Mailo landowner, the mother of the highest ranking UPDF officer, a woman called Nalweyiso. They have Mailo land in Gombe sub-county and the tenants are worried and they are saying, “My brother, help me …” -(Interjections)- we shall talk outside Parliament. If we do not make a decision, these people anticipate that when Nalweyiso dies, that Mailo land will be sold. They want us to make a decision so that they start the process of reconciliation between them and the new or intended heir to this Mailo land. 

I concur with the Bill and also thank the Prime Minister for his statement because it has clarified a lot of issues. I feel perturbed by land dealers who say that because of this Bill, we are going to cause double ownership and the value of land will go down. Whom should we consider first? Is it the lives of the people we represent, the land dealers, or land valuers who are just worried about the price? Much as we value land and we know it is a commodity in the market, we should also be worried about the relationship between the landlords and the Bibanja owners. Let us pass this Bill but well knowing that it is not passed in concrete. If it does not work out as we anticipate, then we shall have time to redress the matter. I know the evil in the power of money, but it should not lead us into making mistakes. Let us bring sanity between the landlord and the Bibanja owners. 

Lastly, when I was in senior four, I was taken by my grandfather, Besweli Kibirige Ssebunya, to Kayunga-Galilaaya to look at land that he intended to give me. When we reached the area, we found people speaking a different language. The Banyala had settled on the land and the excitement that I went with died immediately. However, I could not tell my grandfather that the Banyala had settled on the land he intended to give me. I usually joke with my honourable member, Nayiga Sekabira, that I do not know what we will do; we have the title but we do not have the land. The local people have heavily settled on the land down there and however greedy I am, I cannot go and mortgage these people just because I have a title -(Member timed out_)

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are debating a very crucial Bill where line by line we are taking extreme care. I was unlucky that when my honourable colleague who has just yielded the Floor was debating, he referred to the mother of the highest ranking UPDF officer and I got lost from there. I beg that you ask the member to clarify so that I can follow. 

THE SPEAKER: He said, the mother of Col. Nalweyiso, the highest ranking woman UPDF officer. 

6.10
MR LULE MAWIYA (NRM, Kalungu East County, Masaka): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I will say on the outset that I support this motion. There is a big problem in Buganda here as far as land evictions are concerned. Let me inform the House that I was part of the team that traversed about six districts of Buganda collecting views from the people on this Land (Amendment) Bill. I was in the company of hon. Ssekikubo and hon. Rose Namayanja. We went to Sembabule, Rakai, Masaka, Lyantonde, Kalangala and Nakawa here but wherever we went, the people acknowledged that there is indeed a big problem as far as land evictions are concerned. It is also true that wherever we went, we came up with resolutions in support of this Bill. 

However, there were also some reservations made. It is the government that set up land tribunals with a view of stopping or dealing with cases of land problems, but it is again the government that did not facilitate these land tribunals. Actually, to make it worse, one land tribunal was circuiting within about five districts but we even failed to facilitate those few.  

In the constituency I represent, Kalungu East, we have two types of evictions. One is from public land and the other is from Mailo land. Like you rightly guided, Mr Speaker, public land is now under district land boards but even district land boards have gone ahead to allocate land and to give leases to people on land which is heavily settled. The whole of Lwabenge sub-county is almost public land but still the district land board has gone ahead to re-allocate land and to give leases to people. I was at one time almost caught up in the line of fire when the people tried to resist a person to whom a lease had been given. Therefore, as we try to look at the Mailo land, we should also look at public land because in Buganda, public land is our Akenda and it also the same as communal land. So, much as we talk about Mailo land, government must also look into the issue of public land. 

I also want to give another example where government set up a land fund but again, it is about 10 years down the road and the money for the land fund is nowhere to be seen. Where is the money for the land fund? We are supporting this Bill but we want to be assured by the honourable minister that even this law that we are trying to set up will not be put on the shelf. People want to be assured that we are serious about what we are doing as Government. We have had examples from which we can draw, so we want assurance that when this Land (Amendment) Bill is passed into law, it will work and it is going to help our people. Otherwise, our people are desperately waiting for this law to come up. 

I heard one of my colleagues say yesterday that we need time to go and consult. This Bill has been on for quite a long time - over two years - and we have been trying to consult. We consulted our constituents, we consulted nationwide and we are still consulting. Till when shall we go on with the consultations? 

Honourable colleagues, even those on the other side, I want to appeal to you to support this motion as it is for our own good. All of us are speaking for the poor of this country who cannot speak for themselves and who have been evicted from their Bibanja -(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. First of all, you have asked very pertinent questions. The land fund was not operationalised and the issue of the land tribunals remains in abeyance. Regarding the land policy, consultations are still ongoing and now we are hurrying with a Bill before the national land policy comes on. Those reservations are strong enough to make us put this Bill on hold but now you are saying, “Let us support, although I do not have the assurance”. Which side are you really on? 

MR MAWIYA: Thank you so much for that. Actually, it was not information but you just wanted to make your contribution. I think I have been clear. Much as I support this, I must get assurance from the minister because these laws have been in place but people have been evicted.

The last thing I want to mention is the issue of retrospective legislation. I know that we cannot legislate in that way, but the bigwigs of this country have evicted and chased our people from land left and right. What are we doing regarding this? Can’t we conclude that we are bringing this to cover those poor people who have evicted over the years? -(Member timed out_)

6.19
MR CHARLES OLENY OJOK (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am glad that today we received a call from your office which stated that all the committees of Parliament that had travelled upcountry were required here to debate this very important Bill. Of course as members of the Finance Committee, we were out in the field and I want to express -

THE SPEAKER: I think people were accusing you of escaping from this debate and I wanted to save you.

MR OLENY: Well, I didn’t get you properly, Mr Speaker, but allow me to give my apology -

THE SPEAKER: I am just explaining that people were accusing those going for committee work of escaping.

MR OLENY: Thank you very much. That goes to reinforce my point that it is good to be here on this occasion when we are debating this very important Bill.

When the Bill was tabled in this House, you adjourned the House and all of us went to carry out consultations with our constituents. I am one of those who widely carried out consultations in my constituency, Usuk. I want to put it on record that at that time, the most serious concerns of the people of Usuk and generally those in Teso were the provisions of the amendment under section 32 (b). They fundamentally and strongly recommended to this House that 32(b) be deleted. Therefore, I want to put it on record that since we learnt of the decision by the minister to delete 32(b), the people of Usuk took a stand and have since supported the other amendments. This was because of the fact that –(Interruption)- let me make my point. 

Honourable colleagues, what is very clear in our debate here is that we have not been very honest with ourselves. This is based on the fact that our honourable colleagues from Buganda also went and consulted. I have, with much sympathy, listened to comrades from the other side and some of them, I am sure, have not or did not consult in Buganda but there is a very strong voice coming out. I want to share with the members of this august House -(An honourable member rose)– I have only seven minutes. My constituents will even be annoyed with me if they learnt that I gave out my time, so kindly bear with me my honourable colleague.

The issue here is that I have listened to the passionate debate that has been ensuing from my honourable colleagues from the other side, some of whom I am very sure have not consulted in Buganda. If the members of –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am at pains to raise a point of order against my dearest colleague across the House. The member has repeatedly insisted that some of the members of this House did not consult and he was not helpful enough to mention those who did not consult and I felt unsafe. Is the honourable member, therefore, in order to generalise without substantiating those who did not actually consult when some of us consulted up to last evening? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ojok, are you speculating or you have some facts? (Laughter)

MR OLENY: I really want to re-state my point that I did say “some” and therefore I have not used a blanket statement to imply that the honourable colleagues on the other side -

THE SPEAKER: Do you suspect or do you know some who did not consult?

MR OLENY: Mr Speaker, I suspect. If I may continue; the reason why I made that point is that if the basis of the problem for this amendment was felt more in the central region and the honourable colleagues from this region went out and consulted and from the contributions made by the members, it is apparent that –(Interruption)

MR KAWUMA: With the honourable member admitting that he suspects some members did not consult their constituents and he is continuously insinuating that some members in this region may not have consulted, is he in order to continue insinuating based on a point of suspicion that members did not consult their constituents?

THE SPEAKER: Take it just as a suspicion other than anything more than that. Do not give it a lot of weight. (Laughter)  

MR OLENY: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg that you allow me to proceed and make my point. 

THE SPEAKER: Wind up. 

MR OLENY: May I now move on to the next issue that I wanted to mention. Mr Speaker, I also hope that you can compensate some of my time based on the several points of order that were raised by colleagues and which did not have much bearing on the issue. 

I think that since the basis of this amendment was to address a problem and this problem has been acknowledged to exist in this part of the country, it is only fair that the rest of the members should not blackmail their colleagues from the Buganda region but rather go ahead and support them on the basis of attempting to solve the problem. It is true that this may not fundamentally be the ultimate solution, but it is clear that an attempt is now being made to address this problem. 

Mr Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to distinguish between the title of the Land Act, Cap 227 and the amendment which is being proposed – (Member timed out_)  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have so far received 83 contributions; today I have received 28 but I had already identified some people here - hon. Okurut, hon. Katende, and I said that I would start with hon. Amuriat and hon. Kawuma on this side. I think this is the convenient time to adjourn because I want you to go and prepare if you have any kind of amendment to make because we should be able to conclude this debate tomorrow.  

A record of 83 is unprecedented; we have never had so many contributions on a small Bill for so long. Maybe we may even reach 100; it will depend on many issues. Since there will be Cabinet tomorrow, can we start at a 2.15 p.m. so that many Members make their contributions? We shall start the contributions in the order of the Members I have mentioned on either side. So, be on time.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You seem to suggest that there will be a sitting of the House tomorrow but I have seen in my pigeonhole an invitation for a whole day’s programme tomorrow. I do not know how we are going to draw the line between coming here and going for that function. 

THE SPEAKER: Which programme?  

MR AMURIAT: I think it is about domestic violence or something related to that, from the Speaker’s Office. So by your communication, are you indicating that we should not attend?

THE SPEAKER: That is a small one; it will be here in the Conference Hall. I do not think that it should interrupt us because this is a serious matter. Some of you will be here and others there. It is a half-day function. Let us honestly work on this and finish and then tackle other Bills like the Political Parties Bill et cetera. I thank you for the diligence you have shown. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had indicated to you and to the Leader of Government Business about a matter of national importance and we agreed with him that guidance will be given, that is on the oil shares.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Hilary Onek, my OB, would you like to come back because this directly affects you.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Yes, it is about the oil and the press reports that Heritage Oil is already selling shares to Eni of Italy. I thought that as Ugandans and Parliament we have the right to know from Government, rather than depending on press reports, how we as a country stand to benefit and how other people and other companies are already making a kill out of our resources without putting us on board. I thought that we need a clarification about it, Mr Speaker. 

THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Hilary Onek): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank hon. Ssekikubo for bringing up that very important issue, which is ongoing. I am actually prepared to make a statement on Thursday in Parliament. I have a write-up being prepared and I will come here on Thursday and give a presentation. However, I want to assure my colleagues that nobody will sell that oil without our authority as government. So, those are just speculations. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: With this we come to the end of today’s proceedings. The House is adjourned to tomorrow, 2.00 p.m., to continue with the debate. 

(The House rose at 6.33 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 25 November 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)

