Wednesday 22nd November, 2000

Parliament met at 2.58 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to Order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not have much to say, but I am sorry we started late. It is because of what happened. We lost a colleague and we were attending service at Rubaga, which took longer than expected, and that is why we had to delay.     

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last week I approached you about my statement from the Select Committee on Defence, and you promised that I would deliver it yesterday, but yesterday we were mourning our friend and colleague. This afternoon on the order paper it is not indicated. So I would like to know what the problem is. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are a very responsible member of a select committee, and I appreciate that. You came to me last week and you wanted to make a statement on the progress of the Select Committee on Defence, but because of what has happened, we were disturbed. Maybe we forgot to include you on the order paper, but I want inform Members that the chairperson of the Select Committee intends to make a statement on the progress of the work that they have been carrying out. We shall accommodate you very soon.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to be advised on a matter of public importance related to the motion which happens to appear as a resolution before us. When we last parted, the Minister read out a statement proposing new districts to be created. Immediately after that, the chairperson of the Committee, which discussed the matter separately, presented amendments. As if that was not enough, a substantive amendment from the Kyamuswa Member of Parliament was brought up. It was unilaterally dismissed. So, how do we progress? Why do you sanction one amendment and dismiss another?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In order to assist me understand your point, I would like to know which motion you are talking about.   

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, I am referring to the motion in front of us is in a form of a resolution on the creation of new districts.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What you should have done was to wait for the item to be called out, because as far as I am concern, I do not know which item you are talking about.  So, why don’t you wait? If the item is called out and you have a point to make, if it is necessary, then I will be able to assist you. Let us follow that procedure.

MR. AKIKA: Mr. Speaker, I am seeking guidance from your Chair on a procedural matter. Last week this House raised concern on the implementation of resolutions passed by this House. That time it was in respect to the Deployment of Defence Forces Bill. 

I remember sometime back hon. Egou moved a resolution here, which was adopted by Parliament, and this House, in its wisdom, gave the Minister of Finance/Government two weeks to report back to us. Hitherto, we do not seem to hear even rumours that Government will report back to this House and tell us what is happening to that resolution. I seek your guidance, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately I do not quite remember the nature of the resolution. So, I may not be in position to advise you immediately, but I will consult with my technical staff, that is the Clerk, to find out the details. Maybe tomorrow I will be able to tell you –(Mr.Lukyamuzi rose_)- Hon. Lukyamuzi, the problem is that this item is owned by the Minister for Local Government. Why don’t you give him the opportunity to say something first. Is it related to what is he is going to say?

MR.LUKYAMUZI:  It is.
 	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then why don’t you wait for him to say something.

THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr. Bidandi Ssali): Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. Given the sad events which have engulfed this House for the last two days, and given the fact that my resolution is very important, and given the fact that I know for certain that a number of our colleagues are travelling to Apac for obvious reasons, I would like to move that this item be postponed to Tuesday next week.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, now you have heard what the Minister has said and the circumstances that have prompted him to say so. It is a motion, and I want to put it to vote. Do you think there is need to speak to the motion? I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So the matter will be dealt with next week.

Hon. Members, before we proceed with the Presidential Elections Bill, I want to clearly appeal to you to make all efforts to attend business of the House so that we dispose of the pending and urgent business we have now. You have heard that we are being blamed for not passing the Presidential Elections Bill by now, when we are supposed to have elections between 12th February and 11th March, 2001. Therefore, we should expedite our business here, so that this matter is passed. 

As I told hon. Lukyamuzi last time, after we have finished with this Bill, we have to tackle the Political Organisations Bill, which is also very important. We have the Condominium Bill, and this is not politics at all but this is to do with the economy. The Condominium Bill has been pending for a very long time. We have the Land Act, which is holding up adjudication of disputes. This is urgent. There is the Local Government (Amendment) Bill, which is also urgent. 

Christmas is not very far and we have to have a Christmas recess. So, you see the importance of being present. And the public is looking at us, so we should do our work.  Therefore, I appeal to you, please come and we dispose of the work we have as soon as possible. This is the appeal that I am making to each of you, and I call upon each of you to mobilise a friend so that we continue with our business and we have our Christmas recess as scheduled.  Thank you.
BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS BILL, 2000
       
Clause 5 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I remember the last time we adjourned you had introduced a new clause 5.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr.Wandera Ogalo): Mr. Chairman, I had finished introducing it, and I think the Minister had commented on it. It was being debated

DR. OKULO EPAK: I had sought clarification on clause 5, to the effect that I wanted to be convinced that all the provisions there cater for the holding of a national delegates meeting. And I had said that if it were not the case, then I would move an amendment, which I would wish to move now. I beg to move that we add another paragraph, which would read, “may convene meeting of national delegates.”  I beg to move.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, I think this provision was brought in respect of a presidential aspirant. Does an individual own delegates’ conferences?

 DR. OKULO EPAK: Why not?

 THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: An individual!

 THE OKULO EPAK: Mr. Chairman, this Bill is not dealing only with this individual merit approach to elections.  This Bill, I presume, is now covering even elections that will be held under multiparty system. And for parties, if you want even an aspirant at that stage, you would normally want that person chosen properly to represent the party. I think the Constitution is clear about party candidates being sponsored. 

If this is to be a comprehensive Bill catering for elections under the movement system and elections under parties, then obviously such a provision will be necessary. Parties will not allow so-called aspirants roaming all over the place saying that they are presidential aspirants. One who aspires may have to organise, through the party system and mechanism, for delegates to come and choose out of interested persons.  

The other procedure parties normally use is primary elections, but I think that even when you do not have to hold a primary election, you could start off with the delegates meeting to endorse the aspirant. That aspirant is the one who will be endorsed by the Electoral Commission for a presidential candidate. I think the point is quite clear. I hope we are really talking about the same thing. I thank you.

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, when we were considering this, we did not envisage a situation which extends to delegates’ conferences. This was supposed to cater for the period for a presidential aspirant. So, if hon. Okulo Epak wishes to introduce it, he can do so, but it is not what we had in mind when we introduced this clause.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: I would like to question the practicality of the statement inserted by the Committee in the form of an amendment referred to as 5(1). It reads as follows: “An aspirant may consult in preparation for his or her nomination as a presidential candidate within twelve months before the nomination date.”  

If today, hardly six months before the presidential elections take place, the intending candidates cannot freely hold meetings in respective parts of Uganda - this is with reference to Brigadier Moses Ali’s recent statement - then what is the relevance of this statement?    If this statement cannot stand the test of time, why do you insert it there?

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, as we explained during general debate, this obviously cannot apply to the coming elections, because they are just four months or so from now. This is intended to cover future elections, because for these ones the 12 months will mean November next year. So, the essence of this, as we explained earlier, was to give, in the Minister’s words, some clout to an aspirant to go out and test the ground to find out whether he can actually stand for this office. So, hon. Lukyamuzi, this has nothing to do with the forth-coming elections.  

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Chairman, with due respect to the chairperson of the Committee, if this statement has no relevance to the coming election, and noting that our laws are not static, they can change from time to time, I move that this statement be deleted.

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Chairman, I presume I have a motion on the Floor, which we have not disposed of yet.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I know that, but as the chairman was responding to what you had suggested, another Member came in. I did not know what he was going to say so I had to give him an opportunity in order to find out what he wanted to say. Now even the Minister, I think, wants to make some comment on what you have said. 

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman, I am finding difficulty in even seeing the reason for the clause. I have said this before, I think Parliament should really desist from passing laws that add precious little or nothing to the Constitution provisions. Article 29 of our Constitution clearly states that every person shall have the right to freedom of speech and expression, freedom to assemble, and freedom of association! 

We now have a clause here which says that an aspirant may consult in preparation for his or her nomination. Now, my question is; who is stopping him or her under this Constitution! We have also got something here, which says that while consulting, the aspirant may carry out nation-wide consultation without holding public rallies. Now, outside Article 269, it might be found to be unconstitutional to say they may not hold public rallies as against Article 29 of the Constitution. 

Further down, you say that they may raise funds, and he or she may prepare his or her manifesto. Now, anyone can do all this under our Constitution now. Why do you want to add something, which is clearly not necessary? It does not give anybody any more powers or any more rights! If anything, it might be unconstitutional if you say that they may not hold rallies.  

So, Mr. Chairman, I appeal to the hon. chairman of the Committee not to add what is not really necessary. Let us even not appear to detract from the force of the Constitution as it is now.  

As to hon. Epak, delegates representing whom? He is saying representing a political party! Now, why should someone be an aspirant before he or she has consulted the party? Once he or she is an aspirant, it is assumed that he or she already knows her position vis-à-vis the party!

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Chairman, I presume the hon. Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is a party leader and he is aware of the workings of the parties. My basic requirement for this inclusion is that this law is now comprehensive and it will include all the elections under political parties. This is why an aspirant, of course on individual merit, who goes all over the place consulting individuals or groups, would not work in the case of parties. You just do not emerge from anywhere and say I am an aspirant and I am moving around consulting party members. 

Under normal circumstances, although it has not yet happened in this country, and I imagine it will happen now that we have presidential elections, parties have primary elections for presidency. All they are going to have to do is to choose the cheapest method of selecting from among interested parties. And I see the holding of national delegates conferences as the cheapest and most convenient. All those members of a political organisation who are aspiring – in fact in one party you may have more than one aspirant – would come together and one of them should be chosen to represent the party and present credentials to the Electoral Commission for nomination for presidential election. I can see this as the only option, unless this law is not covering elections under political parties. If not, then obviously my inclusion will be useless.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: My understanding of the contribution from the Minister is that as far as he is concerned, you have rights under Article 29. He asked why you could not utilise those provisions. If you have failed, why do you think you will succeed by a statutory provision? I think that is his question. It is a question of enforcement, because people have failed to enforce their rights under Article 29. So, if you have failed, why do you think you will succeed by a statute? That is my understanding of what he said.

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Chairman, I am sorry to have a dialogue with you. You see, the hon. Minister has responded to two situations. He responded to the generality of this amendment to clause 5 and whether it is necessary, and that comment was for the chairman of the Committee. His comments on mine were slightly different. Obviously, if the whole amendment on clause 5 is dropped, then mine also goes by the way side.  

MR.NYAI: Mr. Chairman, the clarification I am seeking is on the cover of this Bill. The title is ‘The Presidential Elections Bill, 2000’, and I believe therefore, that when this Bill becomes law, it will guide this nation in its presidential elections for a long time under both movement and parties. Unless the Minister is telling me and this House that this thing is only a temporary measure and Parliament will have to come back and make another legislation for presidential elections under parties. If it is supposed to be a long time document, I do not see anything wrong with including hon. Okulo Epak’s amendment, and it will only apply when it becomes relevant.

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, let me first deal with the Minister’s submission that the new clause 5 is not necessary because Article 29 of the Constitution already gives somebody a right to go out as an aspirant and make consultations. I want to repeat what I said earlier. Not-withstanding the provisions of Article 29, the Committee thought that the right, which had been granted in the Constitution, is eroded by the way we normally act. 

You gave an example, Mr. Chairman, that if somebody wanted to sensitise people about agriculture, would he need any law to go out to the countryside for that purpose? In that respect, definitely because he will not attract a lot of interest, nobody will bother about it. But in respect of a presidential aspirant, who would like to go out, if he does not have some clout, if he does not have some basis like this provision in the law, he will be curtailed by actions, normally of the state.  

I may give an example. Right now the Minister of Internal Affairs has issued a statement and said that the present aspirants cannot do certain things until they are nominated, so they would have to wait until nomination day before they can start their consultations. Now, the Committee thought that, since after nomination the aspirants have only 60 days, this is not enough for exposure for an aspirant. So, the Committee thought that we should give an aspirant clout by giving him enough time, one year in advance, to move around. I do not see any harm in putting it there. If the right is guaranteed by the Constitution, what harm is there in giving them clout and allowing the man or woman some legal basis on which he or she can stand?  

At the moment, Mr. Chairman, you are aware of the problems we are having. Aspirants are saying we are defying the ban by the Minister of Internal Affairs. Instructions have been given to the Police that they must act against the aspirants. The aspirants say they have got a right to go out. So, in order to reduce tensions and remove this potentially explosive situation - a conflict between a candidate and his supporters on one hand and the Police on the other - it is necessary to put in the law something that will be able to assist them.  

MR.NKANGI: If you are really so keen on this, I at least urge you to leave out 5(2)(a), because in there you say, “without holding public rallies.” If you put that in the law, I think you would be unconstitutional. If we passed a law saying this aspirant may not hold public rallies, this would be unconstitutional outside Article 269, because Article 269 allows people to assemble. So, if you want this amendment, at least leave out “without holding public rallies.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So you want to delete “without holding public rallies.”  Let us dispose of this.

MR.ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Whereas I appreciate the Minister’s suggestion, and I am really in for it, I am puzzled. Yesterday I met the Minister of Internal Affairs in the corridors here, and I challenged him on the issue of his directive. He said, ‘I am working within the law. All I am doing is stopping these people from holding rallies, but they can make consultations.’ He said he was working within the law. Now the Minister of Justice is telling us that this is actually contrary to the provisions of the Constitution. So now, was the Minister of Internal Affairs’ directive the Cabinet position or his personal position? 

I am being told it is a different matter. It is not at all a different matter, and the country is concerned.  People are being stopped from going around for consultations, and we are told rallies cannot be held before they are nominated. Now we want to put something here, and I wanted to move an amendment to (a) without removing the whole clause, if only this position is clarified. Can the Minister of Justice tell us whether he is in consonance with the Minister of Internal Affairs on this matter?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ongom, I think the Minister is saying that if you delete “without holding public rallies”, and the holding of public rallies is guaranteed by the Constitution, then go ahead. I think he doubts whether it is constitutional to say so, but he does not say you will not hold rallies. So, if you leave it in the law, then a person carrying out consultations will not be able to hold public rallies, because the law says do not hold public rallies. I think he is saying that under the Constitution it is legitimate, you can hold a public rally. That is why he is making it wider instead of it being narrow, because the present formulation narrows it, but with his suggestion it is wider.

MRS.SALAAMU MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I would like the hon. Minister to simplify issues. Maybe it is the English that I do not understand, but I would like to keep the issue in simple terms, so that we all understand. I do appreciate his proposal that we delete “without holding public rallies” so that it conforms to the Constitution, but the Constitution is still operational today and his own colleague has declared that holding such rallies is illegal! So, in the same vein, it is unconstitutional! So, has he not advised hon. Moses Ali that what he is doing is illegal, because you are mixing us up, hon. Minister? Thank you -(An hon. Member rose_)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We are going to get confused because the first clarification sought is not cleared. Maybe if he clears hers, then you may not need to seek your own clarification.

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I will concede to the proposal by the Minister to delete 2(a).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: And then how about hon. Okulo-Epak’s proposal?

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I think hon. Okulo Epak’s suggestion would best be dealt with by the Minister, because this is a matter which we had not yet considered. Since it is a new matter being brought to the Bill, I would rather the Minister handles it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Why don’t we vote then we come to his suggestion and see whether it will be supported or not. We vote on the emoluments and then we come to his, so that we progress, because we are not progressing! Now, hon. Members, the Committee is introducing a new clause 5, that is after clause 4, and the details have been given. I will now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, there is an amendment by hon. Okulo Epak to improve on clause 5 by inserting the other provision, which he mentioned.

CAPT.MUKULA: Mr. Chairman, the amendment, which is being moved by hon. Okulo Epak, is not yet very clear to the Members in the House. I would be very glad if you could revisit it for purpose of clarity before we proceed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Okulo Epak is suggesting that we add another provision in that new clause 5 to read as follows: “an aspirant may convene meetings of national delegates”. That is his amendment.

MR.NYAI: Mr. Chairman, I would like to seek the following clarification, so that maybe between hon. Okulo Epak and I, we might agree. In light of carrying out nation-wide consultations, would that include delegates’ conferences? If it does, then I would withdraw.

DR.OKULO EPAK: Mr. Chairman, when I moved this amendment I started by asking for clarification as to whether all the provisions here would cater for consultations through the use of delegates. And I was wondering whether the provision (a), on carrying out nation-wide consultations, would accommodate it, but I do not think it does. There is no provision here which caters for a presidential aspirant or aspirants of a party to call delegates and consult in one venue. 

What is in here means that everybody moves all over the place and does independent consultations, and at the end of it, they are satisfied or they have made contacts in the field. I am saying this concept works perfectly well with individual merit system. And since this law is now comprehensive and is catering for elections that will take place even under political parties, it is essential that a mechanism for parties to arrive at a singular candidate, whose nomination will be presented to the Electoral Commission, must be provided for. Individual consultations would not cater for this, and that is why I am suggesting that the aspirant, through the party, can hold a meeting of national delegates at which a firm decision is made on an individual aspirant to send for nomination. The alternative, I said, was that parties would be obliged to hold primary elections –(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, I do not know, but hon. Member, I think you are talking about a situation where we have a multi-party system. And if we have a multi-party system, maybe the delegates’ conference will be a structure in the multi-party system, which will therefore exist. And you have said that an aspirant can consult nation-wide, so he may consult within this existing structure, so why then do you provide for it?

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Chairman, I have asked a very simple question, is this Bill catering for the elections under the Movement system only? I have asked a very simple question. If I were told that it is catering for all the elections under the Movement system only, my amendment would be irrelevant. But I thought it is now going to cover all modes of elections.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It will be a law that will be in our statute books to cater for situations that they will arise. If there is need to amend it, it will be amended, but it is a law that is going to run until maybe it is repealed. It is not an interim law.

DR. OKULO EPAK: In that case, we better make a provision which caters for all other methods of elections too.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, this clause says that an aspirant may consult; consult whom? He does not consult one person. It says he may consult nation-wide. It can be to consult one person or to consult 20 people at a time. So, I do not see the real problem here. If you are going to burden a law with all the details, I think it is really going to be bad draftsmanship.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, I will now put the question. You are now aware of the amendment by hon. Okulo Epak

(Question put and agreed to)

MR.RWAKOOJO: Mr. Chairman, clause 5(1) says that an aspirant may consult in preparation for his or her nomination as a presidential candidate within 12 months before the nomination date. I only say that I do not see the relevance of the 12 months. Can’t we delete it and remain silent on it, so that a candidate is able to consult even if it is for a year or two years, whatever period he feels he is comfortable with. Ssebagala has been doing it, everybody has been doing it, and I do not see why we should keep it here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, there is an amendment that we delete the 12 months. I will now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MRS.SALAAMU MUSUMBA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to move an amendment to clause 5(3). While consulting, the aspirant shall introduce himself or herself to the Electoral Commission and notify the relevant local council, instead of village council. I presume this will take care of the municipalities, the cities and other towns. It will include everybody. So, I would like to substitute “village” with “local”.  Thank you.

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I have no objection.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I am still seeking clarification from the Minister. If I do not get it then I will move an amendment. 5(1) reads as follows: “An aspirant may consult in preparation for his or her nomination as a presidential candidate within twelve months before the nomination date”. 

12 months is too long. This can de-stabilise a system. So, I would like to get clarification from the Minister, because 12 months is too long.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: First of all, the amendment was not brought by the Minister, it was by the Committee. Secondly, there was somebody who moved to delete 12 months and just leave it open and we have already pronounced ourselves on that. 

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to

Clause 6

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now we go to the original clause 5, because this was the new one. We go to clause 5 in the Bill, which will of course become clause 6. I will put the question.

(Question on put and agreed to)

Clause 6, agreed to

Clause 7

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Chairman, clause 7(1)(b) reads as follows:“(1) Every candidate, election officer, clerk, candidate's agent or other person in attendance at a polling station during the counting of the votes shall maintain and aid in maintaining the secrecy of the voting, and no candidate, officer, clerk, candidate's agent or other person shall –
(b) at the counting of the votes, attempt to ascertain the number on the counterfoil of any ballot paper.”  

Supposing my agent doubts a ballot paper’s authenticity and would like to verify at the polling station that it is a valid ballot paper by checking the counterfoil? This provision prevents him from doing so, and I do not see any secret that is now being maintained here. So, I am seeking clarification as to whether this provision should really be retained. Alternatively, if it is not working to the advantage of a polling agent, then we could delete it. I am seeking that clarification; why was it necessary?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, what is the policy behind that provision?

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: I really think, Sir, it is a policy to enforce orderliness at the counting, because you can see hands moving backwards and forwards to look at the register. But I can also understand the sort of fears of hon. Okulo Epak. So, maybe we could give the agents the right to ask the polling officer to show him or her the number.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But this is the same thing, because what is he ascertaining? Ascertaining involves saying, ‘I see this number here, can I look at the corresponding number?’ If you say you cannot do so, what are you hiding? I think that is the question. 

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that paragraph (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause (7) of the original Bill be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, in sub-clause (3), I propose to delete the word “the” appearing between the words “of” and “that” in that clause. The justification for this is that it is redundant.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR.OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I propose, in sub-clause (5), to replace the word “eighty”, appearing in the third line, with the word “ten”. And also, to replace the words “two years” appearing in the forth line, with the words “three months”. The justification is to reduce the discretion of court to impose such high penalties for minor offences.  I beg to move. 

(Question put and agreed to)

MR.OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I propose that in sub-clause (6) we insert the word “confidential” before the word “matter” at the beginning of the third line. The justification is that the restriction should be only confidential information and not any other information.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to

Clause 8

MR.OGALO: Mr. Chairman, in clause 8(2), I propose that we replace the words “such as”, appearing at the end of the second and the beginning of the third line respectively, with the word “including”. This is to cater for circumstances where open places are used for the purpose.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to

Clause 9

MR.OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that in clause 9 (1) we replace paragraph (b) with the following: “(b) the nomination is supported by one hundred voters in each of at least two-thirds of all the districts in Uganda” 

In sub-clause (3), we delete the phrase beginning with the words “in the presence…” appearing in the fourth line and ending with the words “…for the purpose” in the sixth line. Also add the following at the end of the sub-clause: “which voter registration number shall be verified by the Commission”. 

I also move that sub-clause (4) be deleted.  

The justification is that the Constitution requires one hundred voters, and the law should stick to that. This is also intended to avoid importing people from other districts to support nomination of candidates. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR.OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I propose that paragraph (b) of sub-clause (7) be deleted. The justification is that the declaration of assets is already dealt with under the Leadership Code. The Leadership Code deals with the leaders and not candidates. 

I further propose that paragraph (c) be substituted as follows: “a deposit of one hundred currency points payable to the commission in cash or bank draft; and”. 

The justification is that the people should not be discouraged from standing for office. And capability to manage public affairs should not be pegged to wealth. I beg to move.

DR. OKULO EPAK: I have another amendment, which differs with that of the Committee. I move that paragraph (c), requiring payment of fees, be deleted altogether. 

In my view, this provision is introducing an additional qualification for presidential candidates outside what is already provided for by the Constitution. In order to be a presidential candidate, you must pay a fee. It is a qualification, because if you do not have it, you are disqualified. I do not know whether at this stage we are introducing more qualifications than what is in the Constitution.

Secondly, it is a restriction, which contravenes the constitutional right of any citizen above 18 years to contest for any position of leadership. I think it is a restriction on that right.

Thirdly, the need and objective for this imposition is not clear. If it is intended to stop crooks, then it is useless, because crooks are crooks and they are able to circumvent any barriers. Indeed, it makes this requirement look like it is being imposed in bad faith. I am saying that even if you made it 10/= million and there is a crook who wants to access 30/= million from the Electoral Commission, he will borrow that 10/= million, access the 30/= million, and pay back the 10/= million as soon as he has got it. So, I do not see the import of this imposition.

Fourthly, offering one’s candidature in participating in the electoral process is already a highly demanding civil responsibility. A candidate will sacrifice a lot of his or her resources to serve the population and the country, with the risk of losing the election. I think that should be enough. It should be enough that you are offering your services and sacrificing your time and your resources for that purpose, even at the risk of losing altogether. So, this fee is really not adding any value.

The hardship and the requirement to present one hundred nominations per district from two-thirds of all districts, and if they increase to 50 or 100 in future, is already hard enough to ward off many crooks. I think this desire to present 100 supporters from two-thirds of the districts is sufficiently hard to make any crook not go through. 

Let me remind you that when I was contesting during the Constituent Assembly elections, somebody who wanted to contest with me failed to even realise 12 nominations from the entire constituency. So, these are 100, but for two-thirds from the districts, it is strong enough. What is this 2/= million or 8/= million for? I think we should delete this and treat elections and offering one’s candidature for elections as an honourable and respectable effort on the part of a citizen to serve the others, rather than look at it as if something should be punishable.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the Bill was providing for a deposit of 8/= million and the Committee has come down to 2/= million. The amendment is that there is no need to deposit, anybody just walks in with his qualifications.  I want you to understand these amendments. So, we have three provisions. The one in the Bill is saying 8/= million, the one by the Committee is saying 2/= million, and the one by hon. Epak says nothing should be charged. 

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, I am not a lawyer, but I am an informed Member of Parliament. I hope the qualifications being referred to by hon. Okulo Epak are not those in Article 102 of the Constitution, which reads as follows:
“A person is not qualified for election as President unless that person is – 
(a) a citizen of Uganda by birth; 
(b) not less than thirty-five years and not more than seventy-five years of age; and
(c) a person qualified to be a member of Parliament.” 

So, unless somebody is not qualified or unless those are present. There is also a provision, which says that subject to the provisions of the Constitution, Parliament shall by law prescribe a procedure for election under assumption of office by the President. 

In my view, these are expressed in negativity. They do not exclude the possibility of Parliament putting qualifications. These are only saying that if you are not a Ugandan do not stand, but Parliament can put up other qualifications under the prescription of the procedure for the election of a President. Why don’t you want a presidential candidate to contribute to what the state is going to provide to him? 

MR.SEMBAJJA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to move for a compromised position between 400 currency points and 100, by proposing that we put it at 250 currency points, that is 5/= million.  That is a compromised position, Sir.

MR.NYAI: Mr. Chairman, I seek your indulgence here. I would like hon. colleagues to seriously regard hon. Okulo Epak’s motion. Besides everything being said, the issue of hon. Bidandi Ssali asking why a presidential candidate should not contribute to the national coffers, is like an ostrich hiding its head in the sand. Because, after you have given whatever currency points you are talking about, the state is going to spend on this candidate so much more money. So, what are we talking about?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, let us vote. The first motion is on the deletion of any requirement to pay a deposit and that is the motion by hon. Okulo Epak. I now put the question to that motion.

(Question put and negatived)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, it seems that the view is that some deposit has to be made by the candidate. Now the issue is on the figure. In the Bill we have eight million. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now that has been disposed off, but there were other amendments that were brought by the Committee.  I would like to put the question to those amendments, which were read out by the chairperson. You see, when hon. Okulo Epak came up to move his amendment, the chairperson had read a number of amendments to that Article, but we did not put the question because there was an interruption. Can you repeat?

MR.WANDERA OGALO: The amendments I proposed to clause 9 and read out earlier are: 
In sub-clause (1), replace paragraph (b) with the following: “the nomination is supported by one hundred voters in each of at least two-thirds of all the districts in Uganda.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR.WANDERA OGALO: The other was to delete, in sub-clause (3), the phrase beginning with the words “in the presence…” appearing in the forth line, and ending with the words “…for the purpose” in the sixth line. And also add the following at the end of the sub-clause: “which voter registration number shall be verified by the Commission.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR.WANDERA OGALO: And lastly, sub-clause (4) of clause 9 be deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There was a deletion on declaring assets under the Leadership Code and he did not read it.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: He did not read it, so I do not know whether we will leave it there or not.

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Thank you, Mr.Chairman. That is in sub-clause (7).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We had already dealt with that?

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Yes. We had dealt with that.

Clause 10, agreed to

Clause 11

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that clause 11 be substituted as follows: 
“(a) The deposit payable under section 9 shall be received by the Commission, which shall issue a general receipt in respect thereof.” 

This is the eight million, which we have just passed. It shall be received by the Commission, which shall issue a general receipt. 

“(b) a candidate who obtains twenty percent or more of the votes cast shall have his or her deposit refunded.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, let us start with the first one, which says that when you pay the money, you get a receipt. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Secondly, he is saying that if you get a particular percentage of the votes, the refund is given to you, but if you fail, you lose a deposit. That is to say he has lost his deposit. I now put the question to the amendment.  

(Question put and negatived)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to

Clause 12, agreed to

Clause 13, agreed to

Clause 14

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that in clause 14 (1), we replace the expression “as soon as practicable” appearing in the first line, with the expression “within fourteen days”. The justification is for certainty. The Commission should not be allowed to create uncertainty as to when the polling day will be.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that sub-clause (2) be replaced as follows: “The polling day appointed under sub-section (1) shall, subject to the Constitution, be not later than ninety days after nomination day except for the elections to be held in the year 2001 where the polling day shall not be later than sixty days.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to

Clause 15

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that clause 15 be amended by inserting a new sub-clause (3) to read as follows:“A candidate who withdraws his or her nomination under sub-section (1) within thirty days of his or her nomination shall account for the money used within that period and refund the balance if any of the funds received under section 20.” 

The justification in this is that the money used is public funds. It has been advanced to you, and therefore it should be accounted for.  

MR.ERESU: I would like to move an amendment to the effect that a candidate who withdraws his or her nomination under sub-section (1), within 30 days of his or her nomination shall refund the monies advanced to him for the electoral purposes.

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I just want to give some information here on that. If you withdraw that money which has been advanced to you after 30 days, you would have spent some on the election. So, if you are saying that having used it on the elections you still refund it, it does not rhyme. 

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to inform the chairman that going by the behaviour of some of the likely candidates, both today and in the future, you will get 100 percent accountability of all the money you gave out within those 30 days. So, it is no use providing something only to enable somebody to look around and present facts. If you were serious and you wanted to stand, you would go and collect the money. You have run around the country, collected all the names required, put the whole country on alert, and after 30 days you step down, then you must refund the whole amount - (Laughter) 

MR.WAMBEDE: Mr. Speaker, anyone pushing the line of refunding all the monies will be having a number of assumptions. Supposing, in my canvassing, I get an accident, which cannot allow me to continue and somehow I withdraw my candidature, should I be made to refund all the monies, when actually I have genuinely had an accident? It would be extremely unfair! Let me urge Members to go along with the recommendation as put forward by the Committee. Thank you.

MRS.ABU WONOTIYA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think it is wrong for us to legislate for accidents. If accidents do occur, they will be reported and they will be treated likewise, but it is wrong for us to anticipate accidents and therefore legislate for them.

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I support the amendment of the Committee. In the process of canvassing, there could be a situation where one may wish to make a compromise and one may wish to withdraw, we should provide for a situation where accountability should be emphasised, rather than a punitive measure of refunding all.  I thank you.

MR.PAJOBO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think it is not good for us to make a law that is so difficult for others to follow. We need to reflect upon it. It should be flexible, because I may decide to stand and then when I reach a certain level, I say no and I decide to withdraw - (Interjections) - Mr. Chairman, I need your protection.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You are protected. Please allow him to contribute.

MR.PAJOBO: Mr. Chairman, I think there are some reasons.  There are so many reasons for which one may decide to step down. As my Friend has said, one may get an accident. You cannot say we cannot legislate for accidents, because they are there. Somehow you may get defeated, but that is different, you may accept that in good faith. So, I think refunding all the money is not fair. Thank you.

MR.LOKERIS: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. When a venture is started there must be some expense you incur to prepare yourself for that venture, and those will be costs.  The money goes, but you do not know how it has gone. That is how to start any business, and this is ‘self-business'.  When you are serious and you want to come up, you should prepare monies of your own. You do not have to masquerade when you are pauper and say you are beginning this so they must give you money. Actually, there are people whom I have even heard say that they are tendering their candidature and the moment they get the money, they will withdraw. These are the type of people we must guard against, who want to squander public funds.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The amendment by the Committee was dealing with accounting for the money if you withdraw. The other amendment was that you refund the money. I think we shall start with the refunding. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to

Clause 16, agreed to

Clause 17, agreed to

Clause 18

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose to replace the word “eighty” appearing in the second line, with the word “twenty”. And also, replace the words “two years” appearing in the last line, with the words “six months”.  The justification is for the same reasons we gave in clause 7.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MS. KABAKUMBA MASIKO: There is a section we deleted, if I was following properly, on declaration of assets and liabilities on page 16. That was clause 9 (b), but in clause (18) it is coming up as (b) as a ground for false declaration. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I see. I think it is consequential now, because if the foundation was clause 9, and the foundation was buried, then the other one cannot come up. So it is a consequential amendment. Maybe we should deal with it. A further amendment is that we delete that particular provision. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to

Clause 19

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that we amend sub-clause (1) of clause 19 by inserting between the words “place” and “and” appearing in the third line, the following expression: “giving at least one day in each district”.  

The justification is to allow candidates adequate time for campaigns throughout the districts.

(Question put and agreed to)

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Chairman, I would like to move that we delete sub-clauses (7) up to (16), which are providing for joint candidates’ meetings - (Interjections)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, excuse me, hon. Members, I must apologise on behalf of the Member. You did not get his notice, because I have just received this from the clerk.  He was also busy with other things. He was not able to give you copies, but he duly gave the notice. Please proceed to justify your amendment.

DR. OKULO EPAK: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was considering the possibility of holding joint candidates’ meetings in a situation where candidates are barely going to have one day per district. In this election there will be about 60 days, and there are about 50 districts. It is very difficult to conceive a situation where candidates are going to have spare days. They are going to need all their days up to the last second. So, I think we are imposing on them unnecessary confrontation.  

I also think that holding a joint candidates’ meeting will involve unnecessary organisational and financial problems for the Electoral Commission. Why should the Electoral Commission spend this useful money organising joint candidates’ meetings? This money could have been usefully spent on civic education. 

I also think that as the number of candidates gets larger in our elections, over four for instance, it is simply not feasible to get all the four candidates to agree to a joint candidates meeting, because they will have drawn up their programmes independently. To try to bring them for a joint programme, I think, involves another organisational problem for the Electoral Commission for nothing.

I also think that people want to make judgement on demeanours. The anticipated value of joint candidates meetings will benefit only one or two venues. So, the majority of the voters will never benefit from such joint candidates meeting. If you want their demeanour to be seen, they should talk, they should be asked questions, but it will be taking place in Kampala and nobody in Karamoja will see this. So, what is the value of these so-called joint candidates meetings to the majority of voters?  

In any case, as election campaigns proceed, agents of the candidates meet regularly with the Electoral Commission.  If it should become necessary or if they wish to hold a joint candidates meeting on their own, I think it should be possible to arrange that administratively rather than to put it in a law. Those are my submissions, Mr. Chairman. I thank you.

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I would have no objection to that amendment.

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, if you read sub clause (7), it says “where candidates agree to hold…” This is permissive. Candidates may find that in a particular area they have reason to be together. So, we are saying, if they do, then this should apply. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, they are saying, do you have to arrange for their agreement? If they agreed, then they will arrange for themselves. So, I put the question to the amendment by hon. Okulo Epak to delete sub-clauses (7) to (16).

(Question put and agreed to)

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In clause 19 (3), I would like to propose that on the first line the expression "is" be deleted and an apostrophe be put before “s”.  I beg to move

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to

Clause 20

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, in view of the deletion of sub-clauses (7) to (16) of clause 19, I have no amendments to clause 20(1). Therefore, I will move to sub clause (5), and I propose that it should be replaced with the following: “For the purposes of sub section (4), the Government shall lay before Parliament the necessary information as to the prohibited foreign governments, institutions, bodies or persons, at least three months before nomination day.”  

The justification is that the Electoral Commission is not competent to do this, and that is why we are leaving it to the Government and Parliament.

(Question put and agreed to)

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Chairman, I had an amendment to sub- clause (1). I thought it needed reformulation, particularly since we have removed the amendment that the Committee was bringing. I would like to reformulate sub- clause (1) as follows: “The Commission shall ensure that the relevant organs of the state provide, during the entire campaign period -
 (a) protection for each candidate
(b) Adequate security at all meetings of candidates”  
I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The formulation in the Bill was the Commission, but I think he is saying that the Commission does not have the security. It gets security from other organs like the police. The clause actually says, "The commission shall ensure adequate security for the protection of each candidate". He has changed this with the formulation he has suggested.

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Chairman there is a very slight difference. I reformulated this particular provision because it now caters for security of a candidate only.  But at meetings, security of all the citizens attending meetings is not clearly provided for. So, this provision should cater not just for a candidate throughout the campaign period, but also citizens at meetings. I was just splitting it into two so that everybody is accommodated.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to his amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to)

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that in sub clause (6) we delete the words "or solicited" appearing in the second line. The justification is that this section deals with money already obtained. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that sub- clause (8) be deleted. The justification is that the Commission should be able to make such demands if not satisfied with the final return made.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose to insert a new sub-clause to read as follows:“In order to comply with clause 20(6) and (7) a candidate shall give the Commission his or her “Campaign Budget” not later than 7 days after nomination.”  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can you explain please?

MR.OGALO: Mr. Chairman, first of all, let us read 20(6), which says:
“Every candidate shall maintain a record of all assistance obtained under this section” 

And then 20(7) reads as follows: 
“Each candidate shall, within thirty days after the election –
(a) account to the Commission for the facilitation given to him or her under subsection (2);
(b) submit a return to the Commission disclosing all assistance obtained by the candidate from any source.”

The sub-clause to be introduced requires that the candidate prepares a budget and submits it to the Commission based on what he has received.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The entire budget? Because, is the Commission going to fund the entire budget?

MR. OGALO: No, not the money given by the Commission, but what he is going to spend.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I oppose that amendment because it imposes restrictions and it is also an unnecessary burden on the candidates. In my view, the accountability that will eventually be given to the Commission will suffice, because it will include both funds given by the Commission and funds solicited by the candidate. So, I oppose this provision.  

MR.RWAKOOJO: Mr. Chairman, the only interest in this for the Commission is the amount of money they are going to contribute to the candidate. Whatever other expenses the candidate is willing to incur are irrelevant, and no body is interested, because we are not going to meet him half way or quarter way. The money is just going to be determined and given to him, whether it covers the entire budget or it does not. So, I think it is irrelevant.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and negatived)

MR.OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that sub-clause (9)(b) be deleted, and the figure (8) also be deleted from 9(c). This is a consequential amendment from sub-clause (8).  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

MS. KABAKUMBA: In sub-clause (5), the chairperson’s amendment indicated that the papers should be brought to Parliament three months before the nomination. Mr. Chairman, I beg to be clarified. If that is the position, then it means it cannot apply in the coming presidential elections, since we do not have the three months to the nomination day.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, it even does not mean that such information must be there, because it may not exist.  This provision is only supposing that in case there is such a situation, but it does not always have to be there. There will be no list. So, I put the question that clause 20 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 21

MR.OGALO: I propose that in clause 21(2), we delete the word “ordinarily” appearing in the last line, and insert a new sub-clause (3) to read as follows:

“For the purposes of sub-section (2), the Minister in charge of Public Service shall lay before Parliament those Government facilities which are attached to and utilised by the President.” The justification is that the facilities being used should be known.  I beg to move.

 THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR.OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that in sub-clause (6), we replace the word “may” appearing in the second line, with the word, “shall”, and we delete the word, “ordinarily” appearing in the third line. This is to ensure that the Commission is compelled to get information from the candidates to provide a level field for all candidates, and also for certainty. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to

Clause 22

MR.OGALO: In clause 22 (1), Mr. Chairman, I propose that we delete the expression “as far as possible”. The justification is that there should be no excuses for discrimination against candidates.  I beg to move.

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, I think we should avoid trying to be too exact in administrative matters.  Supposing the Electoral Commission gave candidate ‘A’ a Pajero and candidate ‘B’ a Land-rover, possibly with the same c.c., would you call that discrimination? Would you call that equal treatment? This is why the expression “as far as possible” should remain.

MR.NYAI: Mr. Chairman, whereas I would like to agree with the Minister’s explanation, there is also another possible opening for the Electoral Commission officers to say it was not possible. 

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: Sir, this Bill makes it mandatory for the Electoral Commission to provide these facilities.  So, they cannot simply say it was not possible. There should be something about it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is there a penalty imposed for not complying with clause 22, even if you delete “as far as possible”?

MR.OGALO: Mr. Chairman, there is no penalty specifically in clause 22(1), although there is a general penalty at the end of the Bill. But let us read this clause. It reads: 

“During the campaign period, every public officer and public authority and public institution shall, as far as possible, give equal treatment to all candidates and their agents”.  
Now, if you remove what we proposed to remove, it will read as follows: 

“During the campaign period, every public officer and public authority and institution shall give equal treatment to all candidates and their agents”.  

The principle here is just equality. It is to treat all fairly. If you remove it, then you are giving the discretion to the officer concerned to determine what to give to the candidates, and in that way it can be abused.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In fact, you are handing him an excuse for not having done this and the other.  

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I support the chairperson in the deletion, so as not to give it ambiguity. “As far as possible” can be abused, whereas what is provided in the amendment is quite explicit and it carries the principle.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. The Minister gave his explanation and the chairman and other Members have contributed to the proposed amendment. The Committee is saying we remove “as far as possible” and we leave it at that. It does not mean that if there is a genuine excuse, things cannot be done differently. So, I put the question 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to

Clause 23

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose to amend clause 23 by deleting sub-section (2) and substituting sub-section (1) as follows: “All presidential candidates shall be given equal time, space and access on the state owned media to present their programmes to the people.”  

The justification for this is merely that sub-clause (2) and (1) are similar and have now been merged to make it clear and to ensure fairness. I beg to move.

LT. COL MUDOOLA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. When you say, "shall give equal time", does it mean that they will not pay for that airtime? Should it be free or should we say that they should allow them equal time?  Even state owned media have got to use this means - (Interjection)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In the original Bill, clause 23 (1) says:  "No candidate in an election shall be denied reasonable access to and use of, State-owned communication media". 

Access may be denied depending on the conditions you have found there. So, if there is need for a fee, I think you pay it.

LT. COL MUDOOLA: Mr. Chairman, if you say “shall give”, it means that there will be no fee charged.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Access to a facility is there, it is open to anybody who fulfils the conditions. That is access.  So, if there is a fee, you pay it. Unless you want to say that it is free and then we shall put it there. You can move an amendment if you want.

MR.NYAI: Mr. Chairman, let us say that there are three candidates and the Commission says that UTV will give each candidate one hour per day, and one of the three candidates goes to UTV and says I want to buy another two hours of airtime. He will now have three hours while the others have one hour each. How would that square with this proposal by the chairman? I would like that explanation.

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, if the decision has been taken that all the three candidates are entitled to one hour, that is equal to all the three of you. If you are going to go back and you want to pay for more time, whether you do it on UTV or on Capital, that is up to you. What is important is that all of you have been allowed equal time.

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, before I take a position, I still want clarification from the chairman. By giving equal time, are we saying that each candidate will have thirty minutes free? Or you are saying that even if it is paid for, if I am willing to pay for one hour and the other one is willing to pay for only thirty minutes, I am forced to pay for thirty minutes because it must be the same time given to the candidate? I just want clarification on that. Is it free or paid for?

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, these services are not free. These institutions are run commercially. It is not that you go and say that now all the three candidates are entitled to free airtime.

LT. COL MUDOOLA: Mr. Chairman, I would amend that sub-clause to say, “all presidential candidates shall be allowed equal time.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But hon. Member, if there is payment to be made and you use the word ‘access’, suppose I do not have the money? If one has the money and the other does not have the money, what will happen?

LT. COL MUDOOLA: Mr. Chairman, if we say "allowed equal time", it implies that you will have to pay for that time, whereas if you say ‘given’, it means I do not have to pay for that time. You are giving it free.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, move the amendment. Say what you want to so that we can decide on that.

LT. COL MUDOOLA: Yes. My amendment says “all presidential candidates shall be allowed equal time, space and access on the State-owned media to present their programmes to the people.” So instead of "given" I want to say “allowed”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, you are abandoning "given" because you say that is free. Do you want it to be free or you want them to be allowed?

MAJ.BUTIME: Mr. Chairman, this means that the State would have to pay for airtime for these presidential candidates. That is what this one means. But from the experience I have, each presidential candidate should buy airtime and he can go to UTV, CTV, and STV on his own. Therefore, this one should be removed.  Thank you.

MR.MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, Government will not have the money to pay for all the candidates. Therefore, each of them will have to pay for themselves. Since we have 23 (1), which says, “no candidate in an election shall be denied reasonable access to and use of, state-owned communication media", I do not think we need (2). 

Sub-clause (2) should be deleted, because if I have my money and I want to pay for one hour, you cannot say I must also wait for someone who has no money who wants to pay for ten minutes. After all, this is a campaign and I am trying to appeal to as many people as possible, but I can only be limited by my resources. So, I want to propose that (2) actually be deleted and we give them reasonable access to the media with equal opportunities.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I am getting confused here. Now we have another amendment.

MR.OGALO: What the hon. Manzi is saying is that we delete (2), and that is exactly what the Committee is saying.  The Committee has said that clause 23 is amended by deleting sub-section (2).  That is the position.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, but the problem is that the House does not know whether this is going to be free. When you say equal treatment or equal time is it going to be free or will a fee be paid? If a fee is going to be paid, and you say equal time, supposing I do not have the money and the other one has?

MR.OGALO: Agreed, Mr. Chairman. So, what we are doing is to delete (2) and re-formulate (1).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, may be we start with the deletion of (2) and then we see what to do with (1).

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: While we are re-formulating, let us be aware of the inherent danger brought out by hon. Manzi. If we leave it without any limitation, you will come as a presidential candidate to buy airtime on Friday or Saturday, and through one method or the other, you will be informed that it is alright, but all these ten hours have been paid for by X or Y.  One candidate can pay for a whole week, and they will say they have not denied you, but they are sorry. So, do not underrate the principle of equity as far as airtime is concerned, but at the same time it should not be free.

MR.MWANDHA: I would like to support what the hon. Minister has just said. It is important for us to protect the candidates and given them the same opportunities. It should be not so much the same time, but the opportunities to access the mass media without any hindrance or any manipulation by anybody refusing to allow a candidate to airtime on a popular media.  Therefore, I would like to say that instead of time, we give them equal opportunity.

CAPT.MUKULA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to move an amendment on (1). In order to cure the lacuna that is in (1), I would like to move an amendment to say, “no presidential candidate shall be denied time, space or access to state owned media.”  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But would it not depend on availability of airtime, because as we have said, somebody may have already booked the airtime? Let us first exhaust the other.

CAPT.MUKULA: Mr. Chairman, I think what we are trying to look at here is protection, and to ensure that presidential candidates are given the opportunity to access on the state-owned media. The point that has already been raised is that, if they have to pay for it, and they should pay for it, and if time is available, they should not be denied. That is why we are putting it here to cure the uncertainty in the first insertion by the Committee and by inserting another. This amendment will cure the lacuna, which had existed in the first insertion. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, hon. Members, a personal problem has come up and I have to adjourn. The Minister in charge of the Bill has got an urgent appointment, which he has to honour now. So, since he is going, and I have allowed him to, maybe we should stay over this particular issue. Tomorrow when we come, something useful should have been decided. Otherwise, I would like to thank you. I am impressed by your patience. You have patiently sat here and some work has been done.  Please, continue. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee report thereto.  
                 
(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered clauses 5 to 22 and passed them with a number of amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, again I thank you for having sat through all this time. With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow, 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.05 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 23rd November, 2000 at 2.00 p. m)
