Wednesday, 29 November 2006

Parliament met at 2.43 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:
         
Mr Bwambale Andy.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is my greatest pleasure to welcome you from the concluded recess. I am also happy to inform you that last night, I returned from Bujumbura, Burundi, where I led a delegation of Members, hon. Ben Wacha and hon. Oliver Wonekha. 

The people of Burundi sent you greetings and thanked you, especially President Yoweri Museveni, for your contribution in the peace settlement that they are enjoying now. We witnessed that the government is working and the country is peaceful.

I want to welcome our Members from the Pan-African Parliament and at the same time regret for what happened to them before they settled in Uganda. 

I want to congratulate honourable members who have been blessed with babies and increased the population of Uganda. From the information that I have received, this group includes: -
•	Hon. Kabakumba, the Chief Whip
•	Hon. Mariam Nalubega
•	Hon. Sekitoleko Kabonesa, and
•	Hon. Bako from Arua.
I congratulate you all!

Honourable members, I hope you have benefited from the recess that we went in after we had completed a lot of work. You may recall that we had concluded business including swearing in, passing the Rules of Procedure, debating the State of the Nation Address, debating the budget and passing it, and passing the Bills. Therefore, by the time we went for recess, there was very little work remaining on our tables. And normally, after the budget is concluded, we go for a recess.

This recess was supposed to end around 7th November, but on making assessment of the work, which we had to start with, we realized that there was no work and therefore we decided to give more time to those concerned to generate work. It should be realized that work must be generated by us: mainly by Government, individuals, and committees are also free to generate work. Parliament convenes because there is work. It cannot convene in the hope that when I welcome you here, I would ask you, “Who has business to transact.” Work must be on the Order Paper and what can be placed on the Order Paper is well listed in our Rules of Procedure. 

So, when we extended the recess, you must have heard highly charged statements in the press attacking the extension, but as I have said, I cannot call you here and say, “Have your read Bukedde or Daily Monitor? Can we discuss what the Daily Monitor said is happening?” That cannot be business of the House or be included on the Order Paper, which you must have before I start work. Besides, we do not have an item called, “Any other business” in our rules. So, honourable members, you should know that it is your responsibility to generate work. 

It is good that today you have come when the Rules of Procedure are already printed and you have copies and therefore you will be able to transact parliamentary business. You remember that when I sent you for recess, I indicated to you that any time there is a very important issue, Parliament would reconvene. But Parliament could only reconvene when properly requisitioned and Parliament can only be requisitioned if there is a motion. But as you saw from the circular of the Clerk recently, he was soliciting for business from you and as I speak, there are two motions from you.  

I wish to take this opportunity to thank those committees that have been sitting here to generate work. I have to mention the Public Accounts Committee, Local Governments Accounts Committee, Statutory Commission Committee, Equal Opportunities Committee, Social Services Committee and the Gender Committee. They have been working and I hope at the end of the day, we shall have work from them so that we can continue. 

There were statements made that there are many Bills that lapsed in the previous Parliament and have not yet been handled. They asked why we did not handle those. Honourable members, Bills that were presented to the previous Parliament expired and if they have to be business of this House, there is a process, which has to be taken in order for us to receive them. So, I want to assure you of this, because I got communication from the Executive that they are re-advertising these Bills. If they advertise them, then these Bills will be ready for you to handle. 

But all the same, I am asking you to generate business so that you do not feel redundant simply because you have been sent on recess. Again, I welcome you honourable members!

I want to welcome our new Member who has just been sworn-in. You are welcome to the Eighth Parliament of Uganda and we congratulate you for having won the by-election. Now that you have been elected, it is true you have come on a ticket of FDC, but in the constituency you are a Member of Parliament for every constituent in that constituency. Forget the differences, if there were any; now become a leader and guide others. We shall give you maximum support. You are welcome!

2.48
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join you also in welcoming back the Members from recess. I would like also to convey the apology of some Members of the Acholi Parliamentary Group. I believe they wrote formerly to you the schedule programme to cover the Acholi sub-region and they are still there up to the end of this week, so many of them are not here.  

Mr Speaker, let me also take this opportunity as Leader of the Opposition - you did mention a number of new additions to the population of Uganda as an activity of our honourable members. I would like also to say that from the activities of FDC, we have added to the population of the Members of Parliament sitting on the Opposition side. I know that the honourable member, hon. Bwambale, will not speak for himself. So allow me, just briefly for those who do not know him, to mention that that honourable behind there has been a long standing leader in Kasese District. He was the District Chairman of Kasese until the last election when he stood as an Independent and did not come to Parliament. But when an opportunity fell, he did what the people of Kasese wanted him to do - he joined FDC –(Applause)- and resoundingly won the elections. I would like to warmly congratulate him and welcome him! 

But allow me, Mr Speaker, to also mention one thing. I was in Kasese myself and I must say that the campaigns in Kasese were very peaceful. My brother, hon. Crispus Kiyonga, Minister of Defence, was also there; we met in the battlefield. I appreciated the fact that he had to move with escorts being Minister of Defence, but I would like to register my appreciation to him because the soldiers who were deployed to keep security did not interfere with the elections. If there is anybody who needs evidence that in a free and fair contest everything is possible, the election of the honourable behind here is the evidence.  

The Electoral Commission and its Chair were in Kasese. There was one critical thing that the vigilant people of Kasese and the Electoral Commission worked on collectively; there was a mischief whereby certain individuals decided to compile lists of about 44,000 people most of them not supporters of the honourable behind here, for exclusion from the voter’s register.  This list was intercepted, thanks to the vigilance of the people and the cooperation of the officials of the Electoral Commission. We pray that this will end. 

It is sometimes very embarrassing, Kasese being next to Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). DRC has been in conflict for so long, but they have held two contentious elections and the record of rigging is not there. We congratulate the Congo for the way they did their thing. In fact, yesterday the person who lost the election conceded defeat and pledged to come and work in their Parliament as a loyal opposition. I think what has happened there should be embraced by all of us, even those who lost because of the fairness of the election. I thank you very much and I warmly welcome my colleague to this Parliament.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, you have remarked that the Bills, which were there in the last Parliament lapsed but I recall there is one Bill we had passed, the Pensions Bill, and I wanted clarification on whether that Bill is among those that have lapsed and maybe how you intend to handle it thereafter. 

THE SPEAKER: Before I answer, I want to adjust the Order Paper to allow the Chairperson of HIV/AIDS Standing Committee to make a brief statement and I think I will answer the honourable member’s inquiry when I deal with item No.4.  

3.05
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS (Mr Elioda Tumwesigye): Mr Speaker and Members of Parliament, I also wish to take this opportunity to welcome you from recess. Then I remind you that on 1st December, on Friday, we shall be marking the International World AIDS Day. And as part of the activities to observe the World AIDS Day, the Parliament of Uganda, through the Parliamentary Committee on HIV/AIDS, has organised a Parliamentary Awareness Week on HIV/AIDS. This is in collaboration with the Coalition of HIV/AIDS and Human Rights Commission. 

This programme is aimed at bringing together Members of Parliament, people living with HIV and AIDS and other key players in the fight against HIV/AIDS and it is intended to provide a forum where stakeholders in the field of HIV/AIDS interact with Members of Parliament and share information, identify challenges and present recommendations for action.  

The programme includes the following: 
•	An exhibition, which is right now going on in the Parliamentary Gardens by members of civil society and other key players in the field.

•	An interaction between MPs and people living with HIV and AIDS, as well as dialogue between MPs and the civil society. 

The exhibition has been officially opened today in the Parliamentary Gardens. Many of the Members were missing and the constituents were looking out for their Members. Tomorrow, the Minister in charge of the Presidency will represent the Executive in the dialogue between MPs, people living with HIV and AIDS and civil society scheduled to take place in the Parliamentary Conference Hall. 

On Friday, the World AIDS Day itself, Parliament and civil society will join the international community to observe the World AIDS Day in the Parliamentary Gardens. The Speaker will preside over the ceremony and address the gathering. The theme of this year’s World AIDS campaign is: “Unite for Children, Unite Against AIDS” and the key action as a follow-up is to test for HIV and protect the future generation. 

The committee has accordingly organized a programme for free testing of HIV. This started today in our sickbay down there and also AIDS Resource Centre, for those of you who do not know. Members are encouraged to participate in these activities and register their solidarity with the people living with HIV in our country. 

I thank you and welcome you to all this, particularly the dialogue tomorrow morning and on Friday for the World AIDS Day commemoration. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.08
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my colleague, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on HIV/AIDS for this preparatory arrangements and I have no doubt in my mind that all Members of this august House will be willing to participate in the activities of the World AIDS Day. 

But one thing I want to register is that somehow Members of this august House - I am sure even in your own constituencies, you come under a number of questions regarding the pace at which the government is taking action on the recommendations of the Ogola Commission report - Global Fund, which fund handled among other diseases the control of HIV/AIDS in this country.  

A lot of questions are looming in our minds on the way forward to salvage Uganda’s image from the Global Fund Secretariat. I hope the government will come up with a very clear position on how the global fund to control HIV/AIDS and Malaria is going to be handled. Otherwise, I also call upon Members that we need to have collective effort, let us not over despair. We need to have collective effort in doing everything possible to ensure that Uganda’s resolve to fight HIV/AIDS does not wane. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.10
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members of Parliament, I wish also to welcome you from the recess. Regarding the Ogola report, I am delighted to inform you that today I chaired Cabinet and we have completed discussing it. What we have discussed will be passed on to His Excellency, the President. When the entire process is completed, all Members of Parliament and the entire population will access what we have discussed. I thank you.

3.11
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I was waiting for the honourable Prime Minister to clear some air on some issues that are pertinent to the people of this country, but I have not heard him do that. May I now take this opportunity to seek this clarification from him?

One, during the time of recess, we read in the papers that our soldiers have been deployed in Somalia. So many parents have been asking me about their sons and daughters from Kasilo, Teso and from the country at large. Could you clear the air on this matter? 

Two, we also got concerned that Tri-Star (U) Ltd has closed. The Government of Uganda had injected a lot of money into it. The Bugolobi plant had been used as security. What is the status of Tri-Star (U) Ltd? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Whereas I may allow an answer to be given on the issue of the Global Fund, because the subject which we have now was a statement made by the Chairman of the HIV/AIDS Committee, you cannot bring in matters of Defence, Somalia. You cannot also bring in Tri-Star. This is what I indicated to you earlier. When they were reacting to the extension, one of the subjects mentioned were Tri-Star and Juba. 

If you are interested in Tri-Star, you bring a question or a motion and we shall handle it. If you are interested in Somalia, you can also do that. What I can tell you is that, the Minister of Defence, hon. Kiyonga, will make a statement on the issue of Somalia. So, the Prime Minister does not need to answer that question.

3.13
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, District Woman Representative, Soroti): Mr Speaker, the main concern I have in regard to the matters of HIV/AIDS, particularly how they tie-up with the Global Fund issue, is the issue of sustainability. Many people were introduced to ARVs based on the availability of funding to buy them. As we have a suspension now, and that we may not benefit sometime in the future from the Global Fund, notwithstanding the debate and discussions in Cabinet, what government needs to address is the sustainability factor. People are worried that six or eight months down the road, there will be no ARVs and then what happens to those who were introduced to them? 

On the other hand, as the honourable Prime Minister considers the question of whether we should get this information, that is really a question of our rights. This Parliament passed a law guaranteeing us access to information. I do not quite understand why the honourable Prime Minister is even saying, “After they have debated.” As Ugandans, we are entitled to this. Our government set up the commission of inquiry, and we paid for this inquiry. So we are entitled to this information. There is no justification for deferring our access to this information. As Ugandans, we would like to make our input. 

My emphasis this afternoon is that this country should get assured on whether after the suspension of global funding, the government can still give people the ARVs that they deserve. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: In respect to that issue, it is a very important one and it has merits. I think the question should be a formal question to the Ministry of Health.

3.15
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, for your guidance, Mr Speaker. However, I still seek further guidance. I know very well that you are a custodian of our law. One of our articles in the Constitution provide clearly on how Parliament would interface with the Executive as regards a situation where Uganda Peoples Defence Forces have to be deployed as a matter of urgency. 

I am seeking your guidance as to whether Parliament cannot intervene independently whether the Minister of Defence makes a statement or not. The Constitution says that you have the powers to call an emergency session. I am wondering if that will still fall within the ambits of your authority. Thank you very much.  

THE SPEAKER: I think that I would be repeating myself. I am the one who said that should there be an important matter, this Parliament could be summoned from recess. And if you have a very important matter, requisition for it properly - you do not go to the press and say, “Let Parliament re-convene.” I will convene Parliament if you file a motion with me, which you think is important. On the basis of that motion, an Order Paper for an emergency meeting will be drawn indicating that item. Otherwise, from the press, I do not really think I can do this. 

I want to assure you that before I went to Bujumbura on Friday, I had an opportunity to discuss with the Minister of Defence on this particular subject of Somalia and he is making a statement. So, whether the troops are in Somalia or not, or whether they are going, he will make a statement tomorrow. I think it should have been indicated on the Order Paper. We rather wait for that statement.

3.17
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Apac): Mr Speaker, mine is a very general statement. It arises from what I perceive as a general reluctance from government to give this Parliament information on very vital issues. Most times, we see matters coming out of the press, which should have been brought to the attention of this House. Members of the House are, therefore, put in the awkward situation of having to discuss what appears in the press with their constituents. I find this a very funny way of handling matters. 

In most countries, parliaments are taken very seriously. Any matter of import is first assessed by Parliament. We have had examples like Somalia, Tri-Star, electricity bills and Global Fund. We were told about Global Fund in the Sixth Parliament and I think it was hoped that it would just die. I think there is a loophole somewhere. I do not want to point fingers. But from your Chair could you please pass information to whoever is responsible to us in this House that important matters of the country come to this House. They should not just be taken to the press. They must first be assessed by us so that we give leadership to this country.  I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Mr Angiro rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Well, the opportunity to address this issue was given to the Chairman of the Committee of HIV/AIDS. You may have other issues but I will allow you at the appropriate time. There was a general observation concerning whether information is readily passed to Parliament. Did you have any special thing on the –(Interruption) 

MR ANGIRO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine was in connection with the mobilisation for the resettlement of IDPs in Northern Uganda. We have been told by those who are mobilising and sensitising people that by the 15th of December, they should have left the IDP camps. I would like clarification on those remarks because my people are now scared. I border with Pader, Gulu and Oyam districts. The situation there does not warrant us to go to our respective villages but to move to satellite camps in respective parishes. So, this has disturbed my people. Consequently, they asked me how that statement has been attributed because if that is the position, they were told they will go back voluntarily yet a deadline has now been given. This is of very serious concern. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: No. I think following what hon. Ben Wacha has said about this general information, in view of what you have said, is not based on the other statement. All the same, you have made it. I will therefore request the appropriate minister to make a statement on the resettlement of people in IDP camps. That will be a separate statement which we shall debate some other time.

MESSAGES FROM HIS EXCELLENCY, THE PRESIDENT

THE SPEAKER: Before we proceed, I think I owe duty to our visitors in the members’ gallery. We have pupils of Nateete Junior School who have come to visit our Parliament. Please let them stand up. You are welcome to the Parliament of Uganda! (Applause)

Honourable members, the messages from the President are two: I will read them the way they were addressed to me. One concerns the matter that was dealt with by the last Parliament, which finished this work. However, the reaction of His Excellency, the President to that work came when the last Parliament had expired. We could not re-convene. Therefore, it is your duty to listen to the message and decide what to do. I believe this will answer hon. Banyenzaki’s inquiry.

The subject of this message is the Parliamentary Pensions Bill, 2006.  I reads as follows:  

“25 April 2006, 
Forwarded to me by the Clerk to Parliament. 

The Parliament Pensions Act 2006
Pursuant to the provision of Article 91(3)(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, I do hereby return the Bill to Parliament with a request that Section 6(1) and (2) be reconsidered and the rates of the contribution to the scheme be reduced from 15 percent and 30 percent to 5 and 10 percent for Members of Parliament and Government respectively. 

You may recall that Cabinet had proposed to Parliament the percentages in question. Government did this taking into consideration our resource base and the commitments to other national development obligations and programmes. These programmes include, but are not limited to, Universal Primary and Secondary Education, Poverty Eradication, infrastructure etc. 

Government had budgeted for the contribution to the  parliamentary pensions scheme at the rate of 10 percent and there is no money to meet the increased Government contribution to 30 percent proposed by Parliament. 

I request that Parliament exercises its mandate under Article 9(6)(a) and reduce the government contribution to the scheme to 10 per cent of the pensionable emoluments of Members.

Signed
Yoweri Kaguta Museveni,
President of the Republic of Uganda.” 

That was the first message dealing with that law.  You will realise, honourable members, the rules tell us what to do. This returned Bill will be taken to the appropriate committee to consider and report back to us. We will then debate it and make a response to His Excellency. 

And according to the procedure, the minister concerned should lay on Table a copy of this Bill. But in case he does not have one now, I can give him my copy so that he uses it to complete the process.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I welcome you back from the very short recess. I take this opportunity to lay on Table the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Pensions Bill, 2006” which has been returned by His Excellency, the President. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Let the appropriate committee of Parliament handle the Bill. What I may explain is that other issues are not involved. The principle is acceptable but the only problem is the rate of 15 and 30 percent, which need to be revised.  

The second message from the President was dated 23rd September. It concerns Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2006. It reads as follows:

“In accordance with Article 91(3)(b) of the Constitution, I am returning the assent copies of the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2006  for reconsideration by Parliament.  

I am, therefore, requesting that Parliament should reconsider items 2(b), 8 and 9 of the Schedule to the Bill.  Parliament’s decision to reduce excise duty on beer whose local raw material content excluding water is at least 75 percent by weight of the constituents from 30 to 20 percent is projected to lead to Ugshs 4.3 billion shortfall in revenue.  

Furthermore, Parliament’s reduction of the excise duty rate on landlines and public pay phones from 5 percent to 3 percent will lead to a contradiction of projected revenue by Ugshs 1.2 billion. 

Lastly, the removal of excise duty on cement of Ugshs 500 per 50 kilograms will lead to a revenue loss of Ugshs 7.6 billion.  The projected loss will undermine the already stretched resources available for execution of key government programmes.  This is at the critical time when we are planning the implementation of Universal Secondary Education and hosting of CHOGM meeting.

The imposition of excise duty on landlines and public pay phones and cement were designed to widen the tax base.  There has been an outcry that some sectors of economy were being taxed highly by increasing rates of tax or duty on their transaction, hence the search for new areas where modest tax rates could be imposed.  

The amendment by Parliament runs counter to the above objective.  It is for the above reasons that I request Parliament to reconsider the Excise Tariffs (Amendment) Bill, 2006.” Signed by Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President. So the essence of this one is for you to examine the deduction, which you imposed in September.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I was trying to peruse through Article 91, and I want this one to go on record- (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, but you see, hon. member, this is a message from His Excellency the President to the House.  The House will have an opportunity to examine this statement and should there be need to correct because of a constitutional error or an article has been missed and so forth, that will be the opportune time for you to raise such a point.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I know that is a message from His Excellency the President, it is in respect of Bills, which were passed in the House and he is putting up the case. I know we are going to debate it later on.  But I am wondering whatever we made has changed. His Excellency has returned it and said, “None of this is acceptable to me”. What is then the purpose of bringing these Bills to Parliament?  Should we always take them as they are, or we should always look at them?

THE SPEAKER:  No, what I can say is that the Constitution allows the President to return, and at the same time the Constitution allows you to either accept or not to accept. The Constitution allows if you insist on your position on a number of times on the given figure then it will become a law.  So, you use your constitutional mandate and allow the President to use his constitutional mandate. Can I ask the minister to lay on Table –(Interjections)- but you will be given an opportunity, hon. Members, to debate this, it is not now.

3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I take this opportunity to lay on Table the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2006. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay.  Now let the appropriate committee handle this. It is the committee on Finance to deal with the requests of His Excellency the President then report back within one or two weeks, but the earlier the better.  

Sorry it came to my notice that there are some distinguished visitors, I should have introduced to you; there is a chairperson of UGANET, Ms Esther Kisakye, in the gallery. You are welcome!  They are representatives of people living with HIV/Aids. You are most welcome- (Applause)- we have the Speaker of Pader District and Deputy Speaker. You are welcome!  There is also the Clerk to Council of Pader District and Sergeant-At-Arms of Pader District Council. You are most welcome!  Parliament wishes Pader District peace.  

STATEMENT OF BUSINESS

THE SPEAKER:  This item, statement of business as hon. members appreciate, Parliament has just sat today.  The business transacted in the House is actually approved by the Business Committee, and the Business Committee has not sat to approve that business.  So, it may not be in order for the Prime Minister really to make that statement.  As need arises we shall deal with this particular item, so we can skip it now.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PUBLIC SERVICE NEGOTIATION, CONSULTATIVE AND DISPUTE SETTLEMENT MACHINERY, 2006

3.35	
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Ms Sezi Mbaguta):  Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Public Service Negotiation, Consultative and Dispute Settlement Machinery, 2006” be read for the first time. As a requirement the certificate of financial requirements is attached. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the motion is seconded. The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament. I have received a note here that the statement concerning Makerere is still in the printery but she has a copy. Do you now have the copies? Can she read it as you wait for the copies? Should we move to another item or wait?

MS MBAGUTA: Honourable Speaker, I seek your guidance. I want to propose that we move to the next business as the minister comes.

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

3.39
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Gertrude Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am sorry; I had gone out to check on the copies for the members that are being cyclostyled. I would like to request that I make the statement; the individual copies will be brought. I apologise we had a problem of machinery, power and other things but we have done everything possible and very soon we shall have copies coming. 

Mr Speaker, may I proceed with reading the statement? 

THE SPEAKER: Please.

MS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you. Mr Speaker, I would like to add my voice to yours and others in welcoming back my colleagues from recess. I believe many of them have done a lot of kakuyege, from which their representation in Parliament stems. I welcome you back to this sitting.

Mr Speaker, the newspapers have been giving a lot of information about the crisis at Makerere University which led to the closure of that mother university where many of us attended our higher education. I am going to make comments about that current crisis and I will make one or two observations about Kyambogo University. 

Mr Speaker, Makerere University Kampala was temporarily closed on Sunday 12 November 2006 by a Council resolution after an extraordinary Council meeting that was held at Mulago Hall. The closure of the university and therefore the resolution followed a strike by Makerere academic staff on 3 November 2006. All academic activities at the university came to a stand still and as a result of the strike there was no teaching and learning. 

The students became redundant and unruly and some of them looted and destroyed property both at the university campus and in the surrounding areas of Wandegeya and Katanga. Police was deployed to ensure security, peace and order at campus and in the neighbouring areas.

Government regrets the destructive behaviour by the students and it apologises to those who were badly affected. Government also apologises to all stakeholders that is the parents, guardians, students and the general public in Uganda who have been affected by the temporary closure of Makerere University.

Mr Speaker, having given that synopsis let me go to the details and background to the present crisis. The current crisis that led to the closure of Makerere University dates back to April 2004 when the academic staff threatened to put down their tools demanding for an enhancement of their salaries. 

The President met the academic staff on the 13 April 2004 and pledged that Government would gradually consider their salaries where a Professor would earn a gross salary of Ugshs 2,800,000 per month. His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda advised that due to financial constraints, the enhancement to the tune of Ugshs 2,800,000 for a Professor could not be effected in a single financial year 2004/2005. The enhancement would be effected in phases, and that other academic staff would be paid a gross salary on a prorata basis, according to their salary scales. Therefore, where a Professor gets Ugshs 2,800,000, the Associate Professor and the rest of the staff would have their equivalents at their own level. 

Concerning paragraph two on the background, I should inform this House about the students at Makerere University at least for this current year and the fees they are paying. Government sponsored students at Makerere University are 7,800 students while private sponsored students are 26,200. Therefore, at Makerere University we have a total of 34,000 students. Whereas Government pays by way of capitation grant Ugshs 4.3 million on average per government-sponsored student and private sponsored student’s pay on average Ugshs 2,000,000 per year.

Mr Speaker, I didn’t go into all the details but I am using carefully the term on average. This is because at Makerere University like is the situation at other universities, each course has got its cost and therefore we are talking about average figures. However, on other occasions such detailed information can easily be accessed.

Mr Speaker, what about the teaching staff at Makerere University? Many of us have been talking about the teaching staff but who are they and how many are they?  At Makerere University we have a total of 32 professors, 71 Associate professors, 168 senior lecturers, 366 lecturers, 288 assistant lecturers and 165 teaching assistants. That gives us a total of the academic staff at Makerere University of 1090. I thought I would bring out this information because in the mass media, many people have been commenting on these professors and academic staff and it is necessary we get the breakdown.

Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister, the Minister of Education and Sports and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development understood the pledge of His Excellency the President to refer to the enhancement of salaries to be gross whereas the academic staff association understood the pledge as referring to their basic salary.  This has added to the misunderstanding because of the different perception of the government and that of the academic staff. Indeed these are issues of concept and terminologies, which need to be defined for everybody to get on board.

The government offer of Ugshs 2.8 million per month to a professor is a gross salary. Other academic staff are paid a gross salary according to their salary scale. A gross salary is financed from the Consolidated Fund and from the internally generated resources paid by the University Council. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development authorized all councils to retain Appropriation-in-Aid, that is internally generated funds and budget for such funds to meet the expenditures at the universities. 

Mr Speaker, members should remember that every financial year there are committees responsible for approving the budgets of these self-accounting institutions and those budgets include the subvention from government and internally generated revenue.

What are the releases so far?  I have referred to a pledge made in 2004 and since then some releases have been made.  Mr Speaker, a total of Ugshs 5 billion was released during the financial year 2004/2005 and was distributed to all the public universities as follows. I want to emphasise that this was following the presidential pledge and the statement that this would be done in phases.

Under that release of Ugshs 5 billion, Makerere University had an allocation of Ugshs 3,0407.125 billion, Mbarara University of Science and Technology received an allocation of Ugshs 0.8315984 billion as it is a small institution, Kyambogo University received a release of Ugshs 0.5748323 billion, Gulu University, which is the smallest was allocated Ugshs 0.2105020 billion and Makerere University Business School Nakawa was allocated Ugshs 0.3423548 billion.  That was the allocation according to the numbers of staff and their sizes.

Government raised the funds for a monthly salary enhancement with that allocation from Ugshs 518,492 for a professor in 2003 to Ugshs 2,568,732 by June this year. I would like to highlight here that in 2003, a professor was getting only Ugshs 518,492 but by June this year a professor is at a level of Ugshs 2,568,732. 

This financial year 2006/2007, government released the remaining Ugshs 3.455,411,828 billion as additional salary enhancement, which brings a professor’s gross pay to Ugshs 2.8 million.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, you will appreciate that there has been a continuous rise in the pay of the academic staff at Makerere University and indeed that of other academic staff in the other public universities. I am sorry we do not have copies for each one to make reference but in the statement we indicated the rise of the salaries from 2003 to where we are right now. I hope somebody is bringing more copies. Therefore, there is a rise in all the scales.

Mr Speaker, according to the mass media and other comments from the public, people have been asking what is happening to the money paid by the private students at public universities?  I am only taking a case study of Makerere University for the three financial years that is 2004/2005 to 2006/2007 as regards the subvention from the government. Government has been sending or allocating money to these public universities and taking the case of Makerere University in the financial year 2004/2005, government released Ugshs 28.7 billion as a recurrent cost to Makerere University and Ugshs 15.5 billion as a development budget.  

In 2005/2006, government released Ugshs 33.4 billion for recurrent expenditure and Ugshs 17.6 billion for development expenditure. For the financial year, which is the current year 2006/2007, government is to release a total of Ugshs 34.1 billion for recurrent expenditure and Ugshs 5.6 billion for development expenditure. 

The point I am making here is that government allocates money to Makerere University and other public universities. It is therefore not true that it is only the money that is collected from the private students that is running these universities. That money which is internally generated is supplementary to the budgets from government.

In addition, public universities as I have said collect money that we commonly term as internally generated funds; these they retain as a matter of policy at the moment.  Government does not pick that money from the universities and government actually has a policy that that money should be used at source. For example, Makerere University between July 2005 and March 2006 that is a period of nine months has made an expenditure of Ugshs 27.8 billion from internally generated funds.  Mr Speaker, that is one point where quite a lot has been said and many comments have been made. Indeed later on as I will indicate, that might be an area that at this stage we may need to review and see exactly what funding is available to these universities.

Having given that background, what action has been taken to address the current crisis at Makerere University? Mr Speaker, probably I should have emphasised that the story is long with so many details but I thought I would give the background facts for the information of members and then at another time probably through committees further details can be worked out.  

Let me now move to Government’s action to address the crisis at Makerere University. Government has put in place an inter-ministerial/departmental committee to handle the issue of staff salary enhancement and harmonisation in public universities in Uganda. A report of that committee will be submitted to the sector minister latest by 10 December 2006.  

Mr Speaker, again reacting to what the mass media and people are commenting about, there have been some suggestions that Makerere should be addressed in isolation of other public universities. However, the same sources give information that if we address Makerere in isolation then Gulu will be next. The government is of the view that this committee should look at salary structures and make sustainable structures that will cover our academic staff at all public universities including Nakawa. So a committee is in place.   

This committee as I have stated above is inter-ministerial and inter-departmental and it includes the following representatives: the sector ministry, Ministry of Education and Sports and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development- of course we cannot talk about money without representation from that ministry. Others include the Ministry of Public Service, academic staff and support staff at the universities who are serving the public. They are not civil servants but are public servants and in our government structure, the Ministry of Public Service is the custodian of all the technicalities and I will call them for theories and philosophies about public office in the public sector.  That is why we need their input into this discussion. The fourth ministry is that of Gender, Labour and Social Affairs. We are particularly interested in the labour component. 

Are we as Government looking at labour laws in considering the issues of these academic staff?  Are we on track or are we off track?  What is the difference between a union and an association? That is why in this discussion we would like an input from the department of labour in that ministry.  

The committee will also include representatives from the Attorney General’s office. This is for the legal input into the discussion and it will further include representatives from the Solicitor General’s office. One would think the two are the same but when you come to the practical analysis of the different schedules, we need both the Attorney General’s office and the Solicitor General’s office.

In the committee we have also included the National Council for High Education. Mr Speaker, I will continue explaining. What is the role of the National Council for High Education and how relevant are they in the present crisis? 

The National Council for High Education is the legal organ in our country that helps to regulate and control universities as well as set standards. I also hope that it is well known as the legal body especially when you consider what happens before the elections that included verifying candidates. It is therefore very crucial in these discussions. The committee will also include the university councils.  In the law of 2001, University Councils have got the authority to control universities. 

Last but not least, we have representatives of the academic staff associations.  There is MUASA and KYUASA and so staff will be represented so that they articulate their demands to the committee. Together we will work out the solution to what seems to be a crisis at the moment.

Mr Speaker, the terms of reference of that committee are available but as I have already expressed in my disappointment, we could not get all of them produced in time for this meeting.

The committee was launched on the 23 November 2006 by the Minister of Education and Sports and is due to submit its report by 10th December. I would like to say that we are all concerned about finding a solution. As I said earlier, this closure is temporary and we should work out a way of opening that university as soon as possible.  

Mr Speaker, I thought I would also mention the visitation committee. The President of the Republic of Uganda is the visitor to all public universities in this country as by law. In March this year, His Excellency the President who is the visitor to all the universities appointed a visitation committee to study the general regulations, funding, academic programmes and management of public universities in Uganda and to make appropriate recommendations. 

Through you, Mr Speaker, I want to inform my colleagues that we had this visitation committee in the early 90s  - more than 10 years ago, and it was due for this committee again to go through our public universities and assess the standards, look at the programmes and review the management.

So, that committee was launched in March this year and it has been on the ground listening to all views and of course studying the framework and structures at all the Public Universities and Makerere University Business School (MUBS). Findings of this committee will form reference points to the Salary Enhancement Committee, which was launched last week. Since the Visitation Committee has been in the field for over six months, they have definitely come up with findings that will help the Salary Enhancement Committee to expedite their work.

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to make some observations and recommendations: Government has always been ready and willing to hold discussions with the academic staff in order to find solutions. The President has already met this group very many times; the Prime Minister has met them; the sector minister has met them; and indeed council has held several discussions on these issues. 

 I would like to reiterate that communication channels between the staff are still open for further negotiations and consultations with stakeholders to resolve the current crisis at Makerere and other public universities. This is very important because at no point has any office turned out the academic staff over this issue.  It is very healthy because we shall soon or later agree on certain basic issues and move forward.

The second observation, Mr Speaker, is that government through relevant bodies, structures and individuals is taking measures to work out a sustainable solution to the academic staff issues at all universities in the country. We cannot continue year after year just treating the symptoms without really going down to the issues. Government is sincerely and keenly working out with the relevant bodies what can be a sustainable solution to this problem.

Mr Speaker, with those two observations and recommendations, I should say something about Kyambogo University though not in details. The story of Kyambogo University is different from that of Makerere and all other public universities in all aspects.  At Kyambogo, the issue is mainly the integration of staff into a structure for the university of Kyambogo.  Kyambogo University is a result of a union or a merger between the Institute of Teacher Education (ITEK), Uganda Polytechnic Kyambogo (UPK) and UNISE, which is an institution that trains teachers of specialised areas in the education sector.  

Those three institutions were merged in 2003 to form a university and each member of staff came with different terms of service. The council of that university has been  struggling to put in place a structure that would fit the university, but the work has been a lot. They haven’t yet been able to complete that merger and integration of staff in time or at the rate where the academic staff would be satisfied. So, what I am saying is very little on that. I might come later on, if you permit me, Mr Speaker, to give further details on this. 

A committee chaired by hon. Ephraim Kamuntu is working with Council at Kyambogo University to solve the staff integration issues. I am made to understand that so far, Council has issued letters of appointment to various members of staff. So, Mr Speaker, I will bring further details on Kyambogo University when the committee submits its report. But work is going on to make sure that the staff’s demands are addressed at the level of government. We hope that the leaders of the academic staff at that university will give chance to government to scrutinise their problems and demands and come up with a sustainable solution.

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.  The papers don’t seem to be coming but they will soon be here.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable Minister for the statement. Honourable members, permit me to introduce some visitors in the Distinguished Strangers Gallery. We have a delegation of three honourable Members of Parliament from the Southern Sudan Legislative Assembly. They are: Hon Oliver Mori Benjamin, Leader of Delegation, hon. Akol Ding, Member and hon. Abdom Akii, Member. You are most welcome. (Applause) 

4.12
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof Morris Ogenga-Latigo) Thank you very much Rt hon. Speaker and I also thank the hon. Minister of Education and Sports for the statement. Mr Speaker the situation that arose at Makerere University and probably the other Public universities has generated so much pressure on all sides.

Secondly, the situation particularly the closure of Makerere University is of grave concern to the whole country. In light of the fact that now the matter has come in front of the House, and we need to give fair guidance and wise council to those who are handling the matter.  I was wondering whether we shouldn’t defer our responses to the Minister’s statement until we get copies of the statement? And also to ask that members go through the statement so that our debate here doesn’t inflame the situation but rather helps to guide us towards a useful solution for our country.
  
THE SPEAKER: Yes, you have heard Professor Latigo - the Leader of the Opposition’s statement.

MR LUKWAGO:  Guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hold on please -(Laughter)-you have heard the Leader of the Opposition’s advice on the issue. But, honourable members, before we reconvened, our committee in charge of education - the Committee on Social Services was carrying out a process of getting views from Makerere University staff and the Minister of Education and Sports.  I do not know how soon that report will be ready - honourable Chairperson was here – so that maybe when we have a structured debate, you will have that information.  Otherwise, you see, you may start talking from what you are thinking when it is different and yet what we want is to get a solution.  So, that is why he says we wait for the copies but, it would be better if we got the views of the committee so that – oh, he is here. I think you have heard the side of the opposition –(Interruption)

4.15
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mr James Kubeketerya): Mr Speaker, I think this is going to take just one week because we met them and we are compiling the report.  So, since the Minister has given her report, let members study it, as we get ready to bring ours.  But we have interacted with Makerere University - MUASA, the Minister of Finance and that of Education and we have really got useful information.  We would not sit because if we did not meet them, people would think that Parliament is not bothered with the plight of the lecturers.  So, within one week, we shall be ready with the report.  

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  But you have already pre-empted the guidance, which I was seeking because I thought there was a committee handling this one.  However, we are going to handle it in conjunction with a statement made by the Minister of Education, that is the guidance I needed.  Since you pre-empted it, the ruling is yours.

THE SPEAKER: No, you are saying you missed the score –(laughter)

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO:  Mr Speaker, now that we have the assurance of the committee on their report and, therefore, a little bit of time - one more week, while we were in recess we also got the problem of Makerere University Business School (MUBS), is it possible that on that day the Minister could also have a supplementary statement or addendum to her statement on the state of affairs at Makerere University Business School?  So that when we discuss the public universities, we discuss then comprehensively.

THE SPEAKER: But, don’t you think that the issues are different and mixing them on the day she makes a statement – I think let us deal with this statement by getting a report.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I do agree entirely with the approach we are taking.  My only concern is: I would want the Minister to probably tell the country whether the library is open or not because we heard students coming back for registration and when they reach Makerere, they are told the place is still locked up. So, could we just have that basic bit of assurance on whether the administrative facilities in Makerere are open or not and then we will continue and deal with the rest later.

4.18
MR MUHAMED KAWUMA (DP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I also want to add my voice and welcome Members back from recess.  I agree with what our position is to get the statement and then we make meaningful response.  But I have listened carefully to the Minister; what I have missed out to hear is the aspect of the Makerere University students at Mulago Hospital.  As we are waiting to get the report on the 10th, the students can be waiting, but there has been an alarming problem due lack of medical doctors to attend to the patients in Mulago.  I think the Minister of Health in liaison with the Minister of Education should give us the position of these medical students as we await the report from the respective committee and the adhoc committee that was instituted.

4.19
MR ELIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. With due respect to observations made, I would like to slightly disagree with the proposal of postponing the debate on this issue because it is indeed a serious matter.  There is a crisis as the Minister has said and we in this august House really need to address it and make our input.  

This comes in light of the statements we have heard in the press which seem to be contradictory and we really need a clarification.  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister is quoted in the press as having said that Makerere is not a priority and we are not so sure of how it is going to be addressed. 

Of course, Mr Speaker, there is a legal implication behind the closure of the University; we are told that the number of the private students is the bigger. These are people who have fully paid and who have a contractual relationship with the University, which is an autonomous institution.  Mr Speaker, we do not know their fate; the implication of these people who have fully honoured their obligations, they have fully paid up; they are expecting to get lectures and not to be locked out. So, this –(Interruption)

4.21
MR PETER MUTULUUZA (NRM, Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Mr Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition has just requested that we postpone the discussion on this report pending the report of the committee within one week.  Now, I am at a loss. Is it procedurally correct for the Minister again to start debating when we have decided to –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The Leader of Opposition put up a position, which was supported by many other contributions, but the Shadow Attorney-General is also putting his case for consideration.  So, I think he was right, but hon. Lukwago, from what you have heard, for Members to have a structured debate, they need more information rather than being superficial or emotional in discussing the issue.  They need to be prepared by getting an input from here, examine the statement and other attachments so that when they come – because we want to find a solution - we can not debate today and again debate in a week’s time. We want to debate so that it has an impact and it is helpful in solving the problem, I think that is the idea. Otherwise, you are right there are people suffering, but can we wait for a week and then handle it.  I think that was their view but you are right to have made your observation.

4.23
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA  (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I want to urge the Minister to follow up what the Leader of Opposition said about MUBS.  She will need to bring a statement to this House so that as we are handling Makerere, we handle MUBS in conjunction since there are areas regarding MUBS, which are not subjudice. 

I think government now has the greatest opportunity because in FDC we believe in institutional building.  That is if government is committed to not destroying institutions so that when FDC comes into power it finds something on the ground.  

Mr Speaker, the Minister of Education and government have the best opportunity to solve MUBS’s problems because the key people who have been causing problem in MUBS are in office illegally.  So, if I were the Minister of Education I would restructure MUBS and have the right team to move that institution forward.  Can the Minister bring a detailed statement?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think what you are saying is that you need a separate statement for MUBS because as far as Nakawa is concerned, it is a legal entity.  If it is, what kind of entity is it in?  So, this one whereas the terms of employment is the issue at Makerere, so it cannot be the same but you are entitled to say, can you maybe tomorrow or the other day give us a statement.

 MRS BITAMAZIRE: Mr Speaker, Members are right in a way to come up with issues concerning MUBS.  But, I would like to inform them through you that there are court petitions and government is waiting until the judges and all the courts have made their judgment and then the administrative process will start.  So, the discussion of MUBS could be postponed until the court process is finalised because in that position we shall be able to discuss not only the status but also many other issues relating to MUBS.  Thank you.

4.26
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I agree with what the Leader of Opposition has said, but I also share the same concerns with hon. Elias Lukwago. Now, I want to find out from the Chairperson of the Social Services Committee because as hon. Lukwago has said, so many students and parents especially those of the private sponsored students are feeling the pinch because of the closure of the university.  Can the committee adjust so that postponement is only this week up to Monday or Tuesday given the urgency of this matter and we get back to this House in order to discuss this issue?  

Finally, as the Chancellor of Makerere University, hon. Prof. Apolo Nsibambi, in order for his reputation not to be at stake, we would be happy to hear from him. 

THE SPEAKER: No, you see, honourable members, we know there is a Chancellor, but in this House we know there is a Prime Minister.  Issues of the Chancellor of Makerere University fall under the Ministry of Education and the person who is responsible - who speaks for the chancellor in this House is the Minister of Education. So, what we do, as a consensus is that we will get the report on Wednesday –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, we shall be ready on Tuesday. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, Tuesday or Wednesday.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Mr Speaker, I am not contradicting the Chairman of the Social Services Committee, but I thought our colleagues have raised some of the issues, which should be clarified at this House.  

Honourable Alaso, was wondering whether the library is open. Well there were statements in the mass media that the library will be open but on checking with the administration they said it is only open for those students on research and not for everybody.  The idea is to keep as much peace as possible and to avoid people who could just come to feel redundant on campus.  So, researchers are screened and allowed to go in and do their research.  

Another one was about Mulago Hospital. I would like to commend the leaders at Mulago Hospital and the school of Medicine at Mulago for containing the situation and as we speak now, work is continuing at that institution.  So, we thank the leaders and the students at that Mulago School of Medicine for realising that they could not abandon the patients.  As soon all these reports come, we shall be in position to address the issue conclusively.  I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: So, now I think the position, honourable members, that we shall revert this subject to next week, either on Tuesday or Wednesday.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE GOVERNMENT LOAN REQUEST OF UA 20 MILLION FROM THE ADB FOR THE SUPPORT TO THE HEALTH STRATEGIC PLAN PROJECT II

4.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Omwony-Ojwok): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay before this House the Government loan request of UA 20 million from the African Development Bank for the support to the Health Strategic Plan Project II. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the Committee on National Economy handle the request.

MR OMWONY-OJWOK: Mr Speaker, during the debate on the Budget, I promised to lay before this House the first annual report for the National Planning Authority for the Financial Year 2005/2006 and I promised that it would be ready by September this year. As you remember, the House has been on recess and I beg now to lay before this House the annual report for the Financial Year 2005/2006 of the National Planning Authority. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let the appropriate committee handle the report and subsequently report to us.

THE STATUTORY REPORT OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCE COMMISSION

4.33
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire): Mr Speaker, while we were discussing issues concerning local governments, I promised to lay on the Table, as is required by the Constitution, the report of the Local Government Finance Commission, and today it is my pleasure to lay the Local Government Finance Commission annual report 2005 on the Table. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let the committee on Local Government take up the report, study it and subsequently report to us.

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS) REGULATIONS, 2006

4.34
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire): Mr Speaker, some gentlemen had taken my paper in advance but I also promised to lay before this august House the Local Government Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Regulations, 2006 and it is my pleasure to lay on the Table the Local Governments Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Regulations, 2006, Sir.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am just seeking clarification on whether what the hon. Minister of Local Government is doing is a mere fulfillment of a promise or it is a statutory requirement that these regulations should be laid before Parliament.

MAJ. GEN. KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: Mr Speaker, as stated in my previous statement, I know the hon. Leader of the Opposition knows that it is both my promise under a constitutional requirement- (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Let the appropriate committee take up the document for study and they report.

THE NATIONAL POLICY ON DISABILITY IN UGANDA

4.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DISABILITIES (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, before I lay on the Table of Parliament the National Policy on Disability in Uganda, allow me to officially invite you to the International Day of Disabilities, which is going to take place on 3rd December at Mandila Primary School in Busia District. 

I take this opportunity to also thank you for this Parliament being disability friendly, Mr Speaker, for you officiated over the launching of this National Policy on Disability and also Parliament passed a number of laws on disability issues. Having said this I, therefore, lay on the Table of Parliament the National Policy on Disability in Uganda. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let the appropriate committee go on to study the document and report to us.

THE STATUTORY REPORT ON THE UGANDA HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION 

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Namirembe Bitamazire): Mr Speaker, I have been authorised by the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to represent the Attorney-General at this Session and lay the following papers on the Table: the Uganda Human Rights Commission Report, the Eighth Annual Report, November 2006. I beg to lay this paper on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for the work discharged and let the appropriate committee study the report and make a report to us.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In my six years in Parliament, this is a new development. I am seeing in relation to item 8(V) on the Order Paper, the national policy on disability in Uganda, which I see here. I do not know who made the policy; whether it is a White Paper; what input can Parliament make on this? I think maybe you will help us to understand it. I thought the minister should have brought the raw material to Parliament other than a finished product. I really do not understand who made the policy. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think making policies is the function of the Executive, scrutinising policies is your function. (Laughter) (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_) Hold on, we have not reached your item.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, Mr Speaker, I just need some small guidance. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am so happy with the Ministry of Gender for having brought the policy for disability, but when are they bringing the policy on employment, which is a very touchy issue in this country?

THE SPEAKER: I think you can put a formal question to the minister and ask when they are bringing it –(Laughter)- yes, but before we go on, there is good news, which escaped me. You know I congratulated people who had increased the population; I was not aware that hon. Dr Epetait also during the recess was blessed with a baby boy. (Laughter) Congratulations. We wish the mother and the baby good health.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION

4.41
MR ERASMUS MAGULUMAALI (Independent, Kooki County, Rakai): Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to address this august House. I will also take this opportunity to welcome you all from the long recess and from the smiles on your faces, it looks you had a wonderful working period.

THE SPEAKER: How short should a recess be? 

MR MAGULUMAALI: Mr Speaker, I am greatly honoured to present the petition of the residents of Kooki County to you in particular and the august House in general. The petitioners are residents of Kooki County, living in Kooki Forest Reserve and they are writing to the Parliament of Uganda: 

“The humble petition of residents of Kagamba, Kyabulangira, Kakyera and Dwaniro sub-counties in Kooki County, Rakai District as presented on their behalf by hon. Maj. Mugumya Magulumaali, Member of Parliament, Kooki County. 

Recent threats and acts by the National Forestry Authority to evict and displace residents within Kooki Forest Reserve have resulted in both their physical and psychological harassment despite facts detailed hereunder.

1.	“The residents of the sub-counties of Kagamba, Kyabulangira, Kakyera and Dwaniro have been settled in this forest reserve for a very long time with the knowledge of the Government.
2.	As a result of this prolonged settlement, government has constructed roads and social services like schools, health centres and dip tanks in this area.
3.	There is no alternative settlement in the area for all the said residents numbering over 30,000.
4.	The residents are of the view that they can continue to practice sustainable development in this area and the National Forestry Authority with the other stakeholders can plant trees on the existing bare hills that currently lack forest cover.
5.	The National Forestry Authority in a bid to effect eviction of the residents of this area has and continues to harass and threaten not only the inhabitants but also their leaders.    
6.	The uncertainty created has hampered the residents in this area from implementing their projects in poverty alleviation ‘boona bagagawale’.

Therefore, your petitioners pray that:

1.	The National Forestry Authority desists from the unattainable and disruptive option of evicting the residents within the forest reserve.
2.	Instead, government considers and effects de-gazetting of Kooki Forest Reserve so that the residents pursue peaceful development like other Ugandans.”

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the petition signed by 10,902 representatives of households from the affected sub-counties namely, Kagamba, Kyabulangira and Kakyera residing in the forest reserve on the Table for your kind consideration. I once again thank you for listening to me. I beg to lay the petition on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR EKANYA: Honourable Speaker, according to the laws of Uganda, it is illegal and criminal to settle in a gazetted forest. The petition being presented here is being presented by people who are illegally settling in the forest. Is it proper for this Parliament really to entertain such a petition of self confessed criminals? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Do you know that even the Constitution of Uganda legalized a person who initially settled on land illegally and became a bona fide occupant? (Laughter) Well, this is a matter, which we are going to examine. The petition has just been – we cannot debate it now. Unless you object to it and then use the rules here which you can find like on page 46. But the petition has been presented and what we can do is to send it to an appropriate committee of Parliament to examine it and it will call other people and then subsequently a report will be brought here and that is when we shall be able to comment on this petition. But for the time being the petition has been received and I think we should send it to Committee on Natural Resources to handle and report to us. Thank you very much.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Our rule 27(4) reads that any Member may move that a petition be rejected on the ground that it is not properly and respectfully worthy or on any other ground. If the mover of the motion said in relation to forceful evicting of people from gazetted forests or gazetted areas, I think I still seek your guidance if the provisions of 27(4) in relation to lack of proper wording can really help you guide this House on whether we should have it redrafted in such a manner that will not help government to shoot its leg.

THE SPEAKER: I think let us give the opportunity to our committee, which is going to work on our behalf. They will examine all this, refer to the rules and then they will advise us. So, let the appropriate committee handle it.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA FOR FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2001

4.49
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, this report is already in your pigeon holes. I am happy that my colleague there can show one copy, but in your free time you can check even on the e-mail you will find it.

I wish to present a report of the Public Accounts Committee on the report of the Auditor-General for Public Accounts of the Government of Uganda for the financial year that ended 30 June 2001. This report is the work of the Public Accounts Committee as provided for under its mandate; you will have to amend that rule because the new rules have just come. 

Under our Rules of Procedure and as a fulfillment of Article 165(5) of the Constitution, the report is based on the findings of the Auditor-General on how money granted by Parliament to meet the public expenditure for the financial year ended 30 June 2001 was expended. It also includes close scrutiny on policy matters related to financial management in central government accounts projects and the divestiture accounts. The work of the committee was mainly to ensure compliance with the Public Finance and Accountability Act, Budget Act, Appropriations Act, and any other laws and regulations governing public expenditure. In doing this, the committee’s interest -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mafabi, unfortunately even the Chair does not have a copy!

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Oh! Sorry. Mr Speaker, I had imagined you had the copy I sent to your office earlier, but I apologise.

THE SPEAKER: Can we be advised on how you intend to present this?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am not presenting the whole of it. I am just putting up a few issues then for the rest, Members will go and read and they come and we discuss. I do not know if it is okay. I will first maybe allow Members to go and read then I present tomorrow? Is that Okay?

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I request that you allow me to present this report tomorrow after Members have gone through it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we seem to be coming to the end of today’s business earlier than expected but before we do so, I have got this announcement to the effect that all members of AMANI Uganda are invited to attend a conflict resolution workshop to be held on Friday 01st December in the Conference Hall starting at 8.00 a.m. The presenters will include hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, hon. Nobert Mao, and many others. The issues will be the intricacies within ICC; are these peace talks or a peace joke; what is the role of MPs? Come and debate it. So, you are welcome to this meeting.

This brings us to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.54 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday 30 November 2006 at 2.00 p.m.)


