Wednesday, 22 November 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Chairman, Al Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)

(The House was called to Order.)

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA EXPORT PROMOTION BOARD BILL, 1995


MRS MASAABA WAFAANA (Woman Representative, Mbale):  I stand to support the Bill, but I have the following observations.  On page 8, Article 8(4).  It says ‘the Chairman and other Members of the Board of Directors shall hold office for a terms of three years and they shall be eligible for the appointment.’  If all these officers are going to be in office for three years and then be re-appointed, it does not follow that a few of them will come up again.  There is a possibility of dropping everybody; and then the continuity of the work of these people will be interrupted.  I will suggest that at least the Chairman stays in office for more than three years so that he can continue with the work that he may have started with the last group of people.  Then turning to page 10, there is (g) at the top of the page, which reads that ‘the Board of Directors will be responsible for making or approving Senior Staff appointment.’  There is a word ‘or’ which contradicts Clause 12 (4); which says that, ‘the Board of Directors may appoint Heads of Department, appoint any other officers and employees.  Then in (g) here on page 10; if there is a word ‘or’ giving the work of these people, it means they may not do it.  It should have been ‘and’ the Board will be responsible for making and approving Senior Staff appointments if it has to make sense.  Then coming to Article 10; it says’ the Chairman or in his absence’ and then the Clause continues to say, the Chairman will be presiding at the meetings of the Members of the Board.  The phrase ‘or in his absence’ is misused in this Clause.  In his absence is referred to in sub section 2 of Clause 10.  That is when they say, when the Chairman is absent, the Members will choose somebody among them to preside at the meeting.  

In this case, I am suggesting that the phrase ‘or in his absence’ from Article 10 be deleted.  Because it does not apply as far as sub section 1 is concerned.  Then when I come to Article 11, sub section 1; the meetings of the Board of Directors will be held at least once in every three months.  Then sub section 2, it gives allowance for Members at least five of them to sign a document requesting the Chairman, to convene meeting.  If this happens, then there will be too many meetings.  Personally I would suggest that the phrase ‘at least’ be deleted and we say that, the Board will meet once in three months to guide them.  And then, if there are other meetings that is well and good.  But at least here we shall have made it clear to the Members that, they must meet once in every three months and it will not be too many if they do their work properly.

Then we come to sub section 5 of the same number.  It says ‘if a Member has any pecuniary interest direct or indirect.’  Which means if a Member is one of those Members of the Board; he has his own interest in a matter that is before them.  The sub clause does not say that, this Member after disclosing his interest, he will leave the meeting to give chance to the other Members to discuss and take a decision on his interest.  He remains in the same meeting and this is likely to influence the decision of these people.  I would have expected to see that, this Member after disclosing his interest, he will leave the meeting and the other Members continue to discuss and then take the right decision without him.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR BUTAGIRA (Rwampara County, Mbarara):  I thank you, Mr Chairman.  I rise to support the Bill, with few comments.  First of all, my view is that, sometimes it is not just a change of terminology that will produce results. So, I do not think that, by changing Uganda Export Promotion Council to the Uganda Export Promotion Board, will produce magic solutions.  We must examine carefully; why is it that the Export Promotion Council did not perform?  Because there is a tendency of getting boards and boards and we think we have solved the problem.  But the problem is deeper than that.  So we call for analysis or the board that we are replacing and this one that is to be put in place and see whether improvements can be made.  Having said this, I want to concentrate my remark on Clause 6(e).  That is the functions of the Board. 

(e) Reads; one of the function is to formulate and recommend to the Government export plans, policies and strategies designed to provide efficient, adequate and coordinating measures for promotion of Uganda Export.’  When you read through these functions, you find there is an impressive list of information gathering by this Board to be created.  But the question is, how does this information filtrate to the people meant to be receiving that information?  Sometimes it is the impressive data, it is gathered and it remains in the offices.  Seminars are held and it ends there.  How is the person who is interested in promoting exports going to receive this information?  

So, there is information dissemination crisis sometimes, which has to be addressed to.  Sometime back, I was passing through Lusaka and then; I got interested to know how this COMESA and PTA Bank functions.  I was amazed when they started telling me the sort of resources available for people wanting to invest.  I said but in Uganda I have not heard of these things.  And I was told, there is no centre in Kampala that would disseminate this information to the would-be industrialists.  So, we must address ourselves on the issue of effective information dissemination. 

Then what sort of things we should address ourselves on when thinking about promoting exports.  We may take a leaf from other countries that have really promoted aggressive promotion campaign.  They often quote these countries of South East Asia called Tiger Countries and so on or the Cub Countries like Indonesia, Thailand who have produced miracles.  

Now, we must now address ourselves; how is it that they have been so successful in promoting exports in industrialisation and so forth?  One of the things they addressed their minds on was on the issue of skilled manpower.  Because when we are trapping foreign investors; why is it that these big companies in America and so forth are rushing to invest in South East Asia?  One of the reasons is the availability of cheap but skilled labour.  Do we have it in Uganda?  Do we have technicians or same technicians?  Do we have the skilled people?  So that when we are thinking of investment in electronics and all this type of thing, the manpower is there.  I do not think so.  

So, I am appealing to the Government and those engaged in this exercise, to address their mind on the issue of promoting technical education in Uganda.  Concentrating more and more on imparting technical skills, by setting up technical schools, technical institutes and so forth.  So that, when time comes for investment you have a pool of skilled labour so that it is self and attraction to the would-be investor.

Another point that this Board should address itself on when it is finally established is the issue of prioritizing or ear marking projects that are really going to promote exports.  When sometimes I inquired about the way the Uganda Investment Authority works, in fact I was amazed by the sort of people you find here masquerading as investors.  Do we screen these people so that we get that person who will come and invest here, so that we can now export and benefit from that or we just open a door for all these sort of people to come?  There are Asians who are now trading in second hand clothing; they call them investors.  Yes, they are there.  You can see really, a foreigner to come here, and settle here, and just engage in second clothing and you call him an investor.  It is an abuse, Mr Chairman.  Sometimes I am wondering and I started to fear that some of the would be investors are going to masquerade for money laundering business. Which now money laundering is a serious matter.  But here, I do not know whether we have addressed ourselves on this one, Mr Chairman?  So really, we should be careful as to what type of an investor we want to come and invest here for purposes of promoting exports oriented industries.  

Now, I also want to address myself on the issue of Agro-based Industries.  Quite often we are talking of Uganda being an agricultural country.  But have we asked ourselves whether our agricultural produce can internationally have market?  Those of you associated with EEC and how it works; there are really barriers as far as agricultural produce from developing countries are concerned.  There is tremendous resistance to opening up their market for our agricultural produce.  So what would be the point then in encouraging to produce, produce and there is no market.  So, we must know the mechanism of international markets; how do they operate?  

PROF. KAGONYERE: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I thought the hon. Member on the Floor and other Members of this House could benefit from this information.  Much as I agree with him that quite often there are barriers to trade with the European Countries, but it is also equally true that there are several commodities on which ACP countries have been given decided advantage over other countries; and have totally failed to meet a fraction of what has been given to them, Mr Chairman.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I do appreciate the hon. Member’s contribution.  But although I do agree in some cases there are barriers; nevertheless, the problem is not barriers as such, but the quality.  The European countries and all developed countries actually basically look at quality more than the barriers you are taking about.  If you can meet them, chances are that you can actually export.  I will say that, for instance in the logic countries, this country had a chance to export an average of 50 tonnes of pineapples.  But one, we failed to have enough aircrafts to lift them at that time, now we do.  But secondly, the quality that was required was not achieved.  If we can have investors in the agricultural sector, who are going to produce to the international standards, certainly the barriers maybe overcome.  

MR KAHERU: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I will like to give more information or extending the information which hon. Prof. Kagonyera gave.  Many years ago, the EEC extended export quota for the importation of textiles, sugar, tea from Uganda.  And they were very patient; they waited for us to produce these commodities while we were wallowing in our confusion.  And a few years ago, they closed that quota; but it is still available if Uganda can ask for export.  So, it is not a problem so much of EEC buying this commodity, it is a question of producing it in exportable surplus.

MR BUTAGIRA:  I am grateful for the information given, which is actually additional to the point I was making.  The fact is that, these barriers are there.  Whether or not, we have not met the quotas, that is another issue.  So my point was that, we should not concentrate only on agricultural produce.  What I was going to add on in my next sentence was that, we should now look for added value.  That we should now try to promote Agro Based industries.  So that, industries now can even be located in rural areas.  So we must have a complete picture.  While we are not discouraging agricultural produce but we should as well also now look at the issue of Agro Based Industries adding value to our produce so that we can at least export it in that form and maybe we shall have market for that.

I want to conclude; but I want to mention the issue of encouraging savings.  We do not seem to have had a consented effort in this country to encourage savings and curtail conspicuous consumption.  Sometime ago I was traveling with the former Vice President; as while chatting, he was telling me how he started saving.  He had a box like this, with a hole on top -(Laughter)- which he could lock and a key. So, he would throw their money and the key is taken somewhere; so he could not come out with a temptation to take out the money.  In the end, he builds up an impressive savings.  So, you do not need a lot of money in order to encourage a saving habit.  

So, we must look at saving schemes, pension schemes and so forth.  Because these savings once channeled into productive activities like industries and businesses that can promote exports, it will be worthwhile.  They did it in Japan.  Why has Japan really grown so far?  They did it! it was a combination of factors including the savings.  So, we must now inculcate in our country this spirit of savings and curbing on ostentation, conspicuous consumption and so forth and all these habits which my hon. Friend Maumbe would call Buzwa.  But those are no longer capable. 

So, in conclusion, I am in agreement with the establishment of this Board.  But the challenge it will have is really to make sure that all this information gathering filters through to the consumers and the people concerned.  Mr Chairman, I support.

MR MWANDHA (Representative for the Disabled): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Yesterday the question was raised as to whether there was need to form this Board.  Because the kind of functions that are being mentioned in the Bill are the kind of functions, which are performed under normal circumstances by Chamber of Commerce.  And the Members wondered why instead of assisting the Chamber of Commerce to have capacity to perform these functions, why was it necessary to come up with this kind of Organisation?  The Minister when he met the Committee, he admitted that, the Chamber of Commerce is weak; is not in a position to perform these functions.  And I think, therefore, there is need for this organisation to be formed.  And I would like to agree with him that, while the Chamber of Commerce is organising itself to become strong enough to perform its true functions, we should have a body which should perform those functions.  We should not wait for the Chamber of Commerce to be strong enough to perform its role; otherwise we shall loose a lot of opportunities.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Point of information.   Mr Chairman, I do appreciate that, the Chamber of Commerce might be weak.  However, an Export Board by the State is significantly different from a National Chamber of Commerce.  A Chamber of Commerce is a voluntary organisation made up by voluntary and voluntarily coming in businessmen to promote their personal and business interests.  It cannot therefore, always be in the national interest that the interests of the few businessmen that who want to come together will necessary do what the whole nation would want.  In a developing nation, we certainly need from what export with inherit and arm of government, rather than depend on voluntarism.

MR KINTU MUSOKE: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, on the functions of our Chamber of Commerce, I would like Members here to recall that at the advent of the NRM Administration, when you are reviving this Chamber of Commerce, people saw it as a new political quorum where they went.  So that we had the likes of Kayondo being the Chairman of this Chamber of Commerce, and when he tried to use it politically it did not work; he resigned from it.  So this Chamber of Commerce of ours, must be a serious Chamber of Commerce.  For you to be able to take over this function and not a front for other intentions other than the one intended for Chamber of Commerce (Applause)

MR MWANDHA:  Mr Chairman, I do appreciate the information that has been given to me both by hon. Manzi and also by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister.  The information given confirms what I was saying and also the argument, which was on the Floor yesterday.  If traders were promoting themselves within the Chamber of Commerce, in total they will be promoting the exports of Uganda.  So really, we are not at violence in arguing.  But really we need this kind of body to do the job, which an effective Chamber would have done.  And as it has been explained, people went to this Chamber with hidden agenda and maybe it is not only Kayondo, there could have been other people who could have exploited this (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.

MR MWANDHA:  But Mr Chairman, my argument is not that, we should not create this body.  In fact I support the creation of a body that is going to promote our exports.  However, if you look at the functions of this new board and also look at the functions of the Council which is now being replaced by this Board, the difference is hardly there.  Now, as one of the hon. Members hon. Butagira mentioned, I think we should really look at the reasons why the Export Promotion Council failed.  The Export Promotion Council was set up by Act of Parliament in 1983; unfortunately it could not operate until NRM came to power and made it work.  But even then, it did work very well.  There were a lot of problems.  

First of all, the management of the country itself left a lot to be desired.  The kind of people that the Minister appointed to look after this Council were not the people that were really going to promote the exports of this country.  And instead of setting up a every effective Board of Directors, the Council existed for many years without a Board of Directors.  And I can tell the House because I know for certain this Council appeared before the Committee responsible for Parastatals.  And they were very surprised that the Council existed for many years without a Board of Directors and the Board of Directors has certain important functions to perform; but because they were not there, those functions will not be performed.  And even because the Board was not there, no effective management could be put in place.  

I think the Minister to keep the Board going, picked a few people from his Ministry and put them out there.  And when you look at the functions these people were supposed to perform to undertake market intelligence work through the gathering and dissemination of trade information, carrying out various studies and market research and engaging in external promotion activities and providing advisory services; you found that these people were basically there; whenever there was an opportunity to go to a trade fare outside Uganda, then there was business.  Many exporters and importers and other people who needed information were terribly frustrated.  Because the management of the place was not really effective.  And by the way, if you looked at the offices where these people were operating, I do not know whether hon. Members have had the opportunity to go to this place; I do not think the hon. Minister has been there.  But the place on Jinja Road is a place, which no serious investor in export promotion business would be encouraged to go.  The place was in one of the very badly run down building of government in town, not renovated and when you went there, even they hardly had enough furniture, you could see occasional old typewriters and the place was not encouraging at all as far as promotion of export is concerned.  

I say I support the creation of this Board.  But if the Minister is going to run this new Board like he has run the Council  -(Laughter) - I do not think that we are going to get anywhere.  Because you see, what it means and as the hon. Butagira has said, we are really changing name; from a Council we are going to a Board.  They will have the same people do the same things in the same office, with the same limited resources of furniture and so on and so forth.  And we shall remain exactly where we are now before the Board is created.  That is my fear.  But I think the Minister should assure this House when his time to contribute comes.  He should assure this House that, when this Board is put in place, definitely there will be a visible change in the image of the Board so that it has effective management, it is properly facilitated, it has a reasonable budget and sense of course.  

Talking about the Budget, we provided that, a certain commission will be charged on export.  And proceeds of this commission would used to fund a Council as well as the Bureau of Standards.  And when these people came to our Committee, we looked at the figures very strictly, to see how much money had come in, how much money had actually arrived in the Export Promotion Council.  

If I had figures here, the Members were going to be very surprised.  That most of the money that had been actually collected as a result of this commission, really never went to the two organisations, which were supposed to benefit.  As a result, their budgetary requirements were really lacking and most of the time, they were suffering from financial problems. 

My appeal is that, let us establish this Board.  Let us establish it according to the objectives that have been set.  But let us really this time be sure that this Board will function in a proper manner.  If that assurance is given to us, I think this House will be happy to pass this Bill.  As far as I am concerned, I think this Board any way is bound eventually to be phased out when the Private Sector improves and that the Chamber of Commerce is strengthened and there are people who are more enlightened; many of the functions, which this Board is performing, will naturally go to the Chamber.  And I think then the Board will phase out.  But I think I will like to support and I call upon the House to support the passing of this Bill so that we can have a Board.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

HON. MEMBER:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I rise to support the Bill and in my very brief contribution, I want to agree and look at the composition of the Board of Directors namely; Clause 8(1).  I do agree that, the proposed Membership of the Board of Structures will go a long way in promoting trade between Uganda and the outside world and all these people will be relevant.  But I am also inclined to think that, one of our ministries has been left out and yet it has a very relevant and important role to play in as far as promoting our external trade is concerned.  And that is the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  I would have been happier if the Ministry for Foreign Affairs representative were put on this Board for quite a number of reasons. First of all, our ambassadors and high commissions abroad are charged with a variety of responsibilities.  Their primary duty of course is to enhance Uganda’s image abroad mainly in the political field.  But it does not end there; they expect it to deal with the promotion of cultural cooperation between us and their countries of a connotation.  They are supposed to engage in scientific technical cooperation, they are engaged in finding schools and colleges for our students.  But above all, I would like to say that at least of recent, the trend has been that, we would like to see our ambassadors practising more of what I would like to call Commercial Diplomacy more than Political Diplomacy.  Our Ambassadors and High Commissions are permanently stationed wherever we have sent them and they are on the spot.  They are in position to go out and do some scouting around and see where the potential investors are.  Not only that! They are there to give information about Uganda through newspapers, through literature for the visual new paper and so on and so forth.  And indeed I am inclined to think that; a good ambassador who establishes good political relationship with his country of a connotation, does lay a very fertile ground in as far as promoting our exports.  And if I were put in a position where I have got to decide where an ambassador should be promoted or not, I will start by looking at the position our balance of trade between us and that ambassador’s country of representative.  

I have had an occasion to consult our colleagues in the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, namely hon. Ruhakana Rugunda and hon. Agadi Didi.  And they quite agree with me that, there is a need for them to be represented in that Board.  I have looked at the Ministry’s structure and I found that, the Ministry has a very well worked out department which is meant to promote trade between Uganda and the outside world.  So, with this, I fail to understand how the Ministry for Foreign Affairs could not have been included in Clause 8(1).  

So, it is my intention, Mr Chairman, if I am not time bad tomorrow when we reach the Third Reading to propose that we include Clause 8(1)(j) which will say, ‘one representative of the Ministry responsible for Foreign Affairs.’  Mr Chairman, I beg to support.

MR SIBO:( Nominated Member): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I do not know whether I want to support.  But if I have got to support this Bill, I would require a lot of stringent conditions from the Minister.  A lot has been said about the efficacy of this Bill.  We have heard past experience of organisations to promote African trade.  We had for instance the African Trade Development Fund.  This was intended to assist the Africans to get into International trade.  Now unfortunately, this fund failed; and as we speak today there is some money I believe which has been lost in the Bank of Uganda on this account.  And the Minister for Trade and Industry does not know anything about this (Laughter)   

The second thing is that, there are a number of buildings all over the country; I think we have previously referred to this problem, which again were constructed to assist the African Traders to get involved in trade. Here again, these buildings have been left to waste; and indeed some of these have been used for personal rents and I do not know whether the Minister is aware of this and if he is aware, I am not quite sure how much he is collecting from these buildings.  

After the African Trade Development Fund, we had the Export Promotion Council.  Now the Minister has referred us to this Council in Clause 18 of this Bill and he proposes to repeal the Act that set up this Council.  I have gone through the available index to find out where this Act is; I have failed to see it.  I have gone through the Act of 1983; it does not exist there.  I do not know what we are repealing?  And I would have liked to compare what is in this Act; with what is in the Bill here.  And I feel most likely what we are really changing is Board for Council.  Because what was done in Export Promotion Council is what is being proposed to be done in the Export Promotion Board.  So I do not know.  I am not quite sure whether the Minister really can enlighten us on the differences between the actual functions and objectives in the Act as compared to the objectives and functions in this Bill establishing the Board.  So, I am not quite sure whether it is going to be effective.

The third point I have efficacy in this respect I would like to bring to your attention - it has been referred to by hon. Mwandha when he said a lot of things have happened. Now if that is the case, then the Minister really will have to assure us that what is happening is something fundamentally different from what has happened today.  Because the Council has failed miserably and we do not know whether this Board is going to succeed.  

Now, having said this, I will also want to say that, in fact what has been lacking is not the provision of the machinery. What has been lacking is the organisation.  The markets are there.  We know there are there for our products.  First, there has been lack of organisation.  A number of exporters have asked a number of Airlines and for capacity on the airline to export; and this capacity has been provided by Airlines like SABENA, by British Airways, now by Alliance.  But you cannot rely on these exporters.  They tell you, we shall provide 20 tonnes every week; and you wait, you provide for this capacity that is not available.  So, I do not know whether really the market is a problem.  I believe the problem here is the organisation of what is available to bring it to the market.  And I think the Minister should address himself more unto that, than the system to look for the market overseas. 

Now, having said that, I would like to address myself to a few points in this Bill.  One is the funds that are being made available to the Board in Clause 13(a), we are providing for a levy of not less than point 5 percent of all imports and all exports.  I am stressing the word all, because I would like the hon. Members to know that, this is a big sum of money.  Currently, we are earning something like 500 million dollars per year.  Now, even if we take only that figure which is only in terms of imports, the point 5 percent will be 2.5 million dollars, which is 2.5 billion shillings.  Now, this body of something like 10 people with a little establishment cannot spend those 2.5 billion shillings really.  There are very few ministries that have got this provision.  Now, what is the Minister going to spend on this?  Why can he not take something less and spend it more effective?

HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I thought it was important to correct the impression that hon. Sibo maybe giving the House.  First, it is correct that the statement reads a levy of not less than 0.5 percent on all imports and exports.  But if the Bill does not in way suggest that, we will be imposing this charge on all imports and exports.  The idea was that we will charge 0.5 percent on imports and maybe at the later stage if we have developed large volumes of exports and large sums of exports, we could swift this charge from imports to exports.  But because we did not want half to come to an amendment, the legal experts advised that, we draft it along this line, subject to clauses that follow.  If you read 14(1); 14(2) and 14(4); you should read it in consultation with those for you to understand why we proposed this provision.  

Secondly, our Annual Import Bill maybe as well 500 million dollars or so; but you know that, the bulky of this is the donor funded and it is not therefore, subject to levy for the figures you are putting are totally misleading if I may suggest; and what we will end up having is a much slightly smaller figure than what you are suggesting.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR SIBO:  Thank you very much, Mr Minister, for the information.  I think two points on this arise.  One, let me say once we say all imports and exports, the law is there, it is provided and people will levy that amount of money from all exports and imports.  So that is very clear.  If the Minister decides that he is going to impose the levy on exports at a later stage, then he should perhaps say so in a law.  The second point is the figure on 500 million dollars.  This is actually a figure that is current.  The Minister should perhaps get himself properly advised.  I am talking of the actual figure that is current and this figure is even less and it has nothing to do with donor funding.  I am not talking of the Budget; I am talking of actual collection as we speak today on imports.  So that is the second point.  

Now, I would like to suggest that perhaps the Minister should address himself to a slightly a more realistic figure.  Even if he refers me to the subsequent provision which I am going to comment on.  Even if he refers me to those, I would suggest, he should bring himself slightly less down, to be more modest in his collection.  And in fact I have suggested in my amendment point one percent.  That might perhaps even be more than he requires.  I am aware that, it is suggested that any access should be put in a consolidated fund under Clause 14(4).  In fact I am trying to suggest that, we should delete that.  In any case, even if we intended to put it in there, why should we have to provide for it in here?  There is already a provision for it.  

The second most important point in this, is that the effect of this levy or is 5 percent is that, it is actually going to increase the prices of the goods that are imported.  Now, if it is going to increase the prices, then why do we have to do this, Mr Chairman?  If it is collection, taxing taxes for the Budget, then the Minister for Finance will look after that.  But if we are going to collect money through the Export Promotion Board, we should know that, the Export Promotion Board does not require all that in order to increase the prices of the goods that are imported.  And even much work is to increase the price of the export.  Because it is the farmer who is going to pay for that.  

Having said that, I want to also suggest that, the funds of the Board should be in form of capitalization.  We should capitalise the Board, and having capitalised the Board, the Board should look after itself and we should not be required to vote funds for it every year.  If we agree on that one, then Clause 14(4), will have to go.  There is no need again for expense of funds from the Board into the consolidated fund.  

Furthermore, I also do not think that, there would be need for the consultation with the Minister responsible for Finance in the cases of estimates.  The Board makes its own estimates and these estimates are approved by the Minister responsible for the Board. You do not have to go back to the Minister for Finance, that is a long queue for really approving a simple matter.  So, I think that again should go.  Now, with respect to Clause 15(2); the annual accounts of the Board are supposed to be audited by the Auditor General.  In most cases, the Auditor General appoints somebody else, he has got the capacity to do it.  So he appoints someone else.  So, we should provide for this under that Clause. 

Secondly, in Clause 3 and 4; we note that, the production of accounts by the Board to the  Auditor General, then to the Minister should be properly regulated not in the way it is said.  Because it says’ the Board shall within six months after the end of each Financial Year submit to the Minister the annual Report and in (4), the Board shall within six months after each Financial Year submit the audits to the Auditor General.’  Now, really, that is a bit of confusion.  I would like to suggest that, in the first case, it should six months, in the second case, it should be three months, giving the Auditor General three months to audit before submission to the Minister and two months to submit to the Board so that the Board has at least one month to submit to the Minister.  That would make it more logical.  

So, the last point I want to make really is that, we are divesting ourselves of public enterprises and at the same time we continue making this item and forming some other public enterprises.  I really do not know whether the Ministers do seriously think of the policy.  And then you know, the policy is there, but they want to make it ineffective.  We are liberalising and at the same time we are serving ourselves in another way.  So maybe the Minister will want to advise us on this matter, because it is a bit confusing.  I thank you, very much Mr Chairman.

MR ABU MAYANJA (Busuuju County, Mubende):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.   I do not see any useful purpose that will be served by establishing this Board.  So, I am opposed to the Bill, and I will give my reasons very briefly.  Up to now there has existed in Uganda something called the Export Promotion Council.  It has been in existence for about 20 years.  I do not know and I do not know if you know, what it has done to promote our exports.  There has been no analysis.  There has been no report; there has been no evaluation of the work of the former Export Promotion Council.  When you look at the composition of the Board, proposed composition, you will find that, it will be composed of bureaucrats, a representative of Ministry of Finance, a representative of Ministry of Agriculture, a representative of Ministry of Trade and other people.  Now, these people do not know anything about export; they do not know anything about promoting export.  If they did, they would not be sitting in these old ministries (Laughter) If they knew anything about exports, they would be out doing their own business and getting rich (Laughter).  But they are sitting there, some of them maybe they are the people who are being accused of these things we hear about, because they want to make money.  Now, how do you expect, how does my Friend and former Colleague, how does he expect these bureaucrats to know anything about promoting export?

DR KAHERU: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the information I would like to give to the hon. Member that, out of a Board of 10 people, only three are the bureaucrats he is talking about.

MR KINTU MUSOKE: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform this House that this Bill was debated in Cabinet. Long time ago and approved by Cabinet when the hon. Member holding the Floor was a Member of the Cabinet and I do not remember him ever raising this opposition to this bill and even raising this issue he is raising here now.  (Laughter)  So, I hope this will be able to help us as to the nature of the opposition that the Members are putting up to this bill.  Thank you very much.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, the information provided by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister might provide a clue to the fact that I am no longer in that very august House.  

DR MAGEZI:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman Sir, there is an oath of secrecy taken by all Cabinet Ministers which bind them in Cabinet and even when they are outside Cabinet.  Is it in order for the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business and the former Attorney General to start divulging Cabinet secrets?  (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Those are not Cabinet secrets.  Proceed please.

MR KINTU MUSOKE:  Mr Chairman, bills presented to this House begin as Cabinet secrets and are brought here.  That is how this one came here.  That is what we are talking about.  It is that Cabinet secret that has come to the House and it is in relation to that that I am giving this information.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.  I had already ruled on that.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, the game now is privatisation.  The name of the game now is privatisation.  The government has found through trial and error experimentation and so on that it is not really suited to the business of making money.  Neither the government nor its parastatals set up by it are really in a position to do that business.  That is why we are now very energetically divesting ourselves of the businesses.  Those Members of the House who may be old may know that we had a problem in the 1960s of promoting Africans in trade.  We set up state trading corporation, we did all this, and in the late Prof. Lule’s era we built a few buildings by the bus park, car park for Africans to put in their shops.  

But until the Amin phenomenon, I repeat, until the advent of the Amin phenomenon, there was no African who had really entered the secluded precincts of trade.  When the Asians were thrown out and Africans had to take over, we found people trying to learn from scratch.  They did not know what an LC was, they did not know how to fill in figures.  But when Amin did it, then they came and we do have Africans in business and they are growing.  The argument I am advancing is that the existence of the national trading corporation or state trading corporation however it underwent some changes, it had abysmally failed to do the task of advancing Africans in trade.  Now we want to promote -(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, before hon. Abu Mayanja came to the House, various people had given information but actually the private sector, the chamber of commerce for instance would be the right body to do the kind of thing that the board is going to perform.  But the Minister has admitted that the chamber of commerce as of now is very weak and has no capacity to do this kind of work and if we cannot wait for the chamber of commerce to be strong enough to perform its rightful role, we have to create a body.  We cannot continue waiting to export.  We have to create a body and this body will subsequently phase out when the chamber of commerce is strong enough to perform its rightful functions.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, I am very grateful for that information but surely if it is admitted, if it is agreed surely then our business should be to put muscle, to give teeth, to strengthen the Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry, not to create some other - if it is admitted that the proper body to do this work is the chamber of commerce, then let us give the money to the chamber of commerce.  Even let us lend them some of these civil servants to do their administration.  Let us do whatever we can, but let this be a private thing.  If somebody wants to get better about the condition of the market, let him go and buy it.  That is what is done.  Now a very thriving export business is developing in our horticulture in the export of flowers, roses, what not.  This was not the work of he export promotion council.  People found out that other people needed roses and they are growing roses and any roses anybody can grow now have got a market.  So, I plead let us use these heads which God gave us and let us think a little bit more seriously, a little bit more creatively, a little bit more constructively, analyze the disease, diagnose it properly and then prescribe the remedy.  So if the problem is that the national chamber of commerce is not working properly but this should be its work, I will vote for strengthening the national chamber of commerce an industry.  If the Minister needs advice, surely the appropriate committee of this House or any select committee can advise him to do so.  So you create this board, you want to tax people, the House objected to taxing say on imports in order to tax exports.  Why should they be taxed?  

Sir, I know it will not be taken but at least let it be said on the Floor of this House that if I had my way, I would humbly advise the hon. Minister for Trade and Industry to withdraw the bill and go and set up, he starts very serious work on how to put flesh and blood and money and life and energy into the national chamber of commerce and industry.  Let people do their business.  Take out the government.  Let the government do the business it is designed to do.  You do not bring a stick to cook food.  Let everything do the best that it is designed to do.  The government should run the army and the police and that kind of thing; maintain law and order and peace and security.  That is its function and let the people go - put there the department of weights and measures so that nobody cheats anybody else and let the Ugandans go and do their own trade internally and externally.  Mr Chairman, I oppose this bill.

MR ADAM IMAGA:  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I rise to oppose this bill.  Before I give reasons, let me allay the allegations about Chamber of commerce.  Chamber of commerce is doing very tremendous work but it is the Ministry of Commerce which is frustrating Chamber of commerce.  Mr Chairman, government should not involve itself in trade.  This has been said many times.  I would prefer the government to establish a board which should promote production like Uganda Coffee Development Authority, like Uganda Cotton Organisation and many others for agricultural products like simsim, like cashew nut and many others.  But when it comes to a time of marketing, this should be left entirely in the hands of the private sector.  

I think government should address itself to these three areas.  One is promotion of production, the second one is funding the middle entrepreneurs and then the third is infrastructure.  The Coffee Development Authority has given a very good example.  Now today, we have Coffee Development Authority, which promotes the production of coffee.  As I speak now, in Arua, we have about 13 nursery operators who are funded by Coffee Development Authority.  Agricultural department through Kawanda Research and Buginyanya provide technical guidance and training.  Now, Coffee Export Association has come as a private exporter.  I think we should learn from what Coffee Development Authority is doing.  Now in future on our side as coffee farmers, we are saying, we want to export coffee by ourselves as the growers because it is like somebody who keeps his cow, milks it when it comes to sale, somebody comes and sells and gives you the price as he wants.  So this is our battle between the coffee export association but at the moment, we have not started.  We are still on the ground.  

Now, if you look at section six, the functions of the board.  This is exactly what the National Chamber of Commerce is doing now.  If you go to Kyambogo commerce, I am sure you will get all the addresses of exporters and importers in the world.  But because Sempa is not supported financially, that is the problem.  Formerly Sempa used to collect the annual subscription from the members through the licensing board; that is to say when you are getting your licence, the licensing authority must make sure that you make your contribution to chamber of commerce.  So when this liberalisation came, the business declined to contribute to pay annual subscription to Kyambogo commerce.  All these, for example, to provide trade and market information services, includes details for tariffs for all markets by product category.  These are all in the chamber of commerce.  

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  May I inform the hon. Member on the Floor that even if the current chamber of commerce is doing what is in section six, there is a tendency as the Rt. hon. Prime Minister said, by members of the chamber of commerce to get some petty traders to gang up so that people who would otherwise do the job are not forth coming and therefore they would elect sub-standard manpower who may not match up internationally.  Mr Chairman -(Interruptions)

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of order.  Is it in order for hon. Wanendeya to come up and say that there are some sub-standard members of the chamber when he knows that those that have led it are not sub-standard?  And two, when he - even if he thought he was not sub-standard - has failed to his membership fee?  (Laughter)  Is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is entitled to his views.  Proceed please; you are entitled to your views.

MR WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman, I am not going to withdraw what I said because I know that some of the Members are not worth to the standard of other chambers of commerce.  For instance, in Kenya, they are not worth it.  I therefore declined to be a member in standing because the people who were there are not good enough.  So they do not match up.  Thank you.

MR ADAM IMAGA:  That is his own observation but as far as I know, the election of chamber was purely democratic.  I was a member of the council of chamber of commerce.  We are people who have been importing into this country.  So I do not know what he is mainly talking about.  I think the Minister should talk more of chamber of commerce and  Uganda Manufacturers Association because Uganda Manufacturers Association is just child of Chamber of Commerce.  So today when you have overseas trips, you take these people of Uganda Manufacturers Association.  What do they do?  They are just manufacturers and part of Chamber of Commerce falling under Uganda Small Scale Industry.  So, instead of creating this body, I think Chamber of Commerce should be reactivated.  

Now, I come to section 8, where the Minister has said, the chairman of the board of directors who shall be from the private sector.  Now, I do not know exactly what he means.  Does it mean that any manager in private sector can be appointed as a chairman of the board like the managing director of BAT, Madhvani, Sembule and something like that?  So, on the point of five percent, really as my Colleague hon. Sibo said, this is a very big amount and it will really affect the prices.  The businessmen do not lose a single cent.  Whatever they pay, they recover from the customers or from the consumer.  So we must be very, very careful when we are imposing a lot of taxes in this import and export.  Also in overseas, it will make our goods more expensive because whatever the exporter pays, he will recover from the farmer and that is why the farmers are getting fewer prices on the agricultural produce.  

Regarding the Export Promotion Council, I think this council was established when most of the exports were in the hands of government.  Now today, we have the policy of liberalisation, of privatisation.  Now, what is this board really going to do?  As I said before, instead of establishing this body, let the Minister organise Chamber of Commerce.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.

PROF. KAGONYERA (Rubabo County):  Thank you Mr Chairman for allowing me to contribute to this debate.  Before I come to the bill itself, I want you to give me some minute to make a comment on what I heard on the radio or read in the papers regarding traders on the streets.  I was a little bit perturbed to read in the papers that people or traders lost their property because someone wanted to establish law and order in Kampala.  I read in the paper that Uganda is hosting a conference on how cities are planned and therefore these people must be on the streets for other people to see.  I thought the opposite should be true that these people should be on the streets so that when these planners come and see Kampala in its true colours, then they decide how properly to plan cities.  (Applause)  And in fact Mr Chairman, these people are trading on the streets not out of fun, not because they enjoy it but because there is something missing; poor planning, whether it is by the State, the Chamber of Commerce, the private people that hon. Abu Mayanja has been talking about, I have no idea.

MR MWANDHA:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman and I thank hon. Prof. Kagonyera for giving way.  Among the people that have been thrown on the streets are disabled people.  The National Union for Disabled People in Uganda had an understanding with the City Council, for City Council to give some stalls to disabled people so that rather than these people staying on the streets and beg for a living, they would go and carry on some trade in the markets and this was officially allocated by the City Council but to our shock, these disabled people, the people from city council just pounced on them, totally unaware without any prior notice and in the process of evicting them from this place, they lost some merchandise.  You imagine the meagre merchandise to enable them to live were lost in the process of being evicted!  Honestly, why can’t our city council officials not have any consideration for the marginalised groups?  Why is it that they could not really give them notice so that they could have moved out in the normal way?

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I appreciate the information from hon. Mwandha but really to go further, these people who are trading on the streets are not doing it out of choice.  In fact I want to believe that there are people who are making some attempt to earn unhonest living.  (Applause)  The question therefore is, what do you do with those people?  Do you throw them off the street and therefore they have to look for less honourable means of earning a living?  

I have read elsewhere that the person who started the Marion hotel system - and those of you have been privileged to sleep in Marion hotels know what it is.  I have never; I just have looked at them.  But that person started on the streets of Washington selling hot dogs under an umbrella.  Had he been thrown off the street, the Marion hotel system would never have been established by him.  Therefore, personally much as I agree with the city council for attempting to making Kampala - incidentally, I never saw anything ugly about the merchandise.  These people on the contrary have arranged their merchandise in a very beautiful artistic manner and they are attempting to attract buyers.  Now I am not saying that they should act illegally but I think we should find a way of containing of these people in a proper manner.  I have been inconvenienced by people selling food on the other side but even then, there are so many things that inconvenience us in this world including mosquitoes.  What do we do about them?  We have to be inconvenienced, we live in the third world and if someone is coming from London, there is Soko in London.  They trade like these people are trading.  So, I do not understand.  I have not carefully studied why the whole story - but I think the government -(Interruption)

MR BUTAGIRA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the information I want to give hon. Kagonyera is that as he has rightly said, this type of people trading and so forth, it is not just a Kampala thing.  It is worldwide, even in planned cities, these people are there.  They have what they call free markets; they are there selling things.  What is annoying us here in this country is when the city council and some officials go about their business.  Right now, you cannot go through industrial area.  The whole thing is flooded nothing.  Instead of paying attention to those things that matter, potholes, they are chasing our people from the streets.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the hon. Member is making a very serious observation on these hawkers.  It is worldwide that hawkers are on the streets.  As he was saying, I was privileged enough to sleep in that Marion hotel in Washington.  They are there.  Then in New York, fifth street, Lexington, just five streets away from the headquarters of the United Nations.  Even hon. Babu who is not here now was able to buy a watch from one of these hawkers.  (Laughter)  So these people are everywhere.

HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, the problem we see on streets is caused by city council.  City council officials have not really done their job.  They have not played their part in developing this city.  They have not really measured up to our expectations.  So, I think the executives of city council should either be transferred or should probably resign.  When you go to places like Natete, it is really jammed. They are just beginning to put up a market; go to Nakawa and so on.  So the development that is taking place now in the country has not been addressed by the city council.  Therefore, the city council should really be denounced and members should really either be transferred or should resign.  Thank you.

MRS SEBAGEREKA:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I would like to stress the importance of this motion on the Floor and to find out the cause and effect of these people or the street vendors.  I have several times stood here and talked about environmental protection about people smoking and BAT and Mukwano and nobody has taken care of that and now these people are trying to earn a living like the hon. Member has said and they are being harassed.  They are increasing on our trade and industry.  But the things that are affecting our health are not talked about and the thing that is improving our standard of living is these people are being pushed out of the streets. I was also once on the streets of Washington and I saw somebody selling a Christian -(Interjection)- no, not a perfume.

THE CHAIRMAN:  What were you doing on those streets?

MRS SEBAGEREKA:  Anyway, whatever it was, it was a scarf and I asked one of the policemen, I said, why are you allowing street vendors to sell these things?  I had bought the same scarf for 90 dollars and they were selling that scarf for 35 dollars.  So I asked the man why, and he said, we are so bogged down with major things other than wasting our time looking at people who making meaningful living on selling things like that; because they were avoiding the high rate taxation and rents.  So these people, I am requesting Mr Chairman and this august House, to let the City Council of Kampala examine themselves the cause and effect of these street vendors.  Let them look at things that are polluting the lungs of our citizens, the well being of the fish and the lake rather than sending out street vendors.  I thank you.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Well, Mr Chairman, I thank all the Members for the information they have given.  But to conclude on this one, I think this is a social problem of tremendous magnitude that cannot afford to be handled by just some - what hon. Abu Mayanja referred to as bureaucrats at the city council.  It is a very important issue and, therefore, I hope that the government will take interest in what is going on.

Now, to the bill. Is the bill necessary?  Is it important to promote exports?  Absolutely yes.  I get surprised by two contributions; one from hon. Adrian Sibo and another one from hon. Abu Mayanja and these are two very senior Members of the House that I thought had tremendous experience about what ought to be happening in this.  First of all, hon. Sibo says that the money these people are going to get is too much.  If he knew, the amount of work these people ought to do, I thought he would say that in fact they are getting peanuts for their job.  All over the world, in the most privatised countries, government has the duty to promote export.  (Applause)  In fact it is government’s greatest duty, every country, Japan, the United States, if you cannot promote exports as a government, you are not worth half the salt you are worth and I stand to be challenged by anybody and the success of any country economically or otherwise, is going to depend upon how much it can export to other countries.

HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I do not intend to challenge the Member but the information I want to give is that the point he is labouring is very important.  Without export promotion, this country cannot make any headway.  We have produced a lot of products and I will give you one example of soya beans.  It is now flooded all over our places in Lango and a kilo is now being bought at UShs 30  to the detriment of the producer and if these people had any market information as to where their soya bean is being demanded, it would go to their own good.  So really this bill is so important that anybody who comes here to challenge it must think twice.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr Chairman, thank you for your protection.  Now hon. Abu Mayanja was saying that this job should be left to the chamber of commerce.  The chamber of commerce is constituted by businessmen.  This body is going to be professional body.  If I may say, the Chamber of Commerce are tacticians, day-to-day running of what they are doing.  This body are going to be strategists.  They are going to look in the future.  They are going to look at commodities.  Traders have no time studying commodity future and what have you but if we put the right people in the right places, these are the people who are going to be studying these things and then inform, educate the chamber of commerce about what they should do.  So personally, I do not see any conflict whatsoever in establishing this board besides the Chamber of Commerce.  I am not going to say that the chamber of commerce is incompetent.  Maybe with time, they will improve.  After all, when it all started, I hear people were selling the shirt by the collar size.  If the collar size was 15, you charge 15/=, if it was 16, you charged 16/= but things have improved Mr Chairman.  

So really, my own contribution is that this body must be established but when it is being staffed, it must be staffed with very, very competent people.  Forget the board, I am talking about the officials.  They must be very competent people who know what is going on in the world.  I was thinking about what type of people the board ought to employ; Ugandans versus foreigners.  I think we ought to mix them up because it must be admitted.  Our history is such that we are not very sufficiently exposed to the rest of the world.  So maybe, we will need to bring in some fresh blood rather different blood from outside.  Look at countries, which have succeeded in diversifying and promoting their exports.  But we must bear in mind that some of these people may come here not to work for us but to represent their own countries.  So in fact it can be dangerous.  So we have to be very careful about this.  

I would like this body to get to serious work and focus on things we ought to do.  The danger has been, spreading our effort too thin and too wide.  We ought to look at those commodities in which Uganda has got a comparative advantage over other countries bearing in mind that we are a landlocked country and therefore costs of transportation are number one constraints for Uganda’s exports.  For example, even if you gave a way certain agricultural products free to the rest of the world, they would not take them because the cost of transporting them to their countries would make them uncompetitive.  Therefore, we ought to look at those things that we can export.  For example, you take floriculture.  Flowers have got a huge market out there and it has been proven that Ugandans can produce flowers of world qualities.  As a matter of fact as we talk today, there are probably about sixty exporters of flowers from this country.  None of them has failed.  So why therefore should the government not focus more on a thing like floriculture rather than thinking about other things that can be very difficult to export, whose prices are no good and whose future is unpredictable?  

So, with those few words, I would like to support very strongly the bill and hope that this bill will help this country to establish a viable export business; because we are living in a false world today.  We are depending a lot on in-flows from aid.  So we may wake up one day and there is no money from aid and we have to depend 100 percent from our own exports and this is about the time to start Mr Chairman.  I support the bill.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now call upon the move to wind up.

THE MINISTER OF PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Kaijuka):  Thank you Mr Chairman.  Let me first of all thank all the distinguished Members of the House who have supported the bill and even those who have opposed the bill in the sense that they have had an opportunity to express their views.  In winding up, I want to try and summarise the major features of what I consider major areas that need clarification so that the entire House can move in full support of our new export promotion board.  

First, let me clarify on why we really must have export promotion board.  Must we have it?  And if we do, should it bear the same name?  Should it be called a board or a council?  I want to really emphasize that it is not just change of names.  We are talking about creating entirely a new institution.  In the old Act and I must apologise because I agree with hon. Sibo, the export promotion council Act that is being repealed - this was a typing error.  It is definitely not 1983.  It is Act 17 of 1969 and I do apologise for that.  But the point I am making is that if you look at that Act, it was indeed a council composed of bureaucrats, nothing but bureaucrats and apart from anything else, it is true they failed to perform essentially because of lack of funding.  But apart from anything else, bureaucrats had their limitation but the new body we are setting up, the new board is meant to be composed of people with stake in exports. In other words, it is the stakeholders who have every interest in making sure that this body performs its job professionally and it succeeds.  Now who are these?  The second question that has been brought by several Members is that why bother to establish a board?

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I wanted to clarify to the Minister that actually hon. Sibo should not have confused you because it is Uganda Export Promotion Council Act, 1983.  So I do not know whether you are going to number seven.  I do not know whether you are going to repeal Act of 1969 or 1983, which is here.

MR KAIJUKA:  Sorry Mr Chairman.  I have been advised by the Office of the Clerk that he has just done some research because I was getting confused myself.  So, I think before tomorrow, he will come up with clear clarification if we can with your permission.  Before I was interrupted, I was beginning to explain that Members of the House should not be confused by the different bodies that do exist because they should recognise that people who are involved in exports do not come from one sector.  We are talking about exports from agricultural produce and therefore you have farmers with their own stake and people are talking about the new bodies that we have established like (CDO) - Coffee Development Organisation, like UCDA (Uganda Coffee Development Authority).  These are meant to focus specifically on those commodities.  In other words, once Uganda Promotion Board is in place, it will not handle those items that are already organised to be exported.  But there are a good many.  We are talking about the board emphasizing non-traditional exports.  The emphasis is on non-traditional exports and therefore, when you talk about non-traditional exports, you are talking about other agricultural products like floriculture that hon. Kagonyera is talking about.  You are talking about people who are going for minerals and so on and so forth.  In other words, this will be a body that will have the capacity to analyze and see how best Uganda indeed can take its comparative advantage and so I listened particularly yesterday by most hon. Members who contributed.  They were confusing the issue by saying that since we already have these bodies, why do we have the export promotion board?  There is no contradiction.  The answer is, we have no choice but to have a body focus on the non-traditionals so that we can increase the volumes exportable over a period of time.  

The third issue I really want to clarify is that question of Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry.  If you look at the proposed vote, it is being proposed that amongst other representatives in the board, apart from farmers, manufacturers, exporting organisations and associations, we are suggesting that the chamber should be represented.  Why?  Because they are also stake holders.  The Chamber of Commerce indeed as you all know concentrates on matters of trade, it concentrates on matters of commerce per se and that trade may be internal or it may be for exports.  In fact the majority of them are just importers; not many of them are exporters.  It will be full hard on our part if we achieved that the chamber of commerce, not only as it is presently constituted but even in the future if it was to be left with the responsibility of promoting Uganda national exports in large volumes.  Then the second point I have to emphasize on the chamber of commerce and industry, yes, I want to agree with most Members that the chamber of commerce and industry is definitely weak and there are very good reasons why perhaps this chamber is weak.  

Incidentally, that is not the only reason why we are proposing this bill.  Hon. Mwandha was giving the impression that since the chamber is weak, that is why we are proposing this new board.  That is beside the point.  It is true that it is weak but even if it was not weak, we would still propose having this until such a time, all those who are involved in exports, through their strong organisations have been in a position to articulate their interests and carry on this great job of promoting exports.  So I thought I should make that clarification because we would be making a mistake if we assumed that once you have a strong chamber of commerce, you should do away with the business of promoting exports.  As far as the problems of the chamber are concerned since many Members of the House have talked about the chamber, they really had a problem of history as has been clarified in the House.  

One, if you look at their Charter, this is a private organisation of business community, those who are involved in commerce and industry; purely private.  But I think the charter made a mistake, a charter that was made recently presupposes that these members of the chamber have to be organised right from village level.  You have to organise members from the village level.  In other words, you will begin electing members from - if you imagined remote shops in Mpigi and Kabong and they come to form Uganda national chamber of commerce.

AN HON. MEMBER:  And Sheema.  (Laughter)

MR KAIJUKA:  And Sheema, although Sheema traders are a bit more enlightened -(Laughter) - they still would not perhaps serve efficiently at the very national level. But the point I am making is that when you are dealing with business, I think people should not confuse business organisations with democracy.  People who make these business organisations succeed are people who have a stake first and they have the money to run them.  So it is not surprising that for example, although our manufacturers association has recently been established.  When people formed themselves into a manufacturers association, they did not go to government to say, can you give us money so that we pay rent?  As I speak to you today, our famous Uganda national chamber of commerce and industry has to ask government to give them room to be accommodated.  So immediately you start with petty traders, it is not their fault that they find themselves in leadership of the chamber, it is not their fault because they were elected from the grass root.  Wonderful democracy!  But in terms of business, you should not confuse democracy with wanting delivery.  You must have people who have money to run these organisations and then you will talk about a strong vibrant and efficient chamber of commerce and industry.  

So, I thought I would take this opportunity Mr Chairman, to explain that it is true that I have had dialogue with Members.  I hope they will come up with an agreement where they will amend the charter themselves and we can have the likes of the Mukwanos and the Mulwanas and so on.  Even you can belong to a manufacturers association but there is need for the country to have a Uganda national chamber of commerce and industry because some countries like middle east and so on deal with nothing else but chambers of commerce and industry.  We have no choice but to revamp these private organisations.  Unfortunately, our hands of the government are tied because we have got to persuade these people so that we have a vibrant organisation at the end of the day.  So I thought I had taken some time to address these issues.

The fourth area I thought I should comment on is on funding because I think the House is entitled to thorough explanation. It is true that if the country - and I repeat - had strong private sector organisations, we would definitely expect the private sector fund these promotion efforts.  But as hon. Members have clearly understood, if you look at those who have succeeded in the far east, for some of you who may have gone to Korea, Singapore, Thailand, Malaysia and so on, governments have had to deliberately fund these efforts and part of our failure as Uganda is for us to pay lip service to export promotion.  I regret to say that much as we articulated this as the major area more than four years ago and the House ended up committing one percent of whatever get out of our imports to fund these institutions, I am afraid the machinery on the ground, the delivery mechanism has been such that this has not happened; and what we are trying to create now is to precisely address that issue to say, how do you create a new vibrant board that will make the difference?  We then had to address the issue of saying, yes, we must get assured funding and that is why we incorporated this provision of 0.5 percent as I had explained.  

Now, I want Members to take trouble and look at that provision because if you read it in a hurry, you will not appreciate what we are trying to achieve.  If you look at the financial provisions in clause 13(1) and hon. Sibo was making that point.  I want to repeat that there is no contradiction in practice.  We will be charging 0.5 percent on imports, not exports.  Why?  Because we still have very low volumes of exports.  We are deliberately making a deliberate incentive to exporters and, therefore, we do not want to tax anyone who tries to export.  

However, if our volumes of exports for the sake of argument increase the levels of three billion or whatever amount, that more than meets our import bill and we have surpluses on balance on payments on annual basis sustainably, then we may as well shift that charge from imports to exports because it will be just the stake holders serving their own interests; and so the legal draughtsmen have advised and I stand to be corrected and that is the Attorney General’s office especially when hon. Abu Mayanja was there, they advised that we draft it along these lines so that at a later stage, we do not have to come back for amendment.  

Now, we had wanted to create an autonomous body just like hon. Sibo was saying but unfortunately, we were advised - we have had a problem with Finance that under the present Finance Act arrangement, all funds that you raise through imports must go through the consolidated fund.  That is why you read in clause - apart from passing through the budgetary provision, each year, the board will sit down and have its own estimates, the board will pass it, it will go to the Minister. The Minister will have year after because we hope we can take on this exercise of promotion seriously.  Once this budget is agreed, the Minister for Finance has to note that although such and such sum is expected to be earned from imports that agreed budget amount must automatically go to the export promotion board.  That is the suggestion we intend to put in place.  We are saying once this money is earned, let assume it is collected for the sake of argument, 1.5 billion shillings but you have budgeted for one billion shillings, clause 14(4) is clear and specific where in any year, the funds collected from the levy exceed their budgeted amount, the funds in excess of the budgeted amount shall be paid into the consolidated fund.  We had to do that precisely because of the present Finance Act arrangement.  We did go back and we looked at whether or not it was possible to do it differently.  We were advised that there is no way it differently other than by this arrangement.  

So, I think some good suggestions have been made vis-a-viz some drafting provisions and we are prepared to look at those that make sense and those that do not.  Apart from that, I want also to underscore the point that once we have this board in place, we would like - I want to capture the words used by hon. Rwakakooko yesterday - in terms of really having strategic action plan for the country and it is possible by the way, it is possible if we are all determined.

I know that Government has budgetary constraints, but if as a country, everybody is bothered about increasing exports and we better do so, because, warnings given by hon. Kagonyera are real, I want to emphasise that they are real, it is not just Speaker Gengrik causing a revolution in the United States; for a long time, you have not heard budgets being declined as you heard recently in the United States, but that Western donor countries are under pressure to address their internal problems including unemployment.  This aid flow is not sustainable, I can assure you.  It does not matter how much we are being praised by the donors, tomorrow the song can change, and we will have to look to ourselves and the time is now and the answer is through this Export Promotion Board without giving it lip service and it must be really supported, not just by really some arms of Government.  I would like Ministry of Finance, to take this as a top priority, I would like to see all the private sector players, taking it as a priority, so that if you are manufacturing, make sure you are efficient and look at the outside markets, if you in agriculture, process indeed, as hon. Butagira was saying, add value, so that there is real improvement in our economy.  If this is not done, I am afraid, we are really sitting on unstable micro economic situation, because, it is wrong for us to really say, a micro-economic position has been contained, inflation is down, people can buy dollars anytime, let me tell you, if tomorrow we are unable to balance our Budget, all those will fall by the way side and we will come to reality and therefore, we have no choice, really, in my view.  We should be really planning to say that in five years or so, the country must be able to pay its bill; we must be able to pay our Civil Service, we must be able to export, but people do not seem to be thinking along these lines, they think it is a joke.  

So, I want to agree and I hope I have convinced hon. Sibo and hon. Abu Mayanja, that much as they had deviated a moment ago to supporting a worthwhile cause, I am sure they will be the first ones once the question is put; whether or not they support this Bill.

The other important area is really a point really made by one hon. Member that we really must deliberately work on improved seeds that have comparative advantage.  I want to appeal again to private sector really and the Research Station, Ministry of Agriculture and everybody involved.  I think Ugandans are ready to move, they are ready to move, except that there is -time has lagged between research and the time these seeds are proven and the time they get in the hands of farmers.  I want to inform the House that there is what we call the Idea Project being funded by USAID and once this Bill is passed, it will have to shift the Uganda Export Promotion Board, because, apart from having bureaucrats looking at each other, this Idea Project intends to actually articulate and develop relevant tradable, relevant items that people should be focusing on and that is the different between the old institution and this new one.  For example, this project could not go into the present Council, precisely, because of its present set up.  But I want to commend those who talked brilliantly about need to develop these high breed seed that could enhance our exports.

The other point I need to make is that people are confusing liberalisation and privatisation and what Government should do.  I think I have heard a good many, and I am having real trouble, because you have embraced liberalisation, you just have to accept that competition is a matter of course, that is a way of life, whether you want it or not.  A minute you say, let us go for liberalisation, if you want to command economy, I would be commanding as a Minister of Trade, you will just not be moving any commodity from Zone A to Y; you will have to get a Licence every minute, but I happen to be enjoying my office, because, once you are fully liberalised, you have no time to waste to waste doing petty things like allocation - you are concentrating on more serious things.  

But, when everything is said and done at a global level, I want to say that Government has to take the lead and that is - one of them is this Export development, it is not by bad Government operations, that some countries like United States, some of you who have been reading newspapers, you hear of Secretary Brown, Secretary for Commerce, leading delegations to China.  Recently, the Chancellor of Germany was leading a delegation to Germany and they go and win export orders.  Why?   Because, they are carrying national interests, they know what is at stake and know that if you have got those orders, employment is sustained and increased and this goes on and on.  It is only in Uganda where you are mistaking liberalisation to mean - and really people should not be mistaken and you know, 

I am the greatest supporter of liberalisation but at the same time, I do not want Government to abandon its roles.  I look forward to a time I am in private sector; so that I can continue demonstrating that whether you are in Government or not, it does not make any difference. So, I want to say - I cannot really exhaust every point that Members did raise, but I wanted to assure hon. Sibo for example, when he talked about African Development Fund; I want to assure him that the Minister is fully aware, otherwise, he would not be in his position and I wanted to advise him that soon the Government is coming up with a clear policy on those properties, in fact, the Cabinet paper on that subject is in place.  

Since we really must wind up, I want to conclude by saying that this is a very straight forward paper; let us really adopt it without much ado and really request all the players and I want to take the caution by hon. Kanyeihamba in conclusion, that I will make sure that the staffing is competent, it does not matter where it comes from and that we will not entertain the so called bureaucrats that have lived in very dirty premises.  I want to assure Members, that when I went there, I just could not believe that human beings would work from such premises.  

I want to assure the House, that we have taken deliberate steps to acquire that whole building and we intend to move all private sector people there, so that the whole Board can have a renovated and we are going to move in a different direction.   We have already by the way, in terms of information technology, we are already connected with e-mail connection and Internet, we are one of the first countries in Africa to do that. We are working with ITC in Geneva to link up with London and Geneva, so that traders can move without any hindrance, you can come from really to the backward country, but at the same time, if you know what you are doing, people will be surprised how much you achieve.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the Uganda Export Promotion Board Bill 1995 be read the Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

And with that, we have come to the end today’s Session.  We adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.

(The Council rose at 4.15 p.m. and adjourned until 2.30 p.m. on Thursday, 23 November 1995.)



 



















  

