Thursday, 26 November, 2009

Parliament met at 10.50 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: I welcome you and thank you for coming this morning. As we agreed, we are going to work up to 1.00 p.m. to enable you travel to your constituencies and participate in the proceedings of Idd Aduha, which is a public holiday.

BILLS
 SECOND READING

THE LAND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
 
(Debate continued.)
         
THE SPEAKER: Sorry, we were expecting a statement from the Minister for Energy and Mineral Development regarding our oil in Western Uganda. However, I prefer that we start with this business, which we were discussing when we adjourned yesterday and then later, the minister will make that statement if there is time.

Hon. Members, you will appreciate that by yesterday 108 Members of Parliament had made their contributions to the Bill. That was a sufficient number of contributions. I had detected repetition. There were no new ideas. We should now give an opportunity to the minister in charge of the Bill to wind up. The minister has informed me that they have shared the responsibility of winding up with his colleague. That is why he is starting.

10.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS (Mr Asuman Kiyingi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My senior and able learned colleague, hon. Omara Atubo, will make a comprehensive response to the issues that have been raised during this important debate. I will, however, for the record, make a few general observations.

I support this Bill not just because of collective responsibility as a minister but also out of ideological conviction as a socially-conscious and progressive Ugandan.

I thank honourable members for their contributions. I noted that the House is unanimous on the following:

i) 	Land is a very important strategic resource that must be managed and administered well for good order and harmony in the country.
ii) There are historical injustices and distortions in land relations and ownership that successive governments have been grappling with since colonialism set foot on Ugandan soil.
iii) 	The lands ministry requires more resources (perhaps over 100 times its current budget of Shs 20 billion) to be able to cope with the land challenges. 

I thank Members for this goodwill and hope that you will continue supporting the ministry in its quest for adequate budgetary allocations to comprehensively resolve the land question in the country.

This amendment is not creating new problems as has been said. It is a further attempt to enhance protection of bibanja holders as required by the Constitution. Article 237(8) states: “… the lawful or bona fide occupants of mailo land, free hold or leasehold land shall enjoy security of occupancy on the land.”

This constitutional protection for the tenant is further elaborated by Section 31(1) of the Land Act, which clearly states: “A tenant by occupancy on registered land shall enjoy security of occupancy on the land.”

Lawful and bona fide occupants are historical categories defined under the law. Under Section 29 of the Land Act - 
“(1) Lawful occupant means -
(a) A person occupying land by virtue of the repealed: 
   (i) Busuulu and Envujjo law of 1928
   (ii) Toro Landlord and Tenant law of 1937
   (iii) Ankole Landlord and Tenant law of 1937.

b) A person who entered the land with the consent of the registered owner and includes a purchaser; or

c) A person who had occupied land as a customary tenant but whose tenancy was not disclosed or compensated for by the registered owner at the time of acquiring the leasehold certificate of title.

(2) Bona fide occupant is also defined as a person, who before coming into force of the 1995 Constitution:
a) Had occupied and utilised or developed any land unchallenged by the registered owner or agent of the registered owner for 12 years or more.”

It is clear from the above that the people the law is protecting are not any “Jonny-come-latelies,” trespassers or squatters. Section 29(4) clearly states: “For the avoidance of doubt, a person on land on the basis of a licence from the registered owner shall not be taken to be a lawful or bona fide occupant under this section.”

If you occupy registered land under a specific arrangement other than those provided for above, you are not a lawful or bona fide occupant as envisaged under the law. Members should, therefore, rest assured that the interests you are trying to protect are genuine and legitimate for the big majority of our people. 

These Bibanja holders were not created by the NRM. They have as much as claim to the land they occupy as do the registered owners. This amendment seeks to enhance their protection by allowing only one ground for eviction; that is non-payment of the nominal ground rent. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was reluctant to rise up but I was wondering which page the minister is reading considering that this is an important matter that he is contributing on and we do not have copies to follow in order to internalise and appreciate the issues that he is raising. 

THE SPEAKER: I think the issue is directed to you and not to me.

MR KIYINGI: Mr Speaker, I am just responding to issues that were raised by Members here. I am the Minister of State for Lands but for the purpose of the record, the copies will be here and distributed soon. 

This amendment seeks to enhance the protection – (Interruption)
 
MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister has agreed that the copies will be here shortly but we are not following this very important matter. Would it not be procedurally right that we get the copies and follow critically well before the minister can proceed with his submission? We are being left behind and yet we are very much interested in following his submission. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The proceedings are suspended for 10 minutes to enable you get copies.

(The proceedings were suspended at 11.02 a.m.)

(On resumption at 11.33 a.m., the Speaker presiding)

11.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS (Mr Asuman Kiyingi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I was saying on page 4 of my statement, this is a partial response to the issues that were raised –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I thank you. I think on the onset, it is necessary for the State Minister of Lands to define what he is doing. Judging from what the title of this paper is, the minister is contributing to the motion. I see this as anomalous given that the Minister of State for Lands is actually the owner of the Bill. I would like guidance from you whether this is the way to proceed on this matter? 

THE SPEAKER: Can you proceed? 

MR KIYINGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise guidance. I have only a few minutes; hold your breath. 

This amendment seeks to enhance the protection of tenants by allowing only one ground for their eviction, that is, non-payment of the nominal ground rent. Colleagues have suggested that the grounds for eviction should be expanded to allow eviction of a tenant in instances where the tenant becomes, for example, a “nuisance” such as being a witchdoctor or violates other laws like environmental laws. 

The question we are asking is: does a landlord forfeit their proprietary interests in land when they become a nuisance as in the above stated cases? Environmental and other laws provide for sanctions that can be applied without depriving a Kibanja holder of ownership of property like Members have argued. 

Colleagues, this amendment is not a radical reform; we are not redistributing land; we are not selling land to the tillers. The landlord is recognised and so is the tenant.

It is also not true that this Bill targets Buganda. There is mailo and native freehold and registered land interests in other parts of Uganda: Busoga, Mbale, Ankole, Toro, Kibaale et cetera that will be affected by the provisions of this Bill. 

During my consultations on the Bill in Busoga, for example, and Busoga South in particular, the only problem expressed about the Bill was Section 32(b) which has been dropped by government. I can, therefore, confidently say that my people support this progressive Bill because they know it is for the protection of the poor and the weak against unfair and oppressive evictions by landlords. 

It is even strange that colleagues from areas that are reputed to treasure communal land ownership are opposing this Bill. If this land is “Ebyaffe” – for all of us – bequeathed to us by our ancestors, why should any Musoga, Munyankole, Muganda or Acholi be at the mercy of some few of us landlords to be evicted and chased around as and when they feel like? 

Hon. Kibanzanga and hon. Mallinga raised the following fundamental questions respectively: “Why should anybody pay rent at all if land was his or hers in the first place? Why should we just guarantee security of occupancy and not full ownership?” I salute them for these progressive positions. 

No government with a popular electoral mandate like the NRM legislates to oppress its people. This law –(Interjection)– but the Speaker has guided. 

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, during the debate yesterday, when a point of order was raised in respect of the Rt hon. Prime Minister reading, we were informed that he is the Leader of Government Business and, therefore, he is right to read his statement. 

THE SPEAKER: For your information, under rule 63, I allowed him to make a written statement. 

MS KAMYA: That is what I am saying, Mr Speaker, that we conceded -(Interruption)

MR KIYINGI: Mr Speaker, this law is for the protection of the weak and it is fair. It is not discriminatory. I however, agree with Members that ultimately we shall need to empower the Bibanja holders with titles.

As a ministry, we require significant resources to buy off both the landlord interests and vest title into the tenants and also for systematic demarcation and titling. 

The Land Fund was set up by this House under Section 41 of the Land Act but has not been adequately funded. Let this Parliament give us the money to enable us resolve this contradictions once and for all. Of course, it will require time to mobilise the Shs 2.0 trillion required. For now, this amendment is the best under the circumstances. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I support the Bill.

11.41
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Omara Atubo): Mr Speaker, I rise to answer some of the issues, which my colleagues have raised. I must at the outset recognise that this has been an extraordinary debate dealing with one of the most important issues namely; the issue of land.

I want to congratulate and appreciate all of you for your contribution and I think it goes a long way to assist this country to address one of the most important issues regarding our daily life namely; the issue of land. 

I do not want to pretend that I have all the solutions and neither should somebody pretend to have easy solutions to the issue of land.

Our debate in the last few days has helped to expose how complicated the land question in Uganda is. It is a very complicated and intricate issue. And I want to say that as we move towards the debate of the National Land Policy, the debate on this rather small Bill, the Land (Amendment) Bill, is an important prelude to the great debate that you, Members of Parliament and the people of Uganda, will have on the National Land Policy; a policy which to me is so important, second only to the national Constitution. Unfortunately, since independence, we have not had a comprehensive land policy. Now there will be an opportunity; that opportunity has started and your views will go a long way to ensure that we have a good, national land policy. 

The debate we have had on this amendment has spilled over and exposed many other issues that are bedevilling us. In other words, small as this Land (Amendment) Bill appears to be, there are so many other extraneous issues that were brought into this Bill. However, I believe that there are five matters, which debate on this Land (Amendment) Bill brought out not only in this House but outside the House for the last two years. 

First, it has exposed us to examine the strength of unity and integrity of the state of Uganda. What we talked on the issue of land has brought to the forefront the issue of unity and integrity of the state of Uganda. 

Secondly, it has brought a lot of tribal sentiments.

Thirdly, it has brought into the limelight the role of cultural leaders on land matters and politics generally. 

As far as Members of Parliament are concerned, it has also brought the issue of how we conduct business and how we treat each other; the issue of mutual respect and speaking the truth among Members of Parliament. 

And finally, the ability of Members of Parliament to stand firm on principle issues. (Applause) I believe that these five matters can be summarised as having been one of the most important lessons that have come out of this Land (Amendment) Bill. One hundred and eight Members spoke, the 109th being my Minister of State who is here. I have not been able to see how many supported or opposed but the figure is there. I want to say that our views can be categorised into three: there are those who spoke very objectively and there are those who spoke very subjectively and there are those who went to the level of insulting colleagues. 

It has not been easy for me to sit down there for the last few days. It has been one of my most challenging days in Parliament but I can assure you that I listened to all of you. I restrained myself and I never answered any of you however provocative and insulting some of your remarks were. Some of your remarks were insulting and I do hope you will accord me the same dignity - I can compare some of the remarks to a politician whom a rotten egg is thrown at. The best thing that you can do when you are a politician and a rotten egg is thrown at you and you are dignified, is to get out your handkerchief and wipe off the rotten egg because the person who throws the rotten egg, maintains the rotten eggs and possibly, its total contribution. In football, which most of us play and enjoy, you can go to the football ground and there are others who kick the ball but there are others who instead of kicking the ball, do kick and injure the players and even kick the legs – that is no longer football. 

I am, therefore, summarising my remarks on the preamble of my statement that those of you who have spoken objectively or otherwise, have made a great contribution to the advancement of the land issue in this country and those issues will be taken seriously by the government. 

Mr Speaker, each of the 109 people who spoke raised or repeated issues but I have managed to synthesise the 50 common issues that you raised like the Land Fund, the National Land Policy, the Bill is unconstitutional, it is under development and others. If you put this down together, you may not be able to say, “This is what this Member of Parliament said, can I respond to each Member of Parliament?” I would like to say that in my response, I will hardly mention names but I will deal with issues and out of even the 50 issues after the three ministers of state spoke, I think I am remaining with close to 20 important issues to touch on. 

Let me start with the object of the Bill, which is to address the problem of evictions. This is a problem which has been growing and therefore the government that is in charge of looking after the welfare of the people for the common good cannot sit by and watch. The statistics on evictions and land disputes ending in evictions are numerous and, therefore, it is the view of the government that one of the ways of addressing this problem is to bring this Land (Amendment) Bill which has some very radical provisions that are important and do not exist in other provisions. 

I want to remind you about the question that has been asked many times, “Is the Bill necessary?” This has been answered by the deputy attorney-general and his views were widely published and reproduced in all the major newspapers and every Member of Parliament got a copy and so, I will not exhaust that but refer you to the statement of the Deputy Attorney-General on this matter. 

One of the important provisions in this Bill is to introduce the issue of criminalising eviction and where an eviction is unlawful, the people who do the eviction will be subject to criminal procedure and on conviction, will be liable for up to seven years with no option of a fine. I think this is a very radical provision and you do not get it in another law because others have said, “It is not there in the Penal Code, it is trespass and so on?” No. I would like you to recognise that this provision of Section 32(a) is a radical provision as it brings in the issue of criminalisation and the same time allows the court to award compensation and damages simultaneously and also order restitution. 

In other words, where a person evicts as it has been happening and takes advantage of the weakness of the Bibanja or the peasants and that person is prosecuted and convicted, the court will go ahead and assess the damage that you have caused to the victim. It will award damages and at the same time, the victim will not have lost his or her land rights - the right of occupation to that land and the court will order that you go back to your land. This to me is a radical provision which never existed in the Land Act but it is of course scattered in other laws. I think Members should recognise – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, bear with me. Today in the distinguished strangers’ gallery we have Members of East African Legislative Assembly from the Committee of General Purpose, which currently chairs the East African Inter Parliamentary Forum on Population, Health and Development. They are here to share. You are most welcome, hon. Members! (Applause)

MR ATUBO: I want to say that [Mr Lukwago: “Clarification.”] No please, let me go ahead.
      
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the clarification is tying his hands and it is up to him -

MR ATUBO: The hon. Erias Lukwago, I respectfully wish to decline and I would like to leave it at that. It is not for any reason, but I think the time has come for me to wind up this debate. Let us end it.

I also wish to say that this law does not protect trespassers, it does not protect squatters; it does not protect people who illegally enter the land. The provision of the law is every clear on this matter. Section 92 of the Land Act is being amended to reinforce the situation to enhance the conviction when a person illegally enters your land. The person will be subject to imprisonment of four years and also to a fine not exceeding 96 currency points. This is in the amendment. This is an improvement. 

In other words, the law has as far as possible tried to bring a win-win situation between the landlord and the occupant. The law has also gone ahead to provide the provisions about the options to purchase - the Land Act talks about option to purchase. The idea especially in mailo tenure is that you have two interests to protect under the law: you have the interests of the mailo owner and you have the interests of the Kibanja owner. These two interests have been recognised since the historical 1900 Agreement and the Busuulu and Envujjo law went ahead and protected these people. 

To reduce the multiplicity of interest and conflict of interest, the law is saying that where the Kibanja holder, where the occupant intends to leave the land and sell to somebody, let him give the first option to the mailo owner. If you do not do that, you are criminalised and punished. The law has gone ahead to make an amendment to say the Mailo owner can sell but subject to the buyer and the interest of the Kibanja owner - the existing interest. 

In other words, if any person buys Mailo land, which has so many Bibanja holders, you cannot just go and say, “Because I have bought this mailo land from Omara Atubo but there are 200 Bibanja holders, I can go and evict them.” No. You buy knowing very well that the interests of these people are protected. This is what it is.

There have also been talks that this law does not address the cause of evictions and to some extent I agree with you. One Member of Parliament went ahead to say that this law is treating symptoms but not the disease. Others have said that they agree that evictions are there but this law does not go far enough to address the root cause of evictions.

I think you have a point there and I want to agree with you. Today, we have the open letter on the Land (Amendment) Bill by the Attorney-General of the Buganda Kingdom. He says this and I want to quote it:

“We recognise the fact that there are many people suffering violent evictions from their homes and the ancestral grounds are being desecrated in gross violation of our cultural norms. However, we do not consider that the Land Bill addresses the twin evils of corruption and impunity which are the root cause of the rampant evictions across the country.”

I want to appreciate the substance of this letter coming from that high institution of Buganda from the Attorney-General of Mengo. There is no dispute. For anybody now to say there are no evictions, where are the statistics and so on - I think those who think that once a big chief has spoken nobody else should speak, I think this is one of them. Now that somebody big from Mengo has spoken, you should not now dispute -(Laughter)- because under certain cultures here, once a big person has spoken, you must not answer back. I want you now in the spirit of that culture to accept that there are actually those evictions.

The issue that this House - and I want you to listen to this very carefully – should now address is therefore the cure. There is no dispute about evictions; we all agree that there are rampant evictions taking place but you and I disagree on the prescription of medicine to cure this disease.

I respect your views for that but as a government we are saying this is our proposal. We want to stop evictions and we are handling it legally and also politically. The first dose of treatment is to maintain the status quo of relationships between the Mailo owner and Kibanja owner. Maintain the status quo; do not evict these people.

Once the status quo is maintained like a good doctor will tell you when you have an accident and you are bleeding, he will go and stop your bleeding, he will make sure that your pressure is sustained at a manageable level; basic management and then he will deal with internal injuries, he will deal with the major fractures and I do recognise that it is a first step to deal with this serious problem of eviction and we do not pretend. I will let you know that even historically, right from 1928, this issue has been a serious problem and, therefore, we are likely to be there. So, if you have any proposals which can add to the government proposal, please let us know.

I strongly support you on the issue of the Land Fund - I think all of us must put our heads together as a government and as a Parliament. The Prime Minister has come out with a figure and I want to tell you that on Wednesday, Cabinet directed me to come with a cabinet paper on the issue of the Land Fund to see how we can operationalise the Land Fund and the money can be used to address this issue. Therefore, the matter is being handled.

On the issue of the 9,000 square miles, hon. Members of Parliament, I want to remind you of the statement of none other than the Minister of Justice and the Attorney-General who was responding to a very important question asked by the hon. Beti Kamya. This response is on the Hansard; it was distributed to you and it was reproduced in all our dailies. It answers the issue of the 9,000 square miles and I do not intend to dwell on that. This is the statement of the Attorney-General on that.

The issue was also raised that there was no prior consultation made with the country before the Bill was published. The critics also went further and said that indeed this Bill should have been preceded by a policy. Yes, I agree with you on both that this Bill basically did not have that wide consultation. But what is a Bill? A Bill is a government proposal for enactment of a law and therefore the government can come with a Bill, publish it and go for consultations. And that is exactly what we did. The government came with its proposal contained in this Bill and did not rush to enact it. It has taken two years of consultation, sensitisation and mobilisation -(Applause)- and now we are ready. The Bill has gone through very drastic surgery as a result of that. Every district and region was consulted; the President went ahead and met as many people as he could; the Prime Minister did; the ministers did and other Members of Parliament and, therefore, I do not see any major injury to the Bill having been made before the policy. And not all Bills are preceded by a policy otherwise you would not move. But I do agree with you that that apparent defect, which you have raised, was well cured by having this Bill stayed on for close to two years. 

The issue has also been raised on the issue of land disputes and evictions under customary tenure. I want to say that even under the customary ownership, the land disputes are there and indeed when the disputes are not amicably settled through consensus, one person must lose the land he is disputing. I personally come from the customary land tenure system area and there are a lot of disputes going on now there. I will give you two or three well known land disputes. 

There is one case of John Otusu in Oyam County, Oyam District, which has been going on and is still going on. The man leased the land with hundreds of people on it. What do you call that? We have the land in Gweri and in fact this was drawn to my attention during the tour. There is a very serious land dispute in Gweri, Aukot parish, of a Mr Ochen who is trying to chase a whole developed parish with a health unit, a school and so on. He wants to evict these people. What do you call that? Near Lira town, there is a serious land dispute over customary land of a very prominent Langi called the late Yakobo Omonya. When he died near Teso Bar in Lira, part of the family had sold the land and the people had even developed it. Now it is a very serious land dispute and they are saying, “Get off this land.” So, colleagues, there are serious land disputes under customary tenure and some of these do end in evictions. 

Mr Speaker, I also want to tackle the issue about the Mailo land system here in Buganda and I want to tell colleagues that you have no better authority on the land problems here especially in Buganda, than this book. There is this book called The Struggle for Land in Buganda: 1828-2005. It is written by a very respected Muganda scholar called Samwiri Lwanga Lunyigo. I would like you to look at this book very critically. I am talking about this because those who do not want to analyse the land rights in Buganda after the 1900 Agreement or as affected by the 1900 Agreement still look at the system as before the 1900 Agreement. 

With your permission, Mr Speaker, let me just read a very important statement by Samwiri on page 3: “This system of land tenure where the Kabaka and the clan heads were joint trustees of the land in Buganda on behalf of the people and where land was basically an instrument of politics, was radically upset during the colonial period. The colonial land system removed the Kabaka from his position of Ssabataka or as chief trustee of land in Buganda; it removed the clan heads as trustees of land on behalf of their clans. The relationship between the Kabaka and the chiefs and through the chiefs to the peasants, changed since the colonial system divorced the ownership of land from political responsibilities and most radical of all, land could be bought and sold like any other commodity from holders of land. At the will of the Kabaka, chiefs now became the major owners of land in Buganda in perpetuity. The giver of land, the Kabaka, was now given land under the Buganda Agreement of 1900.” 

If you still think –(Interjections)- colleagues, I want you to have access to this book and I think it will improve your knowledge of what is going on –(Interruption) 

MR LUKWAGO: The minister is making reference to a book which was written by some scholar - but we have a Constitution, which was promulgated in 1995. Article 246 restored cultural institutions giving them authority and powers to hold property in trust for the people they lead. This Parliament enacted a law for the restitution of assets, which were confiscated from cultural leaders. Is the minister in order to continue urging the opinion of a scholar who insinuates that the Kabaka is no longer “Ssabataka” and that the property which was taken away from cultural leaders will never be restored? That those cultural institutions have no powers to hold property in trust of the people they lead, in total oblivion of our Constitution? Is the minister in order? 

THE SPEAKER: My understanding is that the minister is recommending you to expand your knowledge by getting to know different views and be able to take a stand.

MR ATUBO: I also want to go ahead and end my remarks on this issue of Mailo land holding. Members of Parliament spoke for a week and five days on this Bill and as a minister, I am just asking for a few minutes to respond to your issues. 

One of the problems that has been said about the mailo-bibanja owners has been about the type of relationship they have had. Indeed, there have been some arguments even in this House by members of parliament that the relationship between the kibanja holder and a mailo owner has been very friendly since the 1900 Agreement. Once again, I want to dispute this assertion; there is an assertion that this Bill is going to inflame hostility between the bibanja holders and the mailo owners; that historically the relationship between the kibanja owner and mailo owner has been friendly and cordial. I respectively wish to disagree with this assertion. This relationship has never been cordial and if you take time to go by oral history or read this book, you will find that one of the reasons why the Bataka movement was formed was to fight this problem of hostility.

The Busuulu and Envujo law was enacted as a result of this hostility between mailo owners and bibanja owners. I really want you to appreciate this; the relationship has been a bit uneasy and to some extent hostile. That is why Samwiri Muyingo is saying that “…why the overwhelming majority of the Baganda could not get land whatsoever in this unjust land settlement did not erupt into violence and terrorism when the agreement was signed?” I do not have time to answer that, but I want to recommend you to read the book.

THE SPEAKER: Are you laying that book on the Table?

MR ATUBO: The book costs Shs 20,000 only and I have no problem completing my quotations, which I intend to do, to donate to Parliament by laying it on the Table.

Let me conclude my remarks by answering a few important issues that were raised on the Floor -(Interjections)- yes, it is important. I want to respond to some of the issues which were raised on the Floor. The record must be corrected. As I sat here for the last few days, there were a number of inaccuracies and I would have risen and said, “Can I correct it now?” But I decided to keep quiet and wait for this opportunity to correct the record. 

One of these inaccuracies is that I walked out of the Constituency Assembly because of the provisions of customary land. Yes, I walked out and some of the colleagues with whom we walked out are here, but we never walked out on the issue of customary land. We walked out on the issue of restrictions on multi-party democracy. I want to correct this record - I would have stood up and corrected hon. Michael Ocula and said, “Honourable, you are wrong.” I walked out, but when I walked out, it was because of the restrictions on multi-party democracy.

I also want to correct a few wrong impressions; a number of Members of Parliament did have what I may call personal attacks on me. I would like to beg my colleagues including those on government side to allow me make these corrections because some of them are extremely damaging to me politically. A wrong impression was created here by hon. Cecilia Atim Ogwal and hon. John Odit where they even compared me to a Pontius Pilate. (Laughter)

MS ANYWAR: I appreciate the sentiments the honourable minister has, but the Rules of Procedure do not allow us to talk about colleagues who are not in the House to defend themselves. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, how would he know the member is not in the House when he/she is supposed to be in the House?

MR ATUBO: I want to state that when Pontius Pilate was judging Jesus Christ, he was a governor and he was in charge of a state. I want to state that in this debate I am neither Pontius Pilate in a position of a judge nor a governor in any state. However, more serious is the intimidation by hon. Odit that in his opinion, the Jews have never forgiven Pontius Pilate and, therefore, as a minister in charge of this Bill, if the Bill goes through, I should never be forgiven. I want to thank hon. Onzima for dealing with this matter.

There was another serious allegation made in this House - I want to put my record right for posterity. The second serious allegation about me was made by hon. Aciro who said that I wrote a letter directing the district land board to allocate land to an investor, Gen. Oketa. I want to put it on record and lay the letter which I wrote on the Table. Let me read the letter because I deny having ever directed to that effect. The procedure for allocation of land in the district is very clear and the minister has no powers over it.

The letter reads: 

“The Chairperson, 
District Land Board Amuru, 

Application for issuance of title for Maj. Gen. Julius Oketa for a large piece of land allocated in Omei Parish, Amuru Sub-County, Amuru District

Maj. Gen. Julius Oketa has applied to be issued with a certificate of title for approximately 10,000 acres of land. He has applied to the district of Amuru for allocation. The land is intended to be used for a sugar industry and a foreign company has already agreed to invest in the company.

However, currently we have a problem of not having area land committees in place, thereby delaying the process of inspection and issuing the title.

Maj. Gen. Oketa has approached the ministry to expedite the issuance of the certificate of title on the land to enable the implementation of the project without undue delay.

Taking into consideration the urgency of the matter, I am writing to request you to treat the application as a special case and to proceed with the inspection and consideration for allocation in the absence of a land committee”. 

That is all, so what directive did I give? 

I lay this on the Table.

I also wish very briefly, to respond to two serious allegations about me. One of them is by hon. Benson Ogwal of Moroto who said that when I was Minister of State for Defence, the cows of the people of Lango got stolen and, therefore, I am also responsible –(Interjections)- please, let me answer this. 

When hon. Ogwal was making this serious allegation, I never interrupted him. Hon. Ogwal said and I quote, “Another voice that came out very strongly during the consultation and everybody agreed that when our cattle were being rustled, it was our son who was Minister for Defence. This time round when our land is being taken, it is our son of Lango who is the minister in charge.” I want to end the quotation. He says, “This is a point of view coming from a whole district Chairman of Apac and everybody is in agreement.” This is a very serious allegation and I want to respond to it in this way. I took time to ring the Chairman of Apac who is none other than a person I have known for the last 50 years (Mr Kawuma rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kawuma, please sit down.

MR ATUBO: He is called Nicholas Opio Obunga and I have known him very well for the last 50 years. I asked him and in fact I even noted here that I rung him at 1.30 p.m. on the 23rd. I said, “Did you attend this meeting? Did you say this?” Mr Nicholas Opio Obunga, who is the chairman, denied that he ever said this statement. Secondly, he said that he is a teacher and even taught Benson and was wondering how Benson could have misquoted him.

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up the debate.

MR ATUBO: Mr Speaker, this is very serious and in defence, I want to say that when I was Minister of State for Defence, for one year, I never participated - the cattle rustling in Lango started immediately after the overthrow of Idi Amin and has been going on and so I could not have participated. 

Finally, when we went for consultations in Soroti -(Interjections)- you must allow me to answer this. When we went to Soroti for consultations, hon. Alaso, hon. Akiror and hon. Mallinga said that after consultations, the people of Teso prayed and when we went to the radio talk show, their prayer was heard and we were nearly killed by lightning with hon. Ecweru.

I want to respond like this -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, if I were you, I would have completely ignored this.

MR ATUBO: No, but it is important. This type of prayer, which I believe can only come from devil worshippers and not from Christians was never done and that lightning was all over Soroti District and did not target us. 

I want to end by calling upon Members to support this Bill as it is well-intentioned by the government. It is intended to address the problem of evictions and that it goes a long way to solve the problem. Mr Speaker, I beg to move. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

12.40
MR JOHN KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Mr Speaker, after this wind up speech, I am sure that the next step is to put the question on this matter and we move into committee stage. I want to note that my OB and minister has made a lengthy speech on this matter. He has indicated how important this Bill is and almost 120 Members of this House have contributed to this debate. It is important and he has stressed this. 

When we move into committee stage, we shall be going into amendments to this Bill, which have been indicated. The minister himself has made one amendment dated 12 November 2009, the committee has four amendments and I am sure that each amendment is going to attract debate. I have also moved two amendments and I have already given notice to the chairman and to the minister, which amendments are also going to attract a lot of debate. (Mr Amama Mbabazi entered the Chamber.)

Hon. Amama Mbabazi, you are welcome to the House. All these amendments are going to attract debate if justice is to be done to this Bill. It is one O’clock today and tomorrow is Idd day. I pray that you allow us to deal with the amendments as we should. We should have time to consider each one carefully, and I would wish that honourable members who have to go for their Idd should be allowed to do it in peace. 

So, I am asking, that since time has been given to handle this matter, we should not rush the remaining part because it is also extremely important. I pray that we sleep over all these amendments and be able to give them the treatment that they deserve. This country will not forgive us if we appear to rush the amendments. Let them be given time for consideration. That is my request, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Member, I appreciate your submission. I will respond after the first step. The first step is to give the motion a second reading. Honourable members, I put the question to the motion that the Land (Amendment) Bill be read for a second time. 

THE SPEAKER: I have counted you, the number is over 40. What we are going to do is to vote by show of hands. We are going to do it bench by bench; we want to be transparent.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I notice that the voting is in terms of rows. Unfortunately, the other side of the House is flowing beyond capacity. Some Members have nowhere to sit. If we proceed this way, and given the zeal with which our friends are taking this motion, we run the risk of double voting. I would like to propose that the voting takes a different form. Precedence has been set in this House before during the amendment of the Constitution in the Seventh Parliament –

THE SPEAKER: Do not worry; I am going to take care of your problem. Hon. Members, who are standing, please come down. The area has now been decongested. Let us repeat the counting for the third row. We should never exhibit fear of democracy and transparency. 

 (Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in a very transparent voting system done today, I wish to declare the results as follows: Abstentions; 03, Noes: 55 and Ayes: 112. And the voting has been witnessed by the international observers from Arusha. (Applause) 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

1.12
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Mr Speaker, I am not in any way out to doubt the outcome of the elections that we have just gone through but I want to make one observation and seek guidance. When you total the results that you have announced and you take a headcount of all prospective voters on this motion in the Chamber, the numbers will not tally. There are those –(Interjections)- please, allow me build my point. There are people who have patiently sat here and they have not shown any side at all -(Interjections)- I do not want to embarrass them but if you want me to do that, I will. 

If persons of that nature feel it is their right not to take any side, that is their right but I foresee a problem. This is a very contentious motion in which we as people’s representatives must pronounce ourselves; you cannot sit on the fence. Therefore, as we go into the final stages of this Bill, I would appreciate if we changed the method of voting to roll call so that everybody is accountable. [Hon. Members: “No.”] Yes, why do we fear? We were given an opportunity to vote by show of hands and yet there were some Members who glued themselves to their seats.

Mr Speaker, where I come from, there is a saying that if you want to know whether the tortoise is male or female, throw it into fire. When the shells break off, then you will know whether it is a male or female tortoise. This is the moment of truth and we must remain historically counted. I therefore appeal to your indulgence –(Interruption) 

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, is it in order for the honourable member to consume a lot of time by making statements that he is not substantiating? He is talking about members who have voted without mentioning them. You called for those who abstained and they were three; those who were against were 55 and those for the motion were 112. If there are Members who do not belong to any of the three categories, let him mention them. Otherwise, he is wasting people’s time and money in making statements without substantiating them. 

THE SPEAKER: The returning officer is only concerned with what is in the box. You cannot say you walked to the polling station but did not vote. That, I do not know. I have asked about those who walked to the polling station and did vote. I think you should just leave it that way. 

I appeal to you, hon. Members, to develop a culture of accepting election results when there is transparency. This one was very transparent but still some people are resisting the results and yet even the international observers nodded in acceptance. 

The Bill has been read for the second time, so we should be going to the Committee Stage.

MR WADRI: I thank you for your ruling, Mr Speaker. As I had said in the beginning, I was not here in any way to contest the results of the decision we have just taken. All I am appealing for is your indulgence, as we progress with this debate and voting process, as to whether we can adopt the method of roll call -(Interjections)- that is all I am asking. 

MR KYANJO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am not here to dispute the results but I am here to make an appeal in the interest of the rights of the members who came to vote but you told them that they were late. I beg that they vote as well.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, those Members found when we had passed a certain stage. We could not reverse. They came when we had closed those stations. 
 
MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, I do appreciate your message that Ugandans must learn to accept the culture of electoral defeat. Your message is very different from the attitude that we saw in Uganda in 1980 when a handful of young men who had been defeated roundly in an election decided to run to the bush. (Laughter) (Mr Byabagambi rose_) I think they should really learn from you that even when they are defeated at the next elections, they should not cause confusion. (Interjections) In light of that, I would strongly support the view that we –

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, is the honourable Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire in order, being one of those who objected to the results in 1980, to continue disorganising the House when Members are submitting. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have had many elections in this country. Some of us witnessed elections when we had to go to polling booths alone. With the ballot boxes there, one would even lift and see which ballot box had more cards and which one has less and one could even remove the photo of those having more votes and you put the photo on the other box. Those were the elections then, but I think there have been reforms and we now do not have polling booths any more. Polling booths were very dangerous because you could do anything in the polling booth. You could even pour acid in your opponent’s box to reduce it to ashes. We have been improving the way we vote. As for this particular exercise that we have gone through, I think it has been 99.9 percent transparent.  

There was a submission that was made by hon. Kawanga but I thought he had brought it prematurely in the sense that we had to first of all deal with the motion which was on the Floor for a second reading and then you would talk about the Committee Stage. We did not know whether we would have the Committee Stage then because if the motion was defeated, the question of the committee stage would not arise. Now certainly there will be a committee stage on this Bill. You heard his views that we postpone so that we look at the amendments. I do not know. 

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): The Rt Hon. Speaker, hon. Members of Parliament, we have been with this Bill for two years and I suggest that we proceed –(Interjections)  

1.23
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): I thank you so much for this opportunity. Hon. Lukwago, abstention is my right. I am a Member of Parliament for Aruu County. Tomorrow is a very big day, since it is Idd, and 20 days after that is Christmas. Judging from the festive seasons this country is soon undergoing and with a lot of contentious and important issues in this Bill, I would augur with the view of hon. Kawanga and disagree with the hon. Prime Minister that if you cannot wait up to after Christmas, at least let the Muslims enjoy their Idd ­–(Interjections)- without this legislation. That is my humble opinion that we stay over it as we buy time for more consultations. I thank you so much.

1.24
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you. Hon. Kawanga’s submission has been out of good faith; that we have been debating this Bill for the last 10 days and indeed, we have had various contributions, views and amendments. This morning we received communication from the Attorney-General of Buganda –(Interjections)– I personally distributed these views from Mengo to many MPs here. I will request the honourable members to agree that we stay this Bill until we go and carryout various consultations so that we can come up with a law that is good for all of us. The moment we try to hurry, I know that – (Interruption)  

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Is the hon. Member in order to bring issues of elements extraneous to this House? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: I thought the Member was given the Floor and he is making his contribution. So, you finish your contribution. 

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you for your wise ruling. I physically and personally gave that submission from Mengo to hon. Otafiire. However, my submission is that if we have waited, as the hon. Prime Minister has said, and we have been with this Bill for the last two years, why don’t we wait for only these few days –(Interjections)– so that we can continue? That is my submission.

1.26
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): I have very high regard for the Prime Minister who proudly on the Floor of this House said that I am his product. I will wish to connect that to your communication, Mr Speaker, before we started this morning. You rightly guided us through the festive season that we are going through and you said we are going to be here to deliberate only up to 1.00 p.m. so that our brothers and sisters of the Islamic faith are able to go and prepare for Idd Aduha. 

We have patiently been with this Bill for the last two years and, therefore, my appeal is that we should complete it in harmony, and the only harmony that I will appeal to is that one. Two extra days should not in any way allow us to derail the process. I am therefore appealing to the House that we do endorse this suggestion that has been mooted by hon. John Baptist Kawanga that we go into the second stage of this Bill when Parliament next commences. If it commences on Friday or Saturday, then so be it. Whatever it is, so be it. One or two extra days should not in any way derail this process.

1.28
MRS JUSTINE KASULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you so much. We have been with this Bill and I even held consultations beyond my constituency. From both sides of the House, members have been talking about, “Our traditional leader”, “my wife” or “my husband” and we have listened; why should we now wait for whoever is coming in when we have had the Bill for two years? (Applause) We have already voted and usually when we vote, we move to the next stage. I am wondering why we are taking a lot of time listening to people instead of moving to the next stage. Whoever has an amendment, will move the amendment when it is time. I beg to move that we move to the Committee Stage.

THE SPEAKER: Well, somebody has now moved a motion. Do you want me to put the question on the motion? Yes, you are protected but there is a motion. (Mr Mathias Nsubuga rose_) No, this is without prejudice to the motion. There is a motion.

1.31
MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker and dear colleagues. It is true that you have defeated us. The point we are trying to make is that we are looking for a consensus. The minister said that we are looking for a win-win situation - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please sit down. We have reached the Committee Stage but as I said, hon. Kawanga brought in a motion and as we debated it, somebody came up with a motion that we go to the Committee Stage -(Interjections)- why do you say that it is not a proper motion? Tell me why you think it is not a proper motion? Do you want us to vote on this?

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You correctly guided this House and appealed to our sentiments especially in the direction of accepting democracy and I respect that ruling perfectly. I have been dismayed by the level of disrespect many Members of this House have accorded to the Muslim faith. Some of us have parents away from the city and tomorrow is Idd. We have only two public holidays in a year against 103 for the rest of the faiths. We want to go and care for our families and slaughter animals and come back the day after tomorrow, but Members are not even ashamed to slap that into the face of some of us who respect our faith. Don’t we have rights? I am appealing to you to rule over this -(Mr Kivejinja rose_) Is that a point of order, Mr Speaker? I am still on the Floor. I am speaking for the people I represent.

MR KIVEJINJA: Is it in order, Mr Speaker, for the honourable member to be able to mislead the House that because tomorrow is Idd therefore we cannot transact business. He knows very well that the declared days of holiday in Islam are only two and that is Idd, which is not today - today we are actually here working -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I give you a break of 30 minutes and then we resume work here.

(The House was suspended at 1.38 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.54 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LAND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007

MR KYANJO: Mr Chairman, by the time we went out for a break we had not received your final ruling on the passionate appeal we had made to you over the issue of sensitivity to our religion. We had agreed that we are going to work up to 1.00 p.m. but it is now approaching 3.00 p.m. We have got parents and other individuals of need we have to care for because of the importance of Idd tomorrow.

I had anticipated that you were going to give us this excuse so we would go and share with our people in much the same way as we break early enough for Christmas so that we share with those concerned. I had stated that our brothers and sisters in the Christian faith have 103 days as holidays but the Muslim faith has only two days. There is difficulty in moving from here to a distant area like mine where I have to find my parents in Bukomansimbi. Even someone going to Buvuma or Fort Portal would find himself or herself in difficulty in sharing with her people the joy of that day. I am here to obediently appeal for your strongest consideration in that direction. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, hon. Members, I am speaking not as Speaker now but I am the chairman of a committee because we have started committee proceedings. In spite of that, I want to say that yes, I heard the motion which came from hon. Kawanga and I laid it before you so that we would find a way to maybe adjourn or not. As the debates generated, you realise that it was overtaken by a motion, which was brought by hon. Kasule Lumumba that I formally put it to vote. It was actually useless to put it to a vote and then I suspended the proceedings. 

In fact, by the time I went for my lunch, I left you with Members of this side to discuss and find a way out but apparently you have not. I think there is anything I can really do. I quite appreciate that tomorrow is a big day and this indeed we respect it but as I have said, it was overtaken. I think let us proceed. Actually, there could be very pressing causes for members. I will definitely appreciate why they are going to meet those obligations.

MR KYANJO: Mr Chairman, I appreciate your position but it is unfair to set a precedent where some members can be left to go and find a way out. We are all supposed to be here especially at a time when it is not very easy to gather Members of Parliament but we are here for a commitment. My appeal is that you have got the powers both as the Speaker and as the chair. A decision to the contrary of my appeal will simply indicate the insensitivity which I mentioned at the start. I am not blackmailing because very shortly we are going into the Christmas recess, which is not Christmas itself, but that is in respect of the Christian faith and the dignity of the families embedded therein. Why don’t you reserve that respect equally for the Muslim faith? I humbly beg that you admit this position. I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, we are at committee stage and there are things we do at committee stage and things which we cannot do at committee stage. We cannot transact business of the House during committee stage. What I see is some people just want to raise controversies. Let us proceed. 

MR ATUBO: Can I alert Members and ensure that each of you has a copy of the amendments. Can you make sure that each of you has a copy so that it makes our work easy?

Clause 1
MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, on clause 1, my committee is proposing an amendment to replace 30 days with six months. The justification is to give the board sufficient time to determine the ground rent.

MR ATUBO: Mr Chairman, I wish to accept the proposal but it should read as follows: “… six months after the commencement of the Land (Amendment) Act 2009”. That is how it should read. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, you have heard the proposed amendment which has been adjusted by the minister, so I put the question to the proposed amendment by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, clause 2 is amended by inserting immediately at the beginning of clause 2(a) the expression, “subject to the provisions of other laws”. Justification: for reference purposes.

MR ATUBO: Mr Chairman, I reject the proposal and I would like to urge this House to retain the formulation as it appears in the Bill. Thank you

THE CHAIRMAN: Why do you reject the formulation?

MR ATUBO: Because we want to strengthen the security of occupancy of the occupant on the land so that he is not easily evicted. If we say “subject to other laws”, we are making it very amorphous; we are making it very general. In fact you are watering everything down. If we want it, it means you have to specify which laws. As long as we say generally, “subject to other laws”, then we are defeating the purpose for which this formulation is intended and it is not in the interest of the tenant that we support the position.

THE CHAIRMAN: What would happen if there are health hazards and people have to be evicted? 

MR ATUBO: Health hazard is not an eviction; it is an evacuation. The minister responsible for health would declare a place inhabitable due to health reasons maybe because of diseases. Even for purposes of disaster, you declare a place a disaster area then you vacate the place but after some years they come back and you do not evict them. That is not eviction; it is evacuation due to disaster or due to diseases and there are laws to govern that.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, you have heard the proposal by the committee and the minister says “no”. Maybe I put the question to the proposal by the committee to see what you think or do you have more contributions to make? 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, I concede. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, the amendment has been withdrawn. 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, we are proposing that clause 2(4) be transferred to clause 4. The justification is, for ease of reference and uniformity with the principal Land Act. All offences and penalties are provided for in Section 92 of the principal Act.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, I am also suggesting that sub-clause (5) is renumbered as sub-clause (4). The justification is for logical arrangement of the paragraph.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, clause 2 is amended by inserting a new sub-clause immediately after sub-clause (4) to read as follows: “For purposes of this section, the word “court” shall mean a court presided over by the Magistrate Grade I or Chief Magistrate as the case may be, and reference to the land tribunal in the principal Act and the amendments thereto shall be interpreted accordingly.” Justification: the word “court” is not defined in the principal Act.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Ok, hon. Members you have internalised the proposed amendment. I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, my committee was proposing that we substitute the whole of section 32(b) with the following new clauses:
“(1) A district land board shall not allocate land which is owned under customary tenure.
(2) Where -(Interruption)

MR WACHA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We have an amendment which has been published and placed on the Table by the minister -(Interruption) 

MR OMARA ATUBO: For the information of the committee and the House, the parliamentary committee came up with that amendment but I will be moving for total deletion. That is their proposal but I will be moving -(Interjections)- well, it is not a waste of time; it is procedurally correct because that is in their report. What is in their report is not what we have eventually agreed upon. So, he is moving what is in their report which is already presented to the House and which cannot be amended informally.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. The committee has proposed an amendment to the Bill. What do you say, honourable minister? Do you know of the Bill?

MR OMARA ATUBO: Yes, I would urge the committee not to proceed with the proposed amendment but instead to agree to delete in totality clause 32(b). The reason is this: If you look at the justification, it is possible that a consequence of the interpretation of the proposed 32(b) may be the unintended effect of removing from the district land boards the functions given to them in sections 3, 4, 5, 6, 8 and 9 relating to issuing of certificates for customary land and allocating it. So, clause 32(b) could be interpreted to mean usurpation of the functions provided in sections 88 and 89 of the Land Act dealing with customary dispute settlement and mediation by traditional authorities and land dispute courts. 

The view is that sections 88 and 89 in the Land Act already take care of customary land disputes resolutions and therefore for us to bring 32(b) as it is in the Bill would even be interpreted as usurping the power. So, we leave the procedure of traditional authorities and they are also free to proceed to court at a later date. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, now the proposal is to delete 32(b).

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, I concede. (Applause)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The proposal to delete the whole of 32(b) is injurious in a sense that it is causing a vacuum where we had anticipated that this customary land tenure and customary land would be associated with public land. In this sense, what appears to be customary in other areas is what is public here in Buganda -(Interjections)- at least I would be agreeable with the amendment once it stays and even on that amendment we say “customary/public” so that it does not appear that areas where customary land tenure persists or subsists are  cushioned from this legislation. It should be a national legislation. 

I propose the chairman of the committee, together with the minister, really take this as a national legislation, one which is national in character and not aimed at looking at an isolated place like here. The alternative, Mr Chairman, is that where there is “customary”, we replace it with “public” because it should not apply to one area and not to other areas of Uganda. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have stood up here to thank the honourable minister and the chairman of the committee for conceding to the fact that 32(b) be expunged from the Land (Amendment) Bill, 2007. As elaborately explained by the minister, the issue which hon. Theodore Ssekikubo is raising is adequately provided for and in any case you are talking about customary land there is a difference between the customary land tenure system in the North and the East from what is happening in the other parts that he is referring to. So, I agree with the amendment as put by the minister and seconded by the chairman of the committee.

THE CHAIRMAN: Interestingly before I put the question, in the gallery we have 70 farmers from Aswa County in Gulu and they are here to follow what is going on. Our guests from Aswa, I want to inform you that your Member of Parliament is present in the House. Hon. Members, the owner of the Bill is proposing that we delete 32(b) from the Bill. I put the question to it. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32(b), deleted.

MR ATUBO: I have another amendment not from the committee and it an amendment to clause 35. What has remained of 32 is 32(a) only as amended by the committee including courts. He has put the question, so it goes into the original 32 as 32(a) and that is why the chairman has said clause 32 as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then let me repeat for the purposes of clarity. I put the question that clause 2 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ATUBO: Clause 3 is amending section 35 of the principal Act by inserting in 1(a) at the end the following words: “… and the transaction shall be invalid”. The justification is to state additionally for the purposes of proposed paragraph 1(a) that “where a tenant by occupancy assigns the tenancy by occupancy without giving the first option of taking the assignment to the owner of the land, the transaction is invalid and non-effectual.” 

Proposed paragraph 1(a) currently only criminalises the transaction. That is to bring it in line with 8. What 8 does is to make it invalid when the land owner does it. The proposal has been that when either the mailo owner or the kibanja owner does any transactions without giving each other the option, both should be invalid. So, it is to make the same with one of the land owner in 8.

THE CHAIRMAN: But now, it is becoming invalid, isn’t the landlord entitled to repossess this Kibanja? Because what has happened is that the occupant he knew secretly sold the kibanja to another person and that transaction is invalid and that person who bought the kibanja from him is in occupation but he is in occupation under an invalid transaction, isn’t the mailo owner entitled to repossess this land?

You can say that the transaction is invalid in the sense that the new person who bought has got nothing but should the other man who sold to this new person come back and occupy; the man sold a kibanja at Kololo, he got the money, he went to Jinja but then you find out that there is a new man you do not know, this man is under an invalid transaction, do you recall the other man who went to Jinja, to come and occupy the kibanja again? Shouldn’t the Mailo owner take it?

MR KIBANZANGA: I want to be clarified really. You know some of us who own bibanja are now touched. Why don’t you allow me to pass my status of lawful occupancy to a person I am selling the land to so that the landlord continues dealing with the person whom I have passed my status to? Because when you do this, you are tying our hands, some of us who do not have land in Kasese, why don’t you be kind to us? I will only pass my status and the other person, the landlord will continue with the new occupancy as a lawful owner.

THE CHAIRMAN: I am not supposed to give the answer but I think you need to know the background under which a person settles on somebody’s land. When a person wants to settle on somebody’s land, he goes to the mailo owner and he agrees, therefore, he knows that Kibanzanga is the one I have accepted as my musenze (tenant). So, you cannot change that personal relationship by just bringing some other person without my knowledge.

MR KIBANZANGA: I am debating this for some of us who have never even seen our landlords, we do not know anything about them.

MS TUBWITA: Thank you hon. Kibanzanga for giving way. In fact, what he is saying is not only in Toro. I want to give an example of my district where we have absentee landlords. You find that a tenant has never seen a landlord. The people with the titles have never shown up so how can this person be protected? 

I may not know the landlord but have been on that land for a long time and I am a bona fide occupant. If you say that if I want to sell my Kibanja I must first consult a landlord who I do not know and who has never come around and may have even died, how can I handle this? One time this person may show up when he has not been seen for over thirty years. How will this be applied?

MR KIBANZANGA: Mr Chairman, I do not know whether I was understood but the honourable member has made it very clear. For those of us who are tenants by the accident of history, how do you ask us to go and consult these landlords in order to transact business on these pieces of land? Aren’t you asking for too much? Hon. Adolf Mwesige, please help us. (Laughter)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I would advise the learned Minister of Lands that the amendment that he is adding, which reads, “… and the transaction shall be invalid” should not be included. This is because by implication, the mischief you are trying to cure here is a tenant by occupancy who may fraudulently opt to sell the land to another person without the consent of the landlord. In the event that I buy that land without in anyway being a party to the fraud, by inserting the new provision you are now stating that this even invalidates the transaction of a bona fide purchaser. 

The objective of this section is to criminalise such activities and that is why we have put the penalties, which include fines and imprisonment. It will not be right to invalidate all subsequent transactions as this can easily be challenged. This is because my defence in court would be that I did not, in any way, know that that person did not consult.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Otto, the theory of bona fide purchaser does not apply to this situation because you are not buying the title of registrable interest from the landlord but are buying the interest of an occupant. When you buy the interest of an occupant, you must know that there is a landlord and therefore you buy knowing that you are buying a kibanja. What they are saying here is that before you pay your money, he or she should take you to the landlord so that the latter knows that you are the one coming in.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I appreciate that guidance but what I am wondering is how do you buy land without exercising due diligence?

I would still insist and appeal to the minister to consider these two; one, the word “purports” in the clause, which is very vague because I do not know what amounts to purporting. You are saying, “Any tenant by occupancy who purports to assign”. That word “purports” can be widely abused. Hon. Minister, I hope you have got what I have stated on that. I can let go of the other one.

MR ATUBO: Mr Chairman, the Attorney-General and I have considered the guidance that you have given us. The idea is that the tenant or occupant sells without giving the first option to the landlord then we invalidate that transaction so that even the new buyer has no right to stay on that land. The question is, should the “former tenant” come back and resume occupation? We have now said, actually he should not because he has already breached his relationship and is in a state of hostility with his land owner. We are trying to consult how to draft that and we could stand over it and come back later.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, we also had a problem with the expression “purport” but we realised that in most land transactions, it is legitimately and widely applied. We looked at a few definitions but normally the most authoritative is from Black’s Law Dictionary sixth edition, which says, “Purport means to convey or to imply or to profess outwardly”. In other words, do not liken it to attempt as it is not an attempt. It is to hold out or to do something as if you had the power to do it and you do it but it is illegal. That should be clarified. I am explaining the meaning of purporting.

THE CHAIRMAN: So how do we proceed with this, hon. Minister? We stand it over?

MS NAJJEMBA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. This clause is what makes the whole Bill fair. If you are giving a lot of powers to the tenant, this is there to protect the landlords also. So, I feel we should not stay it but pass this one because it is what gives landlords some power.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In relation to this clause, I wanted to know the implications where the agreement between the two – that is the occupant, who is giving away his interest; instead of saying, “I have sold”, says, “I have given -”, how does that affect this clause and the ownership?

THE CHAIRMAN: No, you cannot change the occupation without your landlord knowing. Whether giving or selling, you cannot introduce some other person to occupy it other than yourself. 

MS TUBWITA: thank you, Mr Chairman. I understand what you are talking about but we also have to note that there are some parts in this country where the landlords have never come to claim their land. And the people sitting on that land have never seen their landlord. And a tenant wants to sell his Kibanja and has an absentee landlord, what do they do? We have even seen people who come with fake land titles claiming that they are landlords. 

So, such person is vulnerable, because he has no one to report to. And Mr Chairman, you may remember that even during the time when Busuulu was put in place, they refused to receive it. So, circumstances may arise where a landlord is not accessible to the tenant; they may even start hiding. So a tenant may be tossed up and down wanting to consult a landlord in order to sell his Kibanja. 

I beg that the hon. Minister stands over this clause so that we study it well for the benefits of those areas where there are absentee landlords. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, I think you are dealing with a different situation from that which is being handled now. What you are talking about is a situation where one occupies land where there is no owner. As far as you are concerned, there is no owner, and he has never given you a Kibanja. 

The situation at hand is that of a person who got a Kibanja from landlord x and they know each other very well, and now he wants to give it away without the land lord knowing. It is different from your situation. Hon. Minister, what is the formulation of the amendment?

MR ATUBO: You know, legally, the land belongs to the landlord; the registered owner. So we are trying to get a formulation that could be – “And the tenant shall forfeit right over the land”. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, can you read it now?

MR ATUBO: Yes, we come here so that people can add more; and others can enjoy laughing because it is law making: “The transaction shall be invalid and the tenant shall forfeit the right over the land” –(Interjections)– “and the land shall revert to the registered owner”.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ATUBO: Mr Chairman let me say two things. First, two of my colleagues have raised the issue of absentee landlords. I want to add to that and say that the issue of absentee landlords is a major legal and constitutional issue. And I can assure you that this issue of absentee landlords as one of the major presentations in the national land policy consultations, which were presented in those areas. It was very touching and what the honourable members are saying is absolutely true. 

The issue is whether we can deal with this problem in this type of law now or do we wait with the views, which were given from your home areas? These were the views given. The issue is going to be dealt with in a major way in another law.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Mr Chairman. A short while ago, the minister was given an opportunity to make responses and clarifications on the Bill. But now at this committee stage, we should be proceeding with amendments rather than beginning another debate as if we are on the Bill’s second reading. 

MR KIBAZANGA: Thank you much, Mr Chairman. I am seeking clarification from the hon. Minister regarding absentee landlords. They have land titles although you are calling them absentee. They know that they have land somewhere. An example is where hon. Margaret Muhanga’s uncle recently died in Hamukungu. Now that you are arming this absentee landlord with this law, what will stop him from being present and claim his rights? What is my status in case that arises?

MR ATUBO: Mr Chairman, at the risk of repeating myself - 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, we are at committee stage and dealing with a Bill that received its second reading. Either you have an amendment or you do not. Do not generate general debates on something, which is not part of the Bill. Your contribution should be to improve the provisions in the Bill by making amendments.

MRS SSEKABIRA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to propose an amendment that a timeframe be provided for the tenant who wants to sell his Kibanja to another person to look for the landlord or a representative of the landlord to consult. If there is no timeframe and the landlord is away for 10 years, a tenant who may wish to move to another place will not. Leaving the provision open is tying up the kibanja owner to someone he may not access. I propose that a provision be provided for at least six months.  

THE CHAIRMAN: If you are taken to court because you have sold a kibanja, which you thought did not have a landlord, your defence would be; “I did not have a landlord or I did not know it would be a complete defence.”

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, according to the committee report, clause 3(a) was supposed to be transferred to clause 4. That is what the chairman proposed. Have we disposed of that one or we went directly to the minister’s new insertion?

THE CHAIRMAN: We have changed the formulation. If the placement is still relevant, it can be done. Are we still handling this? Which amendment now? 

MR BYANYIMA: Mr Chairman, I am adding some value to the clause. All the absentee landlords have their registered titles at the district level. They are well known all over the country and we are saying that we are trying to look for money to pay off the interest of the landlords? I do not see why we should be wasting a lot of time. Let the minister take it up and ensure all the landlords are paid off. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, are there other amendments to clause 3? 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, my committee is proposing that clause 3(a) is transferred to clause 4. My justification is that for ease of reference and uniformity, offences and penalties are provided for in section 92 of the principal Act.

THE CHAIRMAN: But this was dealing with section 35? No. It is clause 3, but after we have finished with this Bill, somebody printing the new version will take it to 35. It is 3 for purposes of this Bill. But eventually, every amendment will be merged.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, we are also proposing that paragraph (b) of the Bill, sub-clause 3 is amended by deleting the words: “… and the commissioner shall not make any entry on the certificate of title in respect of the transaction,” which is appearing at the bottom of the clause. The justification is that the words are redundant.

THE CHAIRMAN: But I have seen better amendments to this. Does the honourable minister have an amendment here?

MR ATUBO: Mr Chairman, he is saying that - 

THE CHAIRMAN: Then there should have been some liaison - 

MR ATUBO: He is saying that if it is invalid, then it does not arise. I have no problem with that. It is redundant -(Interjections)- We can afford to delete it. 

MR BYANDALA: I want to insert a new paragraph 9. Immediately after the proposed paragraph 8, insert the following: In clause 3 you have 8, 7(1) (a) and then you have a new 9 - the text reads thus: “Subject to the section, a change of ownership of title effected by the owner either by sale, grant, and succession or otherwise shall not in any way affect the lawful existent lawful interest or bona fide occupant and the new owner shall be obliged to respect the existent interests.” I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now when you say that you are inserting a new 9, what happens to 8; what is 8 saying? The problem I have is that by inserting immediately after sub-section 7 the following:  “Subject to clause 7, a transaction for the sale of interest in land by the owner made without giving ….” Are you leaving this provision there? 

MR ATUBO: That on is where I have concurred with the committee to delete the last part. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Which last part? 

MR ATUBO: “And the commissioner shall not make any entry.”

THE CHAIRMAN:  And what part do you leave? 

MR ATUBO: You leave only the upper one. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Which one, which says what?

MR ATUBO: “Transactions for the sale of interest in land by the owner made without giving the first option of buying the interest to the tenant is invalid.” 

THE CHAIRMAN: You see hon. Minister and hon. Members, somebody who formulated this 8 as it is did not address himself to the issues because it is talking about somebody selling without giving an option to the occupants, which will not work. It, therefore, means that if you have a village of 200 tenants on a Mailo and I am changing my title to say, Nsubuga, I have to ask the 200 people to write and yet they may not be willing. So, if I do that and I do not show evidence that I have asked the 200 tenants, it becomes invalid because I am selling and people will just laugh at me.  (Laughter)   

Changing a title can take many forms; I can even sale and say that I have given it away. When we make a transfer, I say that for natural love and affection, I have transferred my title to so and so. (Laughter)   Therefore this is not a sale, it is a donation. Should I ask you a tenant as to whether to donate it to my friend or not? So I think that the formulation which we have given is enough to cater for what was done because the other one was a futile exercise. You go by 9 other than 8. 

MR ATUBO: Mr Chairman, we want to thank you for your good guidance. What we want is not to completely stop the land owner. So what we want is to leave 8 and work with 9. So, I move that the existing 8 in the amendment is substituted; we actually delete the other one and substitute it with the proposed 9. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I hope that it is clear to you hon. Members. The interest in this law should be to protect the interests of an occupant of a kibanja owner. It is not for him to get involved whether you are donating or not. So long as the new person who come in respects the interest that he has found; that is enough and I think that this is the formulation he is solving. So I put the question.   

(Question put and agreed to.)  

Clause 3, as amended agreed to. 

Clause 4

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, my committee is proposing that we rephrase the entire clause. Amendment of  Section 92 of the principal Act; Section 92 of the principal Act is amended by (a) substituting sub-section 4 as follows; “a person convicted of an offence specified in sub-section 1 (iii) is liable  to a fine not exceeding ninety six currency points or imprisonment not exceeding  four years or both.” 

(b) Introduction of a new provision; sub-section of Section 92 of the amendment is amended by introducing a new provision immediately after sub-section 1(b) as follows: “Attempts to evict; evict or participate in eviction of a lawful or bona fide occupant from a registered land without an order of eviction.”  The justification is for consistency and uniformity. 

(c) Insertion of a new provision; section 92 is amended by inserting immediately after sub-section 5 the following; 5 (a) “a person convicted of an offence specified in Section 1(e) is liable on conviction to imprisonment not exceeding seven years.” The justification is for consistence and uniformity.  

MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, with all due respect to the honourable chairperson of the committee, I think the chairperson has jammed the clauses. I think he is dealing with clause 5 and yet we have not finalised with clause 4.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, let us deal with this section in an orderly manner.

MR ATUBO: We have a proposal to amend section 59; it comes earlier than 92. Mr Chairman, amendment of Section 59 of the principal Act; Section 59 of the principal Act is amended by inserting immediately after sub-section one, the following: “1(a) For the avoidance of doubt, no transaction of any kind in respect of land or any part of land not falling under sub-section 1(a) including land held under customary tenure, shall be entered into or undertaken or concluded by a board and where a board enters into or undertakes or concludes any such transaction or allocates land in contravention of sub-section 1(a), the transaction shall be void and shall not give rise to any rights or interests in the land.” The justification is to state clearly the consequences of illegal land allocations or other transactions entered into by the district land boards. 

Under the Land Act, dealing in land held under customary tenure by districts land boards is limited only to issuing of certificates of customary ownership or freehold by the board. Consequently, any transaction beyond what is currently permitted by the Land Act including allocation of land held under customary tenure to a person who is not the owner or without consent of the owner, is illegal.

The purpose of the amendment is to render such transactions illegal. I beg to move.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I am rising on a procedural question, whether is procedurally right to amend the principal Act when such amendment was not previously gazetted in the Bill. Because what the minister is introducing now is an amendment of the principal Act, which does not appear anywhere in what was gazetted. I seek your procedural guidance.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, when a Bill is introduced, it could have limited sections. For instance, when it goes to the committee, the committee on studying the Bill may find that in order to achieve the policy behind the Bill, it is necessary to even amend other sections that were not gazetted. So, yes that is possible. 

MR WACHA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We have looked at this proposed amendment by the minister under section 59. We entirely agree with the justification for bringing this amendment. We understand the spirit under which it is brought and we think it is noble but we think it is a mouthful and we think it could be restated and still carry the same ideas and ideals as enunciated by the minister. 

So, I propose that we reformulate the proposed amendment to read as follows; “Section 59 of the principle act is amended by inserting immediately after sub-section 1: 1(a) Where a board enters into or undertakes or concludes any such transaction or allocates land in contravention of sub-section 1(a), the transaction shall be void and shall not give rise to any rights or interests in the land.” I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Can we be assisted to know what is in 1(a)?

MR ATUBO: 1(a) is about the functions of the board. The functions of the board are: to hold and allocate land in the district which is not owned by any person or authority; in fact the functions are from (a) to (g); to facilitate the allocation; to cause for survey and so on. In fact, the functions of the district land board are mainly on issues to assist you with that. What has happened is that some boards have gone beyond these powers and even allocated land which is owned by people or occupied by customary owners and so on. What we are trying to do, and there are some authorities in court already on that is to render the transaction void.

The original version that we had proposed, as hon. Wacha has noted, is a little bit a mouthful. It emphasises the customary part of it but the functions of the board is not only limited to customary allocations. It is very broad. So, I do agree with the amendment of hon. Wacha. In fact it is even broader so there is no problem.

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Chairman, I find the earlier submission by the minister on this amendment more palatable because when you talk about changing interest in land –(Interjection)- no, but I have a concern and I must raise it because you have not voted on it - 

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us listen to her.

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Chairman, the concern we have is that the district land boards give out land and in the case of Buganda, formerly public land. They give out land which is occupied by people and people end up being evicted. So, to me, when you say “land held under customary tenure,” I would rather you say “or formerly public land.” Otherwise, the problem would not have been solved where we have district land boards giving out land which is occupied by people and people end up being evicted. 

MR WACHA: I was trying to cure the ills that hon. Rose Namayanja is talking about. We are not being restrictive. We are actually being very expansive. Let me add to what the minister said in the spirit under which this amendment is brought. 59(1)(a) talks about the powers of the board. Actually the whole of 59(1) talks about the powers of the board and it stops there. It does not tell you what happens if those powers are breached. We are now saying if you breach these powers and give out land which belongs to somebody or if you give out land which does not belong to any authority, then that particular transaction is null and void and it will not pass any interest in the land to anybody. That is why they are now restricting it only to customary land or public land. 

We are talking about what is constitutionally provided for and what is reflected in the Act. The board is only entitled to hold and allocate land in the district which is not owned by any person or any authority. And that is what we are talking about. We are making it as expansive as possible so that in case there is any ambiguity, it is caught up by this provision.

THE CHAIRMAN: My concern is the consequences on the amendment. Say if it allocates land in contravention of sub-section 1(a), the transaction is void and shall not give rise to rights or interests in the land. The complication here may be that if this is done, and after it is done, I pass that land to Nathan Byanyima, what will happen? Under the known principles of our law, Nathan will get his interest. You cannot do it here. [Hon. Member: “Why not?”] I do not know but the Attorney-General could tell us. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, there are court precedents on this matter right to the Supreme Court. And all that this provision is trying to do is to put it beyond doubt. Normally a good law should provide a prohibition and a remedy. The prohibition is district land boards do not do this; we are saying, if you go ahead and do it, this is what happens and this is what we are providing. 

As to the consequences, normally what happens is - because this is by operation of the law; that a person who is going to enter into any transaction should study its history; should do due diligence and by operation of law if you actually do not do that then you pursue the person who sold to you for damages. Otherwise, the transaction stands void. 

There is a very good case, the case of National Housing and Construction Corporation, but it is now limited. I watched the progress of that case in Bugolobi. At that time, you know, most of government land did not have land titles, but this time round, National Housing and Construction Company, now limited, got a title of their land where those flats in Bugolobi stand. 

A person came and got about one acre in front of block 8 simply because National Housing and Construction Corporation did not have a title. That case proceeded up to the Supreme Court where that title was nullified regardless of the fact that – of course we talk about the indivisibility of the title. Mr Chairman, I think that is how we should proceed. 

THE CHAIRMAN: But learned Attorney-General, the situation I was talking about is where, say, me or you, are dealing with a board on this type of land. Whereas the situation can be addressed there, the moment it moves away from you to hon. Nathan Byanyima, do you expect hon. Nathan Byanyima to trace your title and then go back to the board? I don’t think so. And how will the registrar of titles cancel the name of Nathan Byanyima from the title? There are principles which the registrar must follow to cancel the title and these principles are not reflected here.  

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you. Mr Chairman, the basic principle is that before you can transfer interest on land, you must have an interest in that land. The example you have given dealing with the land board and transferring your interest to hon. Byanyima for love and affection is the same as if I were a thief, stealing hon. Obua’s car and selling it to somebody else. The board did not have interest; they did not transfer any interest to you because they had no interest in this land. So, the transaction was void from the beginning.

THE CHAIRMAN: The question is what you understand by bona fide purchaser for value without notice. That situation is pegged on fraud. Yes, there was fraud, but I bought it and I did not know about the fraud. I was not part of the fraud and I have to retain the property. That is the law. 

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Thank you. Over the years, there has been debate as to whether the principle of bona fide purchaser for value without notice is good law; whether we should maintain that principle. It is a common law principle and it is enacted in all our laws, but the debate has been whether we should maintain it. 

Looking at this provision, we have to make a decision. If we decide that we want to do away with it, then we carry the amendment. In my view, if we carry the amendment and express ourselves as proposed by the minister, that means we have consciously decided to do away with the principles. Of course the consequences are that the onus is on the purchaser to ensure that what he is buying has gone through all the required stages. 

I think what we should be arguing about now - and Mr Chairman, you are very right - do we maintain the principle of bona fide purchaser, or do we do away with it? I believe that by legislation, we may do away with it if we decide. 

THE CHAIRMAN: And it will not only apply on this land but also on all land. 

MR OMARA ATUBO: My understanding of this provision is that we should take this whole as customary land, and Mr Chairman, if without the knowledge of all these customary owners on this land, you got a title allocated to you by the District Land Board; and after you have acquired the title of this whole customary land, you sell that title to Mr Apolo Nsibambi. And some months later, Mr Apolo Nsibambi sells the land to Mr Kirunda Kivejinja. Now, Mr Kirunda Kivejinja comes to evict us. And for the first time we know that our land has been sold. What do we do? 

Under the existing law, purchaser of value, we have no right in all those succession of sales. If we say that it is void and gives no right, then hon. Kirunda Kivejinja - this is my thinking – you will have to run back to Mr Nsibambi and say, “You sold me air, give me back my money.” Where is the remedy? 

Then Mr Nsibambi runs to Mr Ssekandi and says, “Please, you sold me nothing,” and the title is cancelled and we are restored to our original position. I thought this is really what we are looking at. So, how should we put it in law? I think this is the issue –(Interjections)– no. That is because you are the customary owners and this is what we are looking at –     

THE CHAIRMAN: I think then what you can do is to borrow formulation from the Expropriated Property Act of 1992 and use it effectively in spite of other written laws – that is how you have to coin it; but with this one, you cannot succeed.

MR ODONGA OTTO: In relation with the amendment suggested by hon. Ben Wacha, I still think that amendment stems from the background that the functions of the district land boards are clear and its function is to allocate land which does not belong to anybody. It is very unlikely that land which does not belong to anybody can have a title –(Interjections)- it may but it is very unlikely. 

For the district land board to go ahead and allocate land which belongs to anybody means they have already gone beyond their functions –(Interjections)- so, somehow the amendment of hon. Ben Wacha should still stand because the functions of the district land board have been specifically stated in the Act. They cannot start becoming referees in a football field because it is not part of their function as stated in the Act. We are not even about to start debating the principles of bona fide purchase for value with notice as it does not arise here because the functions of the district land board are specific and when they move slightly beyond those functions then they have actually done nothing. I beg to submit. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Maybe we can add that the principle of bona fide purchase without value – if we write it so that we are conscious as we are making it. We are conscious of that principle, but we will say that, “It shall not apply.”  The principle of bona fide purchase of value without notice – but look at the Expropriated Property Act because it may help you. Anyway, hon. Members, you have heard the amendments –

MR OMARA ATUBO: Honourable colleagues and hon. Ben Wacha, we have consulted. The other phrase of, “We shall not give rise to any rights or interest in land.” If we stop at “void” and leave the other part, it may be able to accommodate the other principles of law. Let us just stop at “void”. “Avoidable” is another so can we stop at “void”; “The transaction is void?” Even the Attorney-General has sanctioned it; so can you now propose it in that way? 

MR WACHA: I think the Minister and Attorney-General could be right – that if it is “void” the other consequences follow. So, let me reformulate 59(i)(a) “Where a Board enters into or undertakes or concludes any such transaction or allocates land in contravention of sub-section 1(a), the transaction shall be void.” Sir, I move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Is it clear? I now put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Is there any other amendment under 4? Let us finish this.

MR OMARA ATUBO: You all know we are here to rest our minds and, Mr Chairman, hon. Rose Namayanja raised a very important point on former public land. If you can look at section 4 of the Land Act, which is to do with former public land and it reads as follows – this is to rest the minds of our sister and friends – it says: “Any person, family or community holding land under customary tenure on former public land may acquire a certificate of customary ownership in respect of that land in accordance with this Act.” 

It goes further in section 9 and talks about conversion of customary tenure to freehold. It says: “Any person, family, community or association holding land under customary tenure on former public land may convert the customary tenure into freehold under the tenure in accordance with this Act.” So, the district land boards are handling this former public land of which some of it is really this other land – 

THE CHAIRMAN: When did public land become customary?

MR OMARA ATUBO: I am reading the law.

THE CHAIRMAN: I am asking you because you are the minister. When did public land become customary?

MR OMARA ATUBO: I may not want to enter into that discussion –(Laughter)- I am reading you the law as it is –(Laughter)- it was made by this Parliament in 1998 and these are some of the complications we have. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MR SSEMATIKO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Having passed the amendment to section 59 of the principal Act and giving the status of the board and its actions, it is the very opportune moment for honourable members to fully constitute the composition of the board because during the constitutional amendment 2005 under the Fifth Schedule, section 10(3), it states: “A regional land board shall be represented on each district land board in its region in a manner prescribed by Parliament”. 

This Parliament has never prescribed the composition of the district land boards which means this is the opportune moment to fully constitute the district land boards, and I will propose an amendment to section 57 of the Land Act to add to section 57(1)(e) to provide as follows. “An equal number to the above mentioned members to represent the regional land board for the district in the region with a regional land board as provided for under section 10(3) of the fifth schedule of the Constitution of Uganda.”

This will ensure that the district land boards have got their full constitution and it is prescribed by this Parliament as per the constitutional requirement.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman and hon. Members, it is true, under the Constitution there is a provision for representation of the regional land boards. But my understanding - and I am subject to the minister responsible for Local Government - is that until the regional government is legally constituted and the Act passed here, I find it difficult for me to accept the proposal. It is a little bit presumptuous.

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr chairman, whether the regional governments are instituted or not, a provision of the Constitution is there and it is very clear on the composition of the district land board. If actually somebody went and challenged the existing land boards in courts of law, they are unconstitutional because they are not fully constituted.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. It is a constitutional requirement that regional land boards should be represented on district land boards. That is a constitutional requirement but their non-representation on the current district land boards does not invalidate the existing land boards at all.

What I would appeal is we will be presenting the Bill on regional governments next week -(Laughter)- we would stand over this amendment; it is a good amendment, the principle is not bad at all as proposed by hon. Ssematiko. We will cater for it when we have already approved the Bill on regional governments so that we have a more harmonised position. I appeal to the honourable member to wait for that moment.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, this is put on hold; it is appreciated that the amendment is valid but it comes when you are dealing with the Regional Governments Bill. Thank you very much. Have we exhausted amendments under clause 4? Wasn’t 92 under 4? If you are making an amendment, please do so.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, I am proposing to rephrase the entire clause 4’s amendment to section 92 of the principal Act. Section 92 of the principal Act is amended by: “a) Substituting for sub-section 4 the following: A person convicted of an offence specified in sub-section 1(c) is liable to a fine not exceeding 96 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding four years or both.” 

“b) Introduction of a new provision, subsection 1 of section 92 is amended by introducing a new provision immediately after sub section 1 paragraph (d) as follows: Attempts to evict, evicts or participates in the eviction of the lawful or bona fide occupants from registered land without an order of eviction.” The justification is for consistency and uniformity. 

“c) The insertion of a new provision: Section 92 is amended by inserting immediately after sub-section 5 the following and it becomes 5(a): A person convicted of an offence specified in section 1(e) is liable on conviction to imprisonment not exceeding seven years.” The justification is consistency and uniformity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, you have heard the proposed amendments.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Accepted.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, with all due respect to the committee chairperson’s submission, I do not know whether attempted eviction has been defined in the definition section of the Act. 

Imagine you sitting in a meeting where someone is removing your land in Luwero and we plan to go there to evict you from the land. This is already attempted eviction. I see the sentence and the penalty of seven years much as it is the upper limit; seven years is a little on the higher side. That is almost a decade. I would really submit that we reduce the upper limit from seven years to four years or even three years because in a period of seven years in prison, you can find that your family has already disappeared.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, first of all, we have already passed clause 32(a) and secondly this is giving an upper side; it can be one day or even one hour. We are not saying seven years. We want to give the magistrates and judges a chance to make their discretion.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.33
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Omara Atubo): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the house do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.34
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Omara Atubo): Mr Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, before you do so, let me introduce our children who are here. In the gallery we have pupils and teachers from RAF Community School, Mukono District, in Buikwe County North. They are represented by Hon. Onyango Kakoba. You are welcome. (Applause)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.34
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daniel Omara Atubo): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Land (Amendment) Bill, 2007, from clause 1 to 4 and made amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.35
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daniel Omara Atubo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that we adopt the report of the Committee of the whole House on the Land (Amendment) Bill, 2007. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE LAND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007

4.36
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daniel Omara Atubo): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Bill entitled, “The Land (Amendment) Bill, 2007” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Land (Amendment) Bill, 2007” be read the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE LAND AMENDMENT ACT, 2009”

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to thank you for the contribution you have made that has enabled the passing of this Bill. However, I think your work starts from this point in that you have to go and sensitise people, both landlords and tenants, about the contents of this Bill and tell them that it is not intended to sour the relationship between the two, but to improve and provide security.

Therefore, I want to thank the minister, the staff of the ministry, the members of cabinet and all of you as well as our constituents who gave us views about this Bill in one way or the other. 

Before we end, I want to say that in the public gallery we have residents from Bulondo-Bugabya Parish, Busedde sub-county, Jinja District, an area represented by hon. Daudi Migereko. You are welcome. (Applause) 

4.37
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO: (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for having guided this House through this sensitive Bill. Most importantly, the reason why I am up here is that I want to thank my colleague and minister, hon. Omara Atubo, for conceding and accepting to delete clause 32(b) from the entire Bill. (Applause) Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

4.40
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daniel Omara Atubo): I thank you for your very kind words of appreciation to me personally. I must say I am a little bit flattered. But I must put it on record that it was not me, but the government, the Cabinet and even the President. When we gave the report of our sensitisation and consultation on this Bill, it was submitted to Cabinet and we very honestly told them the situation on the ground. As a result of that, all these people participated, including your friend, hon. Mallinga and hon. Ecweru. So, I would not like to take the credit alone. But I am happy that you have seen light; you should continue to see light. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, as you note, this has come on the eve of Idd Aduha, which is going to be marked tomorrow. I want, on your behalf, to take this opportunity to wish our brothers and sisters who are going to celebrate this great day tomorrow, a happy Idd Aduha. Carry out all the activities you are expected to carry out and give alms to those who will need them. So, I wish you a peaceful Idd Aduha. I believe all of you, Members of Parliament, will go to your constituencies to wish all our people a happy Idd Aduha.

Well, you have heard the proposal that we meet on Wednesday? I understand there is a meeting here and, therefore, you have to come on Tuesday - ok that they know. So I wish you -(Mr Oleny rose_)- Yes, please.

4.42
MR CHARLES OLENY (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The House will recall that last week I raised a matter of national importance in the House regarding the unpaid salaries and now that we all hope to enjoy tomorrow, obviously the personnel affected will not be able to enjoy as well. So, I wanted to seek your further guidance as to whether the statement that was promised for today can be made available at the earliest opportunity next week.

4.44
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Ali Kirunda Kivejjinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the honourable member for raising the issue. As soon as you raised the issue here we were ready to reply but because of the Land Bill, the Prime Minister advised that I should ask the Speaker to give me the first chance on Tuesday to be able to answer all your queries. They are all ready and with the Clerk to Parliament and I will be able to answer on Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: Again today we expected to get a statement from the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development. He had the statement but I think he is not here. Maybe on Tuesday we shall get this statement.

MS ALASO: There was also a promise to give us a statement on MDG No.5, which specifically deals with maternal health. It was promised two weeks back but up to now it has not been delivered. If it is possible we could also receive it early next week.

DR NDUHUURA: I was not here but I have seen the copy of the statement in the ministry and we should be ready to do the needful next week.

THE SPEAKER: So, with that we have come to the end of today’s business.

(The House rose at 4.49 p.m. and adjourned to Tuesday, 1 December 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)
