Thursday, 23 November 1995

The Council met at 2.30p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to Order.

THE SECOND PRIME MINISTER:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, and hon. Members, you will recall that the need to pay a living wage to all our civil servants and other public servants has been the concern of National Resistance Movement Government since it came to office.  Over the last nine years, the Government has continued to address the problem through earning salary increment within the framework of Government Revenue Resources.  These increments have unfortunately not reached the desired levels as to adequately motivated civil servants for better performance and hence improved service delivery to the people of Uganda.  

Indeed, it is partly due to low pay that we witnessed in September, this year, the strike by Health Workers.  Because of the adverse effects that this strike and any other similar industrial actions we may have, this august House passed a Resolution requiring Government not only to address among others the pay demand of Health Workers, but also enhance remuneration for civil servants as a whole.  

I wish to take this opportunity to inform hon. Members and the House that Government has reviewed remuneration policy and pay structure in the civil service and is taking the following decisions:

1.  That the pay system in the civil service should seek to achieve the following four key objectives - (a) The total cost to the country of Public Service remuneration, the public sector wage Bill must be affordable within the context of a rational and non-inflationary public expenditure policy; (b) All public servants should receive at least a living wage.  In other words, a wage necessary to ensure that the recipient sufficient income to maintain inadequate standard of living for himself and his immediate family at the level of his appointment; (c) That the remuneration package of a public servant should be as transparent and simple as possible, and should ideally consist of a single consolidated taxable pay without the provision of additional allowances or non-cash benefits.  This package should be sufficiently attractive to motivate and retain him to perform to the highest standard of which he is capable and which he should be judged.  

Lastly, the Public Service salary structure should be harmonised, rationalised and equitable throughout Uganda for all groups of staff.  Selective salary award should be discouraged as much as possible.  Accordingly, Government is in the process of working out a new salary structure based on the on going job evaluation and grading exercise.  

In pursuit of the above stated policy objectives, Government has decided to implement the following measures:

    1. The total wage Bill for 1995/96 Financial Year, be maintained at UShs160b as approved in the 1995/96 Budget;

    2. Government, will effective from July 1996 increase the wage Bill to UShs 220bn in order to pay a living wage to all civil servants.  Government is aware that at the moment the total package of some civil servants exceeds the living wage when basic pay and monetised benefits are taken into account.  This is particularly true at the top of the service.  However, many civil servants particularly those in middle ranks fall below a living wage as you can see in Chart 1 and 2 attached to this statement.  Chart 1, relates to the wage structure of Ministries.  It indicates the line of the living wage and it also indicates the current package to employees in Central Government.  As can be seen in the Chart, Mr Chairman, are at the U8 and support staff level; the current package goes below living wage.  That was also the same at the salary scale U5b - U1.  Whereas at U1 special are the package exceeds that which is determined by the living wage.  

Therefore, where the consolidated pay of a civil servant is already above the living wage, no increase will be allowed.  The living wage scale as originally recommended by the Public Service Review and Re-organisation Commission has been up-dated by the recent - that is 1992/93 integrated house hold, expenditure survey providing details data on expenditure patens by social economic groups which was conducted by the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning and are adjusted for inflation.  The living wage package incorporates in allowance for expenditure on such items as housing, transport and health and therefore, by definition payment of living wage constitutes full monetisation of non-cash benefits.  

In practical terms, the payment of a living wage will have the effect of raising the lowest paid civil servant at U8 from the current average basic pay of UShs 34,991 to a consolidated pay of UShs 58,941 per month.  A University Graduate at U5a from UShs 89,206 to UShs 200,084 per month.  Senior Officials at U1 from UShs183,139 per month to UShs 771,366 per month.  Similar pay scale will also be applicable to Police, Prisons and Teaching Service.  Details of the pay structure are contained in Annex 1 to this statement.  It should, however, be noted that the Figures quoted in the Table are average pay level per scale and hence actual pay for any individual will depend on the entry point and years of service within a particular scale.  The wage level sported will be consolidated salary packages and no allowances such as, transport and housing will be paid on top.  The wages will also be subject to appropriate deductions including income tax and housing charge where Government is providing that facility.  

Consistent with the above, all allowances of the salary nature which are paid outside the payroll will effective July 1996 be abolished.  Further more, all non-contractual payments or allowances of a salary nature being paid by donor agencies to serving civil servants will be abolished with effect from July 1996.  Given the trade of between the need to pay living wage and increase in the staff numbers the total number of staff employed by Government, that is Central Ministries, Police, Prisons, Teaching Service and University will not be allowed to exceed their current levels so that a living wage maybe affordable and sustainable.  

Recruitment will strictly be controlled even where this means keeping of staff below the approved establishment levels.  Government recognises that a living wage scale is not a final objective of Public Service Stay Reform.  To this end, an optimum wage structure is envisaged.  The optimum structure will include, among others, elimination of inequities inherent in the current structure and appropriate compression ratios to provide motivation and provide a framework for career progression.  

Government will also restructure the remuneration of Ministers based on salary structure for Members of Parliament, taking into account Ministerial entitlements.  

The above remuneration measures are applicable to the entire civil service including Health Workers.  Other administrative matters regarding conditions of work of health workers are being addressed by a committee chaired by the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Health.  Mr Chairman, I beg to report.  Thank you.

MR WILLIAM WANENDEYA: Point of Clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like the Second Deputy Prime Minister to clarify to me and perhaps to the country as to where you find, in the world, persons like Medical Doctors who are qualified being acquitted to receiving the same remuneration as ordinary workers who are not qualified and who do not go into training for a long time.  The reason for seeking this clarification is that the Government was thinking that in Uganda if we pay a million shillings to a Medical Doctor, then all other staff in the service of Government, 300,000 would be paid the same wage.   Is this done in some parts of the world or is it only going to be in Uganda?

The second clarification I would like the Second Deputy Prime Minister to clarify is whether there is any machinery in Government to look into some of the problems whereby a person gets, as an example, less than UShs 200,000 but you find that in places like Tank Hill and others, people are putting up mansions which are far beyond their monthly remunerations.  How did they earn that money?  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

AN HON. MEMBER: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I wish to congratulate the Second Deputy Prime Minister for the good statement he has made.  I believe, that the service will see a lot of commitment by Government through this statement.  Hitherto, the main concern or the principal concern of the civil service was that some sectors of the service were being given salaries without due regard that to other areas of the service and it looked as if there was some sort of discrimination.  That is why some time back I stood here to somebody who graduated on the same day, in the same degree, with the same class, if he joined Ministry of Justice he would get ten times as much as one who joined Ministry of Lands.  I thought that was not fair to the service and I am happy that the Second Deputy Prime Minister has taken this bold step in trying to rationalise the terms and conditions of service of the entire service of Uganda.  I think there has been a tendency for creation of projects and appointing some directors in those projects for purposes of earning more salaries in terms of allowances.  I am happy that this practice will, from July cease, and I think this is in the right direction.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR ADRIKO: Mr Chairman, to respond to hon. Wanendeya.  First of all the statement  that Medical Doctors are paid less than ordinary workers, is not true.  I have enclosed Annex to my statement a Table, which quite shows that clearly.  The Doctors are not earning a salary, which is less than ordinary workers.  I will take it that by ordinary workers, maybe he means people in group U8 and support staff.  This is clearly not so.  Doctors enter a scale U5 and this is well above.  The problem has been the question of harmonisation.  That has been the central point that there has not been harmonisation with regard to the various professional cadres.  For example, in the past there has been an agreed position, where doctors get marginally more than a graduate in another sector.  Now, this broke down and this statement a thrust of it is saying that we are going to move to iron this out through a study; a job grading and job evaluation study.  But for now, we may not reach there in one step.  The step we have taken is to make sure that those who are being paid below living wage are brought to the living wage line, and those who are above it remain there until those who are there below arrive there.  I think this is the essence of the statement.  

Secondly, I am unable to help hon. Wanendeya about this development in Tank Hill unless he tells me who the individuals are.  Really this is not related to my statement.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KAIJUKA: Mr Chairman, I just wanted to clarify before you proceed that I want to make a clarification I promised yesterday on the Memorandum that it is actually that the Bill we are re-appealing is ‘Uganda Export Promotion Council Act, 1983.’  It is Act 7, not 17.  That was the confusion.  It is Act 7 of 1983.  I thought I would clarify that on the Memorandum.  Thank you.

THE UGANDA EXPORT PROMOTION BOARD BILL, 1995

Clause 1

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 2 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 3 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 4 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 5 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6

MR KAIJUKA: Mr Chairman, I would like to add an amendment to 6, 1(a).  We have spelt out the functions of the Board from 1(a) to 7.  I would like to add 8 as a result of being enriched in yesterday’s discussion.  If we could add, ‘of Market Information’.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 6, sub-section 1 be amended as proposed by the hon. Minister.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MANZI: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 6 (b), sub-section (ii) - carrying out on farm - of new crops in the export potential.  I have the feeling that this should be deleted, Mr Chairman, it is a stretching export promotion too far to try and go out to carry out on the farm trial of crops.  This should be work left either narrow or some other organisation other than making it become a field agency in the system of production.   I beg to move that we delete sub-Clause.

MR WANENDEYA: I beg to second hon. Manzi’s proposition.  The point over here is that the export promotion much as it would export goods, this is a province of agriculture.  So, it means we do well to engage this included in NARO or Ministry of Agriculture extension programme but not in the export promotion.  I thank you Mr Chairman.

MR KAIJUKA:  Mr Chairman, I think I did try to explain yesterday that the new Board intends to focus on promotion of exports in harness and I went on to inform you that actually we have already designed a project called IDEA, funded by USAID, and part of this component actually is already experimenting on viable exportable goods and items that the population may not already be aware.  NARO has the brought mandate of concentrating on broad research across board.  But we are saying these are focusing for the time being on exports.  Therefore, we are not even saying that the Board is going to set up laboratories.  They can even use NARO, but that they will be focused.  Therefore, the idea is well conceived.  If anything it is very progressive because they want to get on with the job.  So, I oppose the amendment.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 6, sub-section 2 (b) be deleted as proposed by hon. Manzi.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

DR LUYOMBYA: Mr Chairman, I would like to move that Clause 7 (c), be deleted and replaced by the words, ‘to facilitate any export contract’.  Mr Chairman, in most countries, you have strong associations dealing with particular commodities and the Board, as set by this Bill will not have any commodities on which this country have contracts with anybody else, rather than the Board should facilitate those associations who are specifically engaged in particular areas and with particular commodities.  So, I beg to move.

MR WANENDEYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I beg to support that amendment.  The point over here is that while our Government is diversiting itself out of parastatals, we are saying over under (c) that we should enter into contracts.  This Organisation we trying to set up should not be in business per se, but rather facilitate the best way of getting businessmen to get contracts explored and therefore, concluded.  Therefore, I strongly urge hon. Members to make sure that what Dr Luyombya is saying is approved.  I thank you.

MR MAYENGO: Mr Chairman, I would like to oppose the amendment because the contracts which a Board of this kind may enter are of various kinds.  If for example, the Board wishes to buy a motor vehicle that is a contract.  If the Board wishes to rent space in a building owned by somebody else, that is a contract.  The nature of contract is limitless unless these were specific type of contracts.  That is how we would have supported the amendment.  But to say that the Board may not enter any contract is as much as to say, we should not even establish it.  Mr Chairman, I am opposed to the amendment on those grounds that it puts a blanket cover on any kind of contract including the simplest.  Mr Chairman I oppose the amendment.

MR KAIJUKA: Mr Chairman I really want to thank hon. Mayengo because he has said it all.  If you look at the nature of this Clause 7(c), it is not talking about getting into trading contracts. In fact, absolutely none of that.  What we are talking about as hon. Mayengo is saying, should a Board want to get into any contract of any description in terms of operation, it should be legally be so facilitated.  So, I really wish to oppose the amendment that is before the Floor.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 7, sub-section (c) be deleted as proposed by hon. Luyombya.

(Question put and negatived.)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, it is Clause 7 (e), which talks about publishing periodicals and booklets and other written materials. Then it talks of producing or sponsoring the production of documentary films.  I believe it is films, not files because you produce films, but you compile files.  So, I think he is talking of audiovisual materials.  So, it must be files not films.

Clause 7

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 7 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8

MR NTIMBA: Mr Chairman, I have already circulated my proposal amendment and I beg to move that Clause 8 be amended by adding Clause 8 1(j) which states, ‘one representative of the Ministry responsible for Foreign Affairs.’  As I indicated yesterday, I want to say here that our Ministry of Foreign Affairs is our window to the outside world.  Our representatives are in Embassies and High Commissions are on the sport to our great fertile ground for our exports and traders with the outside world.  They are there to find markets for us; and indeed the thinking nowadays in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is that they will really to go into what is called, ‘Commercial Diplomacy’ with great emphasis in commercial diplomacy.  Their membership on that Uganda Export Promotion Board will even help them to be able to present the interests of the Board in countries where that Board cannot afford as yet to open missions.  

Indeed, I remember as far back as early 60s, I was privileged to serve in the Uganda High Commission in London and we received the directive from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs then to say that the Government wanted to go into more commercial diplomacy.  Under the wise leadership of our good Friend across hon. Etiang’s High Commissioner, his order was fully complied with, and I am happy to recall that the export figures are there for everybody to see.  So, the Minister of Foreign Affairs is very irrelevant to this Board and I beg to move that they be included.  Thank you.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Mr Chairman, I beg to support the Mover of this amendment very reluctantly, because Ministry of Foreign Affairs should be able to be a jag of all trade, but unfortunately in most of our missions Overseas, you will find that Uganda is not even known as if we do not have Ambassadors there.  This same sort of complaint came in our Sectoral Committee when we were handling Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities.  We found that even that very important area is lacking.  May be this is going to give that Ministry the incentive to begin to know that she is there to sell the interest of Ugandans abroad, sell what we produce here with the view to maximising the marketability of whatever we have here.  But otherwise, I do not see any good reason.  But because of this, being the first time we handling it, maybe if we put, he will include as he has suggested Ministry of Foreign Affairs will now know that she is there to cater for all the interests across the border.  Thank you.

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, I stand to support the addition with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the list in the Bill.  Our Friends have been complaining though people have been appointed in various missions, to handle Uganda’s inch, one of them is to market Uganda commercially.  Actually, the biggest establishment we have abroad is the Mission of Foreign Services.  Since they seem not to be aware, maybe they did not take it as their responsibility.  It is proper that they be represented in this particular Bill so that their representatives can now -(Inaudible)- all the foreign services.  I think that is proper.  I strongly support the addition.  Thank you.

MR KAIJUKA:  Mr Chairman, I certainly have full support for reasons advanced by hon. Ntimba for having Foreign Affairs being aware about the efforts on part of Government and society in promoting exports.  I have one problem, Mr Chairman, why I do not support this amendment, and that is precisely we are moving away from a bureaucratic run institution.  In other words, an institution run by officials to other run by private sector.  That is number one. That is why yesterday I was able to explain that we have a mere three officials and a moment you add on a fourth one, you are even tilting the balance.  That is my biggest problem.  

Secondly, at least judging from the restructured Government operations, the Ministry of Trade and Industry is already working hand in hand with Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the extend that starting from the top, even before people appointed ambassadors and High Commissioners, I want to agree with hon. Ntimba, their job number one is to promote a country’s trade and investment as a priority.  So, job number one of any ambassador from now on, will be clearly this without any doubt.  But where we may end up having one or two that may not be fully exposed for some reason or another, we even intend together with Foreign Affairs we work hand in hand to make sure we have commercial officers that we commonly agreed upon ourselves.  So, with this explanation I hope the House will appreciate.  It is really up to the House whether or not.  The reasoning for having a private running organisation has merit or we continue to have a 50, 50 body where you have bureaucrats influencing decisions.  So, it is for those strong reasons that I oppose the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 8, sub-section 1(j) be amended as proposed by hon. Ntimba.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 9 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10	

MR KAIJUKA: Mr Chairman, I want to thank the Member who helped me to understand the nature of duplication in this Clause.  I wish therefore, to move that Clause 10, 1, we should delete in the middle - if you read the Chairman or, delete in his absence, appearing in the first line of the sub-Clause.  Go on to the third line to delete out ‘but shall not vote, except in the case of equality of votes when we shall have a casting vote.  Then you add a ‘full stop’ after the Boards of Directors.  So, the new Clause would, ‘The Chairman or the person appointed under sub-section 2 below of this section shall preside at any meeting of the Board of Directors.’  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR KAIJUKA: Mr Chairman, I wish to move that in Clause 11, 6, I would like to move that we delete the words at the end, if you read the last line but one, starting by, ‘under the adjournment of any meeting at which a quorum is not present.’  Again I captured the contradiction in maintaining this Clause.  So, if we could delete that and put a ‘full stop’ after meeting, we will have a better Clause.  I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

MR WANENDEYA: Mr Chairman, I support what the Minister has just amended.  I would also request the Minister to agree that in Clause 1 where he says, ‘and in place as the Chairman from time to time…’ -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us deal with the Minister’s amendment.  I now put the question that Clause 11 be amended as proposed by the hon. Minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 12 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13

MR KAIJUKA: Mr Chairman, again I was enriched by several Members contribution yesterday and I thought it would be in order to move that we substitute sub-Clause 1(a) which reads ‘a levy of not less than 0.5 per cent on all imports and exports with,’ I quote, ‘a levy of not less than 0.5 per cent on all imports.’  I beg to move Mr Chairman.

DR LUYOMBYA: Mr Chairman, I would like to oppose the Minister’s amendment, in that if you say, all imports is too wide and this is going to include imports on raw materials and spare parts on which most of our industries today it depend.  Already the production cost of industries are high and this is so because there is a levy on imports of raw materials.  Now, if you leave it as the Minister has proposed, it is going to add to the burden.  Some industries are just limping, others are just managing to break.  Any addition to that burden will just make them collapse.  So, I would like to oppose that amendment as proposed by the Minister.  

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, I would like to join Dr Luyombya in opposing this proposal.  Apart from the reason which Dr Luyombya has advanced that the imports here means everything which is imported from Medicine to Foods, building materials, and the rest that has to come in from here.  There is also -(Inaudible)- at what stage shall we levy the 0.5 per cent?  Are we going to charge it on the X Factory Price?  Are we going to charge it on the F.O.B price?  Are we going to charge it on the C.I.F price?  Where exactly?  Or, are we going to be specific right in this House and say, it will be charged at this stage?

Secondly, when we passed the Finance Act, which was the Finance Bill, it specified what percentage or taxes import duty, sales tax, any other taxes were going to be charged on things that we import.  Is this a way of amendment to the Finance Statute that we are doing this sort of informally?

Thirdly, things are so expensive in this country that it is considered that as a result of all these charges on imports, we have taxed our imports so much that the effect is lowering the standard of living.  One who would have been able to afford glasses in his house, he finds them so expensive because of taxes that he prefers or decides to go for wooden windows.  Mr Chairman, I think we should not tax ourselves into miseries.  I oppose this amendment.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO: Mr Chairman, while I have some problem with a proposed amendment of the Minister, where he says that the levy of not less than 0.5 per cent on imports.  Now, that thing, we do not know how much he wants to tax.  When you say, not less, you may come with 100 per cent, because when you say, not less, then we are not legislating; we are not putting any tax.  Not less, it can come with 20 today, tomorrow it will be 30.  But then, at the same time, if we have to, since we have agreed in principal, we need to put a tax to run this institution.  Otherwise we will be wasting time.  If we purchase the idea of hon. Mayengo that we do not tax anything, otherwise how are we going to run this?  The moment you accept not to have any levy, any income to the Board we can as well forget creating one.  You will be giving the Minister the responsibility of creating one and then disarming him to run the whole thing.  Otherwise it will be useless to create it without any money.  We should agree and see -(Interruption)

MR MAYENGO: Mr Chairman, hon. Wasswa Nkalubo did not get me correct.  I did not say we do not tax anything.  I said, we have already taxed too much.  Secondly, I said, when we tax we have to be precise, just as he is saying.  That we are saying, not less than, that means there is no limit that the tax collectors can go to any extend.  If we tax, let us be precise.  So, far we have already taxed.  So, I did not say, we do not tax anything at all.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO: Mr Chairman, since the Minister has brought an amendment, I would rather have an amendment on his amendment that this should be on consumable finished products, which we are importing.  We forget the raw materials, which we are going to use in the manufacture.  But we tax the finished goods, which are ready for consumption like sugar, salt.  Now that one would have been an amendment which those who can do the panel beating should put in a word.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Although the Minister had gone some way in amending this section, I had put up another amendment which I think caters for hon. Wasswa Nkalubo’s proposal.  It says, ‘delete 13 1(a) and replace with ‘a levy of not more than 0.5 a per cent on designated imports.’  In other words, the Minister gave three way to look at the import and removes those are supposed not to be taxed like medicine, heavy capital, and he can designate that shall be imported and charged half per cent so that we can run the Board.  I am changing the word from ‘less than’ to ‘not more than’ so that there is a limit because currently we are paying 4 per cent with-holding tax and we are going to pay another half per cent on a levy.  If we allow it be not less than, it means he can put up another two or three. 

So, I am talking of designated imports to be charged half a percent and I hope the Minister will accept that kind of amendment.  Thank you.

MR KAIJUKA: Mr Chairman, I have listened very attentively to the reasons advanced opposing my amendment.  But let me take this opportunity to make some clarification.  One - When you talk about taxing raw materials, perhaps one thing you may not have taken it into is the fact that we certainly encourage industries to use domestic raw materials as a matter of course.  But that is not to suggest that we do not get raw materials from outside.  

Secondly, hon. Mayengo was saying that this is not specific.  It is precisely because we want to be specific that we are moving this amendment.  You maybe saying - you do not say whether we are making charges on F.O.B., C.I.F.  Yet at the moment taxation everybody knows is always made on the basis of C.I.F.  It is a clear and understood position. We suppose that within the next three to five years, we will even changing the basics of not only evaluation for imports but on how we calculate this.  That is why it would be confusing to put in the Law that aspect because you may end up changing from time to time.  

I wanted also to confirm to hon. Mayengo that in proposing this, we do not intend to amend the Finance Act because collection of imports would be carried as normal.  It is a percentage of what will be collected that would be earmarked for export promotions.  Then I turn to hon. Manzi’s suggestion and hon. Wasswa Nkalubo.  Yes, I can understand they are worried to the extend that one should as much as possible be certain.  The minute you say more than five, you assume that you leave room open for even higher charges.  But if you look at the subsequence Clauses below from 13, 14 - that is why we talk about the Board being able to make estimates, present them to the Minister; the Minister of Trade would, in consultation, on an agreed Budget from year to year.  Whatever expense goes to the Consolidated Fund.  It is a well-articulated position, and, therefore, if I may suggest in order to allay Members of Parliament’s fears. I was going to even end up agreeing with the permission of the Chairman, that we delete what is here as I am proposing, but replace it; I am fine tuning my own, with a levy of not more 0.5 per cent on imports.  Why am I opposing the designated component?  That brings in even more confusion in terms of preciseness, and I think hon. Mayengo will be the first one to agree with me that the minute you say designated it presupposes from year to year, you have got to sit down and clarify what is to be designated and what is not to be designated.  

Secondly, if you look at the trade figures when you talk of not more that of course opens even more room for lowering it to 0.1. That also captures your point so that from year to year we shall be adjusting the tendency on the nature of the budget.

So, I think with this meeting of mind, because I listened very attentively and I want to move along with the House, I hope you will agree with me that with this panel beating and grade position, you will all be able to support my amendment.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Which amendment are you putting in place now?

HON. MEMBER: My amendment I am putting before the House is, delete 13 (1) (a) and replace it with a levy of not more 0.5 per cent on imports. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Point of procedure.  The point of procedure, Mr Chairman, would be that, first of all the Minister should withdraw his amendment. Because now he is amending my amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: That is his amendment. Your amendment is quite different.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, I am glad the Minister has conceded to parts of the amendments that have been proposed by hon. Manzi.  But I would like to request him to concede to the provision of designated items.  Because, in fact this would be in the interest of the Minister from year to year to see whether it will be prudent to tax say, medicines in that particular year. Or to tax raw materials or to tax industrial machinery and things of that kind. So that actually we do not simply say imports as blank provision.  We should give the Minister, this Minister and then Ministers coming later, to really look at the -because each time you impose a tax you are actually increasing the price of a particular import.  Therefore, it is important to allow the Minister the leeway.  If he wants he can impose the tax on all imports.  But one year he may be interested in actually to remove the tax on a particular import in line with a government policy at that particular time.  Therefore, in my view, the Minister should permit this proposal by hon. Manzi that this tax should selectively levied on particular imports so that actually the Minister has the opportunity to vary his levy from time to time. So, I really want strongly to support the proposal by hon. Manzi.

MR KAIJUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I really do not want to prolong the debate, Mr Chairman.  If it is the wish of the House, much as I really think it is going to cause more administrative delays and problems. I think we would have gone a long way by going with my amendment because a minute you say designated, it is does not mean that you are interfering with whatever is to be taxed.  It is very clear the Finance Act would pass from year to year and you tax; and a percentage of whatever is agreed is charged.  That is what I am really proposing irrespective of what you are importing. But because people have reasoned that we must exclude items like raw materials, or some items that may be of particular importance, with your permission, I continue to accept incorporation of this designated so that we take hon. Manzi’s amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)


Clause 13 as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 13 as amended do stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 14 do stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15

MR WENENDEYA: Mr Chairman, much as I regret that in clause 14 there is something, which is technical which should have been clarified. In Clause 15, I would request the Minister that sub-Clause 2 should read that external Auditors are appointed by the Auditor General so that it is not fully the responsibility of the Auditor General.  You find that several of the accounts which are audited by the Auditor General have got some frauds and this would go along way to assisting the Ministers.  I thank you.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO: Mr Chairman, I am surprised that hon. Wanendeya is bringing that amendment when he was in the constitution, he made the constitution, the constitution is so clear that all parastatal bodies where the government has 100 per cent have to be audited by the Auditor General.  He did not find it necessary at that time to bring that amendment. (Laughter) Now, I do not see how we can include something, which is contrary to the constitution he proposed.  Because that one is so clear that it is only the Auditor General who can do the Audit.  Likewise, this amendment by the Minister does not arise.  We cannot legislate against the Constitution. 

MR WANENDEYA: If hon. Wasswa Nkalubo  had listened to what I said, it is the Auditor General who designates external auditors;and designating does not mean that it absorbs the right of the Auditor General.

MR KAIJUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Yes, on a sheet that was circulated, I am afraid we had put in place an amendment that we are  not moving.  We shall go on to move an amendment on Clause 15 (4), again this was pointed out to me yesterday.  Which should read, we should substitute the word six. If you read the board shall within six months, you should replace that six with three after each Financial Year. That will take care of 15 (3) because the board within three months will submit to the Auditor General, while in fact it is mandatory in (3) that the board shall within six months submit to the Minister.  That gives the time frame that I think the House was asking for.  I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15,  as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 15 as amendment do stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 16 do stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 17 do stand part of the bill.
      
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 18 do stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE TITLE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the Title do stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)
	
MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

MR KAIJUKA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the council do resume and the committee do report thereto. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

MR KAIJUKA: Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has concluded its consideration of the bill entitled: ‘The Uganda Export Promotion Board Bill, 1995’, Clause 13 with amendment.  Thank you.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION FROM THE COMMITTEE

MR KAIJUKA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the report of the committee be adopted. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE UGANDA EXPORT PROMOTION BOARD BILL, 1995

MR KAIJUKA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the bill entitled the Uganda Export Promotion Bill, 1995 be read the third time and do pass.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR A STATUTE ENTITLED:
THE UGANDA EXPORT PROMOTION BOARD STATUTE, 1995

(Title settled and Bill passed.)

With that we have come to the end of today’s Session. We adjourn until Tuesday next week at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 3.55 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 29 November 1995 at 2.30 p.m.)

