Tuesday, 29 November 2011

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, welcome back from the two-week break. I am sure you have had an opportunity to interact with the people back home and got the assurances and confidence again, and their congratulations for what you have been able to do in the House in the last few weeks.

You have been seeing some correspondences about some deductions that have been made in your – something about gratuity. I think you remember, there was a discussion before. In consultation with the Public Service Commission, the Parliamentary Commission took a decision. The decision was that your gratuity should be paid at the end of the term, arising from challenges previous Members have faced. That decision has been taken in your interest. So, the money is not being taken anywhere, but is being kept safely for you; just for a rainy day - just in case. Do not be surprised. I have seen some correspondences to that effect.

Hon. Members, I have seen motions drafted today and they end with phrases like, “and any other matter incidental, thereto.” I think the purpose of Parliament and the purpose of motions is that when a motion is presented, it must receive fair debate and a decision. For a motion to receive a fair debate, Members must be able to do research. If you only say, “Incidental, thereto,” how do I research about it? How can a Member research on incidental, thereto? You need to present a motion concretely so that people can go over it, do research, come when they have fully researched and then, the debate can be very well informed and a decision that is taken is not accidental but arises from a good debate based on research. I am trying to see how to discourage the issue of presenting an issue and you say, “And other matters, incidental thereto.” I have seen one of the motions coming today with an extension called – what we call in law - “The Incidental Clause” of a particular motion. In order for the House to have a good debate, we should try and desist from this. Officers who assist Members draft motions should be advised to avoid such extensions so that we deal with matters squarely; well researched, well presented and well articulated by the Members so that we can take good decisions.   

Today, we should have been receiving some reports from the Rules, Discipline and Privileges Committee but they have sought extension on both issues before them. We have rules they are reviewing; some amendments have been proposed by Members. Through its chair, the committee has requested for an extension of one week for the draft amendment to the rules to be presented. I am sure they are still open. If you have new matters you want to present, I am sure it is not too late. You can still approach the chair, the hon. Fox Odoi, and he will still be able to receive some of your comments before they can finalise with the compilation of their final report, which should be ready in one week. 

The same committee has also requested for an extension of two weeks to deal with the matter of – I think there was a motion on contempt of Parliament that has been referred to that committee. They need an extension of two weeks. From the correspondence I have got from the chairman of the committee, they will be ready by the 13th of next month to bring the matter back to the House so that this House can deliberate and take a decision on it. So, when they are ready by the 13th, this House will be ready to receive the report and decide accordingly. 

As I always do, we observe time very strictly. Organise yourselves and always be focused. When I am in the chair, I like people to be honourable members. Focus on the subject that is before us so that we deal with the matter and stop wasting a lot of parliamentary time discussing things like points of order, points of procedure, points of these things; those make debate lively, but they can also take a lot of parliamentary time. For as long as I am in the chair, you stand duly warned that I do not -(Interjections)- yes and it is the Speaker speaking. (Laughter) So, stand duly warned that I am very strict with my time and if you begin diverting, I will take appropriate action so that we can guide the debate and move properly in an organised way.

Thank you very much.

2.48
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I, equally, on behalf of the Members, welcome you from the trips you have gone for. Thank you very much for that challenging address you have given us about time keeping.

I am rising on a point of public concern pursuant to Rule 35(1) of our Rules of Procedure. Before I even present the matter of public concern - what I want to say is also important. Yesterday -
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member -(Laughter)- you have already started. Please, proceed with the substance of why you stood up.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of public concern pursuant to what is happening in my constituency, Lubaga South, one of the constituencies in Kampala. 

Yesterday, during the torrential rains which invaded every part of Kampala, in a particular place called Mutundwe and Kabawo, a child of five years drowned in the floods along the water channel leading to River Mayanja in Nateete. The rains were so heavy that even the body disappeared at one time. It was trapped at one end. As if that was not enough, in the same area near Sembule, on the road from Kabawo to Mutundwe, the road is so bad that the whole of yesterday, car after car passing on that road was flying in the air because of the strength of the torrential rains that made every area impassable. As I speak now, cars have to rotate all the way to Kitebi Police Post to find their way to Mutundwe. The area is impassable and one could assume we don’t have a government in this country, especially when you go to that particular place.

So, I rise to seek clarification from the Minister in Charge of Kampala; it is on record that the World Bank extended a grant to assist the Capital City of Kampala in rehabilitating the areas in terms of roads, water channels and so on. But as we speak – I have been talking to the division chairpersons who are all under the command of the Executive Director of Kampala – even the smallest area of perfection that a division may want to do must be sanctioned by the executive director. 

So, the sense of decentralisation of powers under the decentralised system has died out in Kampala though it is working elsewhere in places like Kitgum, Kabale and so on. So, what befell Kampala? Who has invaded our powers? (Laughter) The councillors are like spectators including the Lord Mayor with everything being referred to the top. What are we up to? 

In that regard, I would like the Minister, first of all to inform me and this House in general, where our money, that would have addressed these calamities, has gone. What are you doing as the minister? Are you just warming the chair in State House there? We need to know that.

Finally, as a Member of Parliament, there is something that occurred to me yesterday, which I need to report. I got a letter from the Police informing me that I would not carry on with a demonstration over the load shedding problem that we are all going through. I said yes, but as a responsible person, I thought I would go to the venue where I had invited my people to inform them of that order and ask them to disperse –(Laughter)– so that we could call it a day. 

However, as soon as I reached the venue, I was all of a sudden harassed and intimidated with a battalion of policemen being called in to invade me though they did not do so. Later, I was forced to board a pick-up car as if I had stolen something, and driven to Central Police Station in the company of the former Member of Parliament for Rubaga South, hon. Suzan Nampiijja. But you can see that embarrassment – being bundled onto a pick up in the company of your daughter as if I had stolen chicken. (Laughter)

I would like to bring it to the attention of the honourable members that in the ruling in regard to the case: Muwanga Kivumbi Vs the Attorney-General of Uganda, the Constitutional Court ruled that Police could no longer stop people from involving themselves in processions on anticipation. It also added that the people had to first create a mark of misdoing before they can be arrested.

The same court also ruled that the content of Section 32(2) of the Police Act is unconstitutional. So, since no appeal against that ruling was filed, we all assume that the Police should have been good enough to leave people do what they want provided they know – because in that ruling the court said thus: “You don’t rule over what has not happened in anticipation…” According to that ruling, the Police are supposed to wait for such a thing to occur before they come in. This was based on the fact that the Police are expected to be on duty 24 hours. That means that if there is anything unusual even at a wedding party, they have the capacity to intervene.

So, honourable members, we should know our rights. When I got to the Police station, I asked the officer who had arrested me to tell me under which law he was executing his arrest. I later referred him to Article 28(12) of the Constitution, which says in parts that before anybody arrests you, that person should quote the law under which he/she is effecting that arrest. Otherwise, any person has the right to resist such an illegal arrest and I nearly did that –(Laughter)– that is why I am now free. 

In conclusion, it is on record that I rescued honourable members of Parliament when I won a case against the IGG. And as you know, from that time, the IGG can no longer harass Members of Parliament –(Interjections)– yes, for example, you cannot be sacked from Parliament because you delayed the forms. Parliament must put in place an appropriate tribunal to rule over that. And that is why you are now free people. Has anybody harassed you? (Laughter) You should pray and praise me. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you do yourself a lot of disservice for the future when you go beyond what has been permitted. I now will limit debate to 10 minutes because the rules allow us to use 15 minutes.

2.57
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank my colleague, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, for observing a very tragic development that is now not only befalling Kampala, but the rest of the country because of climate change.

Shortly after we concluded debate on the budget for this financial year, the Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees was directed by the Speaker, following a debate in the House, to come up with a comprehensive report on the situation throughout the country. That report was supposed to be brought to this House within the first week of resumption of Parliament, which was understandable, from the 29 October when we resumed. But to date we have not had any report brought here.

I know for a fact that a number of Members of Parliament have been desperately trying to get in touch with the Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. I have personally written letters – I don’t know what happened with that ministry – we have brought to their attention issues to do with floods and roads being cut off and people being displaced, for example in Ngora District, where things are in disarray. What I am saying is that this issue is not really limited to Kampala; it is a national matter. I think this House needs justice – we need a comprehensive report on this matter.

As we talk, the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness is now itself becoming a disaster –(Interruption)

MR TANNA: I would like to thank the honourable colleague for giving way by accepting my information. I know very well that he is a veterinary doctor, but I also believe that he is also aware that these floods are not only wrecking havoc on the agricultural sector and the road infrastructure, but also on the animal industry. The information that I would like to give is that I have just been to my constituency and the surrounding areas in Tororo District and realised that all crops that grow close to the ground in my area, for example, onions, cassava, groundnuts and so on, are all rotting in  the fields. Crops like rice, which is grown in the nexus between Butaleja and Tororo District, have been carried away. 

I also want to inform him that I am in support of his views that the minister was supposed to come and explain to us these issues. The purpose was in relation to our expectation from the Executive to notice that within the next three months – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, are you now debating?

MR TANNA: No, I am only providing information to him that within the next three months, according to the agricultural officers in our district, there is going to be famine looming. So, it is important that the Executive responds to that. I thank you.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, honourable colleague, from Tororo Municipality for that information. Mr Speaker and Members, as I did say, this is a very serious matter. We have written, individually and several times, to the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness asking for interventions to mitigate the situation in our various constituencies, to no avail. 

I think the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, as we speak now, is really tied up. The very reason for which Parliament demanded for a comprehensive report was to see ways and means of helping this ministry in getting resources to help mitigate this bad problem. 

Otherwise, I still remain wondering when the ministry will come up with a statement and tell us the various interventions they have made in various places, including Ngora District where we submitted a comprehensive report to them. I thank you.

3.02
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to welcome you and honourable colleagues from the recess. To add to what Dr Epetait is saying, we need more than a report. I think the people of Uganda need action. 

Let me tell you that while we were on recess, the people of Ndorwa West were going through very difficult times. In one parish alone of Katenga in Kamugamu sub-county, over 1,000 families were affected by heavy rains. 

The road from Katuna which connects two districts, is now blocked. We have so many people who have been affected; 15 households are now homeless in Butanda sub-county. 

The experience I am getting from all these and the previous disasters that we have got is that we need to strengthen our mechanisms for response. If something like this happens, the Ministry of Disaster alone cannot manage this. It requires a comprehensive approach. For example, roads need ministry of works; seedlings, need ministry of agriculture. We need to help Government to strengthen that department so that we have a quick response towards the problems we are going through. 

I have raised this with the minister; we are in discussion. He has assured me that the people of Ndorwa West will get a response very soon and I encourage other Members probably to take it up with him, but also, we would expect that Government responds, maybe a weekly or monthly address to the nation because disasters are happening and the public must know. For example, with regard to weather, the weather patterns are changing, and the people of Uganda are now not sure when to plant and when to harvest because of climate change. 
 
MRS BAKIREKE: I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. The information I want to give is that it is true that Government must prepare itself to come in in times like this one. But the Hansards can bear me out that at the beginning of this year, the Office of the Prime Minister came to this House and told Ugandans that they should expect drought this year. That we shall experience an extended drought and that people should not even go out to plant. Radio announcements were made indicating the same. It is very interesting and really absurd and annoying that at this time, we have experienced rain throughout the year and people never prepared for this type of weather because they were misled by Government. 

I want to know if these officers are still occupying their offices after misleading the country that we shall have no rain this year and yet it has ended up raining throughout the year.  That is the information I wanted to give. 

MR BAHATI: It is called weather forecast; if we forecast, it does not necessarily mean that what we have forecasted is what will happen. So, it would be unfair to say that Government deceived the population. That is not true. Government gets some indications, but things can change because this is climate change. This is unnatural.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and hon. Bahati, for giving me this opportunity to fill you in on some of those concerns of disaster. 

Half of Serere District is flooded. And all the things the ministers have been asking us to do on the Floor, I have done them. Go to this ministry, write to this minister, talk to this, go with the technical people, but there is no intervention. 

In 2007, Teso was flooded. The information I want to give you hon. Bahati is that the President actually went with us to Teso and he promised us that that would be the last time water will flow freely in Teso without being harvested. That Government was going to start irrigation schemes and water would be harvested. And that in years to come, we would not go through the cycle of floods, drought and famine. Not a single water harvesting scheme was set up in Teso. And as we talk now, the people of Teso, particularly the ones I represent, I can tell this House that by January, they will have no food. Everywhere you go, you smell the rot of cassava and potatoes. Water is oozing from the ground in huts where people sleep. In one village in Kateta sub-county, Agule Parish, there are 46 collapsed latrines where water has washed the latrines and people are drinking a mixture of faeces and water. 

In this country, in the 20-something century, I think Government ought to be serious. We begged the minister to update us, but up to today, it is no man’s or no woman’s business. So, what else should we do in this Parliament that will cause Government to save Ugandans who are suffering? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Bahati, you need to wind up.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, as I wind up, it is true Government has a responsibility to react to these situations, but I also think that as Parliament, we need to assure Government that you have our support where you need it. The people of Ndorwa West are in a very difficult situation and they need your attention. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you honourable members, the 15 minutes are up; that is, the time allotted in the rules for this matter. The matter is certainly important; it is national, everybody can see that. I am going to invite the ministers to make some responses and then we close. There are some other matters that are going to come up.  

3.10
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Ms Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issues of disaster preparedness – the line minister is not around, but I believe the commitment to brief this Parliament about what is happening in the country is still on and I am going to remind my colleague to prepare that comprehensive paper to cover all the concerns the Members have raised.

There were two specific issues raised by hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi regarding his constituency that happens to be under Kampala Capital City Authority. It is true that we are facing challenges of floods in KCCA, but it has many angles to it. Colleagues have already talked about the issue of the changing weather patterns. There is a lot of rainfall; it remains a big challenge even when we try.

Starting with the roads; we have a programme to repair some of the roads, to fill the potholes, to reconstruct others and to pave, and I did promise this House that I will come up with a comprehensive statement about the plan to improve roads and drainage infrastructure in Kampala Capital City Authority, but the two weeks elapsed when we were away and I would like to request for space either tomorrow or Thursday and I bring this comprehensive statement if you allow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will you be ready tomorrow?

MS KABAKUMBA: I should be ready tomorrow. The issue of administration at Kampala Capital City Authority; it is this Parliament that passed the KCCA Act and that Act did give to the Executive Director to be the accounting officer. Because KCCA is not fully constituted, the structure has not been approved by Public Service; we are trying to fast-track it. I am glad to report that we have eight of the 10 directors in place and I have been mandated to handle the issues that fall within their sector to a certain limit so the divisions will be facilitated to carry out some of the activities that they wish to. Even if the divisions want to do some things, they still have to procure some of the services and the equipment.

I will tell you that as KCCA, we have been trying to procure blades for graders; it has taken us over three months and it is Makindye that had requested for them. I am glad that we have them now. Give us some time and when I give you my statement tomorrow, you will see what we have done, the challenges we are facing and the way forward that we are proposing.

3.15
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I am not answering these issues raised, but I would like to convey my word of appreciation to honourable members for showing solidarity with me during the time when I lost my madam on 29th October this year. I also want to thank colleagues for prayers which had a consolation effect and the material support that came through directly or indirectly. On behalf of my family, I want to thank you very much for coming to support me during that difficult time.

I want to thank my colleagues who managed to come and joined me in laying to rest the madam and I am sure they represented all of you during that time. You know that from Him we came and to Him we shall go.

3.17
MS RUTH ACHENG (UPC, Woman Representative Kole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I raise on the issue of national importance, which is in relation to child sacrifice in my district Kole in Aliro Sub-county. Aware that we have laws that protect our children such as the UN Convention on the rights of the child, the African Charter on the rights and welfare of all children in Africa, the Constitution of the great Republic of Uganda and Children’s Act, which clearly states that it is our responsibility to protect all our children regardless of the background, the race and  the colour, from all forms of abuses and protection.

When you look at the inter-agency sub-cluster working group manual by Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and UNICEF, plus other NGOs that work for the protection of children in this country, it is clearly stated that it is our responsibility in the development of the child protection framework for the family, the community, the nation and everyone else. 

But to my dismay this is not happening, with the entire child protection framework; some of us have turned to abusing children. I have a report of child sacrifice about children that have already been killed innocently in Kole District. Early this year in February, a boy-child was found dead and dumped in a nearby swamp in Aliro Sub-county, Ayara Parish with his private parts cut. At that time it was reported, the suspect was arrested, but nothing went beyond that. I was not yet a Member of Parliament.

On the 28th day of October 2011 in Alyaro village, Amuge Parish, Aliro Sub-county Kole, an innocent child of one year eight months named Adong Winnie disappeared when the parents had gone to the garden and then the following day the child’s body was found dumped near the child’s home. The child’s left leg was cut, both lips were cut and the heart was missing.

As if that was not enough, on the 10th day of November 2011, another innocent child called Akulubyan of three, daughter of Omara Isaac of Apipida village Aliro Sub-county, was also slaughtered in cold blood. The post-mortem report said that the heart was not found.

Three days after Akulubyan was slaughtered, Oscar Aremo aged one year and one month was rescued when the mother was heard shouting. It was already dark in the evening and the mother made ululations. Two men ran from where the mother shouted and found two youths already running with the child. After realising that the two men were running after them, they threw the child and the child is in critical condition, undergoing treatment at Lira Hospital.

Against this background, I would like to request and call upon my colleagues in this Parliament to join me in the fight against child sacrifice in the country in Kole District, and let us do the best we can to safeguard the lives of the innocent children. Alero is a very big sub-ounty in Kole; actually, it is the biggest with 14 parishes. The security situation has not always been good because it was also one of the sub-counties directly affected by armed conflict. It has only one Police post and the people of Lira are now living under fear and they have been requesting that if possible, we add more Police posts and – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member is still raising the matter.

MS ACHENG: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. So, they were looking at the possible ways where the security personnel could be deployed in Alero to continue hunting for these killers who are killing our innocent children. Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me the opportunity. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. These are serious matters again. I will limit debate for contribution to 10 minutes. The rules allow us 15 minutes. She has used five and I will allow 10. 

3.23
MR FRED EBIL (UPC, Kole County, Kole): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, what my honourable colleague Ruth Acheng is saying is a serious matter. The over 170,000 people of Kole who live in the 41 parishes are living in total fear because of the mayhem of child sacrifice. We, as leaders, need to sit and weigh; as a Member of Parliament, the DPC, the RDC and the DISO, we went on the ground with the chairperson of the sub-county of Alero and the OC of Alero Police Post and we designed a strategy using a method of surveillance, to try to look for these culprits day and night, and I want to report to the House, as a matter of information, that some culprits have been arrested under what we call circumstantial evidence and very soon, they will be produced in court. But the challenge we got was that the Police is underfunded and not facilitated, especially in Kole. Sometimes transport for the DPC -to transport the manpower - in terms of fuel and vehicles to protect the 41 parishes, is not easy. 

Worse still, I beg that we should increase the support of the Police in terms of financial resources to aid them in doing this work, especially the department of child protection, which is really underfunded. I beg to move that as a matter of serious urgency, we should protect our children because they are the future leaders and they are the future of this country. I thank you.

3.25
MRS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much. As the chairperson of the children’s forum, I really get concerned and disheartened whenever I hear about child sacrifice. Mr Speaker, I remember mid this year, the children of Uganda handed a petition over to you concerning child sacrifice and they also went ahead and came with a draft Bill. What they found out is that child sacrifice is caused mostly by witchdoctors who are deceiving people that if they want to get rich, they have to sacrifice children and many of them are following suit.  

Mr Speaker, that draft Bill that was brought to you, which is just a sample, was also handed over to the National Council for Children, but the National Council for Children is almost toothless. They are not facilitated, they don’t decide on their own and as such, children have no one to speak for them. These children cannot speak for themselves; they cannot come to Parliament to influence polices; they cannot go to the public to advocate for themselves. It is we, the Members of Parliament, that should speak for them. We are tired of seeing children disappearing at the hands of witchdoctors. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, you are aware that the Anti- Witchcraft Act was declared null and void in the 60s and so, there is no law. I am suggesting that we come up with an Anti-Witchcraft Bill to protect our children because these witchdoctors are very sure that even if they do anything, they will not be taken to court and maybe taken to prison and so on. So, they will keep on sacrificing our children. But if we have this law in place, I know that our children are going to be protected -(Interruption)  

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. Without sounding like I am contradicting her statement, I would like to inform the House and my colleague that this practice of child sacrifice is not actually the work of only witchdoctors. It is actually the work of international mafias that are involved in human body parts trafficking and we must be careful; and as Parliament, especially Government, we need to look at this broadly. If we narrow it to witchdoctors, you might actually leave the big culprits to escape. It is a very big racket even involving professional doctors other than witchdoctors because you can never remove a human heart if you are not professional. So, we need to be careful as we propose the Anti-Human Trafficking Bill and whatever is concerned about it. That is the information that I wanted to give you. 

MR RUHINDI: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. The information I wish to give to my colleague on the Floor is that it is not lack of the relevant laws in place, although of course the Constitutional Court took issue with the Witchcraft Act, which is an old legislation of the 1970s. We have adequate laws in our penal laws. We have laws on homicide, on murder, on manslaughter and others under which such suspects can be charged and brought to account. 

I remember that in the Eighth Parliament when this practice became a challenge in our country, the Police and the Ministry of Internal Affairs took up this matter very seriously and even came here with a report. Now, these matters raised by the honourable Member of Parliament from Kole leave me wondering whether, for instance, those matters were ever reported to the Police or whether the Police took any action. I would really request that those matters be brought to the attention of the responsible minister and if necessary, Mr Speaker, the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs comes here with the report on the measures taken to combat such evils because we had gone a long way in combating such practices.

Of course, in addition to the laws we have in place, in the last Parliament we also passed another law here, a law against Child Trafficking -(Interjections)- a law against human trafficking. It was all embracing. It was passed here. So, we could ask the sector ministry to come with the report on how far we have gone in implementing it. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mutyabule, please wind up. 

MRS MUTYABULE: Thank you very much hon. Members for the information, but I would still like to insist that we come up with a specific law on witchcraft.

This National Council for Children is a very good body that could help to work on a number of children’s issues, but just calling it National Council for Children is not making it stronger. We are coming up with many authorities - Revenue Authority; Investment Authority. I am suggesting that we also come up with a national children’s authority so that this authority can really be an authority that can talk on its own rather than just being embedded in the Ministry of Gender. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

3.34
MS HELLEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue of child sacrifice is a serious one and I think as Ugandans, we have to really stand up and “condone” the act seriously. In my district - [THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: “To condemn it.”]- to condemn the act seriously. (Laughter) In my district Kiryandongo, there was also a similar case of a five-year old boy whose private parts were cut off. Up to now, the boy still urinates through a tube. The person who did it was arrested, but I do not know whether it was because of corruption or the laws were not substantial, that the man was released and we are told he went to the neighbouring village. 

So, such things are really happening and sometimes - after that incident happened, we tried to get the herbalists and all the so-called witchdoctors in the place, but the problem was that it was difficult to differentiate between witchdoctors and the herbalists because the witchdoctors during the day work as herbalists and at night they are the same people working as witchdoctors. They have licences showing clearly that they are herbalists. So, that is the main thing that is hindering our efforts. If they cannot clearly differentiate between the witch doctors and the herbalists, such acts are going to continue. 

Even as I talk, recently we had problems of a witchdoctor having sent demons to certain schools - actually three schools were temporarily closed. Now, if a person can do such and when you go to investigate such a person the person is a herbalist and does not have such medicine for witchcraft - and as I talk now, one man named Mbogo from one of the villages was actually chased away from the village. So, you find that even if they chase the man from one village, the man will go with his habits to another village and the habits will continue being in the country -(Interjections)- I will take the information.

MS NAGGAYI: Thank you honourable member for giving way. I want to inform you that the issue of people changing venues when they are arrested for any crime in this country, is very normal because we do not have national IDs. Someone will leave Gulu after committing a crime or maybe sacrificing a child and relocate to Busia. It does not even stop on Ugandans internally changing venues after committing crimes. Even foreigners can do it so well, especially when they are black Africans. 

Now, the issue of security, not only when it comes to apprehending criminals inside the country, is the major challenge, and also strengthening our lowest administrative unit, that is the LC I, which is not - actually it is a problem right now for security.

Recently, I had an issue with my maid who got a bar and hit one person and when she was arrested by the Police, we found that the information we have about her and the phones, were all fake, and when she went to Kabalagala Police Station she could not even have anyone come to bail her out on Police bond. She refused to mention any person who knows her. Now she is in Luzira and she has refused –(Interjections)- it is bailable because now the issue can be settled, but she has refused to have anyone who is known to her - a relative, a friend - come there. So, now I am stuck with the case. The person is there; she hit someone with an iron bar and the magistrates are telling me, “We have to release her.” I said, “But to release her to who - so that she goes ahead and commits another crime somewhere?” 

So, we have very many challenges in this country. Lack of an address and ID are a major challenge and our children will continue to be the major victims of this. Thank you, honourable member. 

MS KAHUNDE: Thank you, honurable member, for that information. I want to end by requesting the government, if possible, to clearly investigate these herbalists and each district be availed the names of the different herbalists it has, so that if there are any cases of child sacrifice and similar habits, such people are always contacted and they use them as they witch-hunt or to identify the witchdoctors who might be involved in such acts. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable members. Eight Members had approached the Speaker to be scheduled to raise these matters of urgent public importance. We have business that is scheduled for today and it runs to two pages of the order of the business. We have only been able to handle three issues. I am, therefore, not going to allow any more of the urgent matters to be raised now. We will defer some to tomorrow because most of them will still be relevant tomorrow. 

I will now ask if there is a response from the ministry, particularly on the issue of child sacrifice, and the matter that has been under debate, after which, we go to the Order Paper.

3.41
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, on behalf of the government, I want to convey our condolences to the family and those children who have been sacrificed as reported and even those that had happened before. This shows how our society is and, therefore, as we call on Government to take serious actions, we also want to appeal to members of the public to be vigilant so that together we stop this bad practice.

In Government, we intend to ask the Ministry of Internal Affairs to come with a paper in Cabinet to allow Cabinet to discuss comprehensively and see, as it is said, whether there is no law and then take proper action. But we shall take very serious action and ask - Government will have to take a position based on what the Minister of Internal Affairs will be directed to do.

Otherwise, again we are sorry for these things that have happened, but we shall take it seriously. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, some announcements. The Parliamentary Commission has organised a parliamentary health week and has invited Members of Parliament and staff with their families to participate. Activities will include free voluntary counselling and testing for HIV/AIDS, screening for breast cancer and cervical cancer, surgical male circumcision, blood donation, fitness and wellness clinics.

The week will start next week on Monday 5th December with an awareness walk starting at Parliament through Kampala streets and back to Parliament. The chief walker is expected to be the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament. Other activities will run until Thursday 8th December 2011. All activities will be held in the CHOGM grounds adjacent to the North Wing parking yard. You are all invited, please come with members of your family.

Today in the Public Gallery, we have pupils and teachers of World Ahead, Matugga represented by hon. Ibrahim Semujju Nganda, Member of Parliament, Kyadondo East. They have come to observe the proceedings of Parliament. Please join me in welcoming them.

Hon. Members, also in the Public Gallery this afternoon we have pupils and teachers of Nabaale Church of Uganda Primary School and Kigomba Womens’ Group represented by hon. Nambooze, Member of Parliament, Mukono Municipality. They have come to observe the proceedings. Kindly join me in welcoming them. You are all very welcome.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION ON UGANDANS LIVING AND WORKING IN THE UNITED ARAB EMIRATES IN MATTERS PERTAINING TO THE OPERATIONS OF THE UGANDA EMBASSY IN UAE RELATING TO THEIR WELFARE AND ISSUES INCIDENTAL THERETO

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Hussein Kyanjo? Next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO INSTITUTE MEASURES TO ADDRESS MATERNAL MORTALITY AND OTHER MATTERS INCIDENTAL THERETO

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nambooze, this is one of the motions in which I said “incidental clauses” have been permitted. You remember honourable members, this is one of the motions we deferred to today and I am glad it is on the Order Paper. 

3.45
MRS BETTY BAKIREKE NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Before I start, Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the issue is a motion for resolution of Parliament urging Government to institute measures to address maternal mortality and other matters incidental thereto.

MRS BAKIREKE: I am ready, Mr Speaker.

May it please you, Mr Speaker and honourable members of this august House to receive and consider this maternal health motion? The title is a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to institute measures to address maternal mortality and other matters incidental thereto.

With your guidance, Mr Speaker, I wish to drop the issue of “matters incidental thereto”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MRS BAKIREKE: “WHEREAS Article 33(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda obliges the State to mandatorily protect women and their rights taking into account the unique status and natural maternal functions in society and; 

WHEREAS Objective 15 of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of the State Policy further urges Government to recognise the significant role that women play in society; 

FURTHER AWARE that Objective 20 provides that the State shall take all practical measures to ensure the provision of basic medical services to the population;

AWARE that the current status in Uganda is that 435 women die out of every 100,000 live births and; 

FURTHER AWARE that 16 women die each day in Uganda while giving birth largely due to preventable causes such as over bleeding, sepsis, unsafe abortions, hypertensive disorders and related causes;

COGNISANT of the fact that Uganda has committed herself to fully realise the Millennium Development Goals, particularly the goal to reduce maternal death to 125 deaths for every 100,000 live births by the year 2015;

ALSO ACKNOWLEDGING that the National Policy on Midwifery Training is so biased that only six percent of the total number of enrolled students pursue midwifery and the current ratio of qualified tutors to midwifery students is only one to 60 as opposed to the internationally recommended ratio of one to ten;

FURTHER ACKNOWLEDGING that the coverage by skilled birth attendants in Uganda is so low that a midwife in Uganda attends to about three or more times the number of recommended patients according to the report on the State of the World Midwifery Statistics, 2011;

RECALLING that various stakeholders have in the past recommended that Government recruits an additional 5,000 nurses, midwives and clinical officers and also enhances their remunerations in order to create a well-motivated and an equitably deployed professional health workforce;

REALISING that family planning not only gives a woman a choice to create gaps between births, delay first pregnancies or to avoid having pregnancies too late, but also prevents maternal mortality and morbidity;

FURTHER REALISING that births close to one another weaken a woman and reduce her chances of surviving child birth related complications;

CONSIDERING that family planning services are not readily accessible to most women and up to now, family planning communication strategies and messages are not harmonised among the different stakeholders who are the Ministry of Health, civil society organisations, cultural and religious leaders, which results into passing conflicting information on the subject;

RECOGNISING that the loss of a mother shatters the family and threatens the wellbeing of the surviving children and husband;

NOW THEERFORE, be it resolved by this august House as follows:

1.	That Parliament urges Government to carry out maternal death audits annually to establish the cause and publish its findings.

2.	That Government develops a policy of compensation of the families of all women who die as a result of maternal related causes while in Government facilities.

3.	That Government undertakes to reform the midwifery training curriculum by enhancing the duration of training in maternal and child health modules.

4.	That Government re-centralises the recruitment of medical personnel and addresses the critical shortage of medical professionals particularly through recruitment at a minimum of more than 2000 well trained, motivated and equitably deployed midwives, in order to reverse the current rate of deaths resulting from preventable maternal related causes.

5.	That Government empowers the community and enhances their capacity to get involved in the fight against maternal and infant mortality by requiring that all Local Council Is in the country do maintain a register of pregnant women in the village indicating the outcome of the pregnancy and make returns to the sub-county quarterly, which in turn should compile a half-year report to be transmitted to the district.

6.	That Government compiles and tables to Parliament an annual report on the status of maternal health in the country with a full national maternal mortality audit report and that Parliament shall dedicate a particular day to debate this report and propose the way forward.

7.	That Government provides free HIV testing services and free ARVs for every HIV positive woman in the reproductive age as a strategy to secure an AIDS free generation and also scale up the accessibility to family planning services throughout the country.

8.	That Government convenes a national convention for the dominant voices to reconcile their stand on family planning with a view of harmonising family planning messages.”

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is the motion seconded? The motion is seconded by hon. Alaso, hon. Mutyabule, hon. Kamateeka, hon. Dr Epetait and several other Members of Parliament.

I think this is an elaborate speech on its own. Can I ask if the seconder wants to say something to this motion? You want to say something? The motion is very elaborate, honourable member - but you can. I will give you five minutes.

MRS BAKIREKE: Mr Speaker, Ugandans made a commitment to protect women in 1995 under our Constitution, and as I stand here this afternoon, I am here to remind the nation of this commitment we made.

I am not making a request, but I am here to claim, on my own behalf and on behalf of my sisters outside there and daughters, that as a nation, we made a commitment under the Constitution - Article 33 to protect women given our natural role as mothers.

I want to appeal to Members of this august House to present only a few cases of these women and that their fate should be considered as we discuss this motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, just allow this short interruption. There might be people you want to know are witnessing your presentation. It might give you morale to present it even better.

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have a group of people representing Non-Governmental Organisations whose activities are focused on improving maternal health in Uganda. They have come to observe the proceedings, kindly join me in receiving them. You are welcome. You can proceed.

MRS BAKIREKE: Mr Speaker, I want to talk about the late Jessica Avusya of Maracha, Ewanyapa village, Pajule sub-county in Arua district.

This was a 37-year lady and her story was properly captured in the Daily Monitor newspaper of Thursday. I will give you the date, Mr Speaker. It reads, “As one enters the maternity ward of the only referral hospital in Arua, there is a smell of death and fear among expectant mothers who are contemplating whether they will deliver safely after one of them, under what has been described as neglect of duty, died.

She left her home at Maracha, Ewanyapa village in Pajule sub- county for the hospital after she fell sick and was expecting to give birth with the help of experts, but she was denied the right to proper treatment. Jessica fell off the bed due to severe pain. 

When she fell sick, she was brought to the hospital and the only doctor present at this hospital told her that she was tired and would work on Jessica the next day. Her attendant narrated that the next day, no one attended to her until she met her death.”

Another case is the so called case of Nambozo of Mbale. In summary, for more than ten hours after Nambozo checked into Mbale Regional Referral Hospital to bring unto the world a life, she was ignored, neglected and writhing in pain. Her crime was that she did not have Shs 300,000 that the hospital medical staff demanded before they could attend to her. And so she wasted away as her husband Mr Richard Wesemayo made desperate rounds in the village to raise the money.

Another case is of Joan Kabane of Nyakahita in Kiruhura district. She arrived at Lyantonde hospital on the evening of October 2nd ready to deliver her fourth child. By the following morning, it had become evident that she would not have a normal delivery and Dr Gerald Kamutera performed a caesarean section operation at 8.40 a.m. but before the operation, Kamutera asked Kabane’s attendant Dorcus Katukunda to buy a surgical suture for the stitching of the wounds.

Katukunda bought ordinary sewing threads, which had the same translation ‘ewuuzi’ as the sutures in the local dialect. Kamutera allegedly got sutures from his store and asked Katukunda for Shs 70,000 -They had given him Shs 50,000; these were the relatives who were saying so - before he offered to operate on the patient, Katukunda said in the statement at Lyantonde Police Station.

The last case is of Acen Middy who reported at the hospital on May 27th and was operated on, and her baby saved, but she did not live to see the infant because she badly needed a blood transfusion and there was no blood in Lira hospital.

On the same day, another 30-year old mother, Eunice Ochola, reported to the hospital and a caesarean was performed on her. It was discovered that she needed a blood transfusion, but there was no blood in Lira hospital. She also passed away.

The director Dr Jane Aceng Acelo was at first not aware of these deaths when the reporter visited her office on Tuesday, but promised to crosscheck and pass on the information. She later confirmed that there were two deaths as earlier reported. She said the women could have been saved if they had blood at Lira hospital.

Mr Speaker, each of these cases represents 16 of a similar kind. It is only that these ones were reported in the papers, but the fact of the matter, according to official reports of Government, is that 16 women die per day in Uganda due to maternal issues. They die in labour. That means that every one and a half hours, a woman passes away and I am very sure that by the time we leave this House, about two women would have died in labour. That is the situation, and as I told you, I am here to plead for my life and the lives of my sisters and daughters.

All these reports, which I am going to lay on Table because of your guidance, that we do not have a lot of time, are here as evidence to show that we have not done enough as a country to protect our mothers.

Recently, there was a policy shift where Government decided to train comprehensive nurses instead of midwives, but I have found out that the comprehensive nurses - the training module has only five weeks of training for midwifery and the rest of the course covers other issues. That means that the comprehensive nurses we have today cannot handle labour issues as they would have been handled by the qualified midwives. Some people are suggesting and I believe that they have reason to suggest thus, that instead of having comprehensive nurses, why didn’t we choose to have comprehensive midwives?

Finally, the districts were given powers to recruit and employ medical personnel, but I have a case of Kalangala district, which has been advertising over years, but have not been able to attract even a single application from any doctor because doctors say that Kalangala is a hard-to-reach area and indeed it is. That is why we suggest that recruitment and employment for health workers should be re-centralised; that people would go into the health profession, be recruited and be equitably deployed with a possibility of being transferred instead of a medical personnel or officer thinking he is condemned to a particular district all his professional life.

I want to end by giving you some of the figures, which show that our hospitals are empty. The government itself came up with human resources for a health recruitment plan for districts and this is what the report says; “The health sector is currently grossly understaffed with nearly half of all the approved positions being vacant. A deeper analysis of the current staffing levels reveals yet another dimension of this problem in that majority of even the few existing staff are either support staff or administrative staff. Qualified health workers including doctors, midwives, nurses and allied health professions are in shortage, especially in hard-to-reach rural districts and the new districts. This situation seriously compromises the performance of the sector and particularly in its contribution to national development.”

When you go further, you will find that, for example, a district of Namayingo, which is supposed to have 306 health workers, currently has only 62. The district of Kyankwazi, which is supposed to have 263 health workers has 65; Buvuma district which is supposed to have 139, currently has 38; Kiruhura is supposed to have 668 and it has 208 at the moment; Ngora is supposed to have 191 and currently has 62. That is the story throughout and it is properly captured here. The ministry has indicated that even those 62 are drivers, sweepers and cleaners. I wish to lay this report on Table, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, what is that report you are laying on Table?

MRS BAKIREKE: Mr Speaker, it is a report from the Ministry of Health of the Republic of Uganda and it is Human Resources for Health Recruitment Plan for districts for Financial Year 2010/2021. I wish to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is so accepted by the record.

MRS BAKIREKE: Mr Speaker, I also wish to lay a report on improving access to skilled attendance at delivery. This is a full report, which was made in August 2011. Some of the issues I was addressing are contained herein. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What report is it?

MRS BAKIREKE: I beg your indulgence, Mr Speaker. I will lay this one when I reach the proper bulletin, to organise myself better.

This is a report from Kalangala District Local Government. It contains the details of how Kalangala Local Government has failed to attract applications from qualified medical personnel to work in their district. I request you to allow me to lay it on Table, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What date is it?

MRS BAKIREKE: It is dated July 27 2011. It is Kalangala District Local Government, Office of the Chief Administrative Officer. It is a report, which was given to the visiting Local Government Accounts Committee and they had presented it to satisfy a query on why they had failed to fill vacant positions in their district. Their reason was that they cannot attract applications.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture it accordingly.

MRS BAKIREKE: Mr Speaker, this is the Millennium Development Goal report for Uganda, 2010 by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development dated September 10. It is a report with a special theme to show how Uganda is accelerating the progress towards the improvement of maternal health and in particular, it is reported here -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you have already addressed Members on those subjects. Just lay the document on the Table. What date is it?

MRS BAKIREKE: It is dated September 2010. I wish to lay it on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture it as such.

MRS BAKIREKE: Mr Speaker, this is the midwifery report. It is entitled, “The State of the World Midwifery 2011”; Midwifery in Uganda, an in-depth country analysis prepared by Mitchell Mika in May 2011. 

It is the report which talks about the policy shift where the course of Midwifery is being dropped in favour of Comprehensive Nursing and it in detail, gives the problems which we shall face as a country if we drop Midwifery for Comprehensive Nursing. I beg to lay it on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture it as such.

MRS BAKIREKE: With that Mr Speaker, I wish to conclude this matter and rest my case by calling upon colleagues to look at this matter closely. When I travelled to Dubai recently, I met there a gentleman and he told me he had gone into exile. As a politician, I wanted to know why this man had left Uganda and gone into exile. I requested him if he could tell me why he left his country and who was this person who was looking after him. He said, “No, I left Uganda because my wife died in labour and I think I cannot return to Uganda before I am assured that the health facilities there can effectively and properly cater for the mothers in the country”. And this was not a simple case. 

Peoples’ lives are shattered, the children, the families but above all, these ladies who die. It is very unfair for anybody to die while bringing a life into the world.

On the issue of family planning, today medical officers turn up and tell our ladies to use family planning. The next day, a religious leader will turn up and address the same audience against family planning and I think we need to harmonise our voices and for that, Mr Speaker, I rest my case. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. I would like to turn to the people who have seconded the motion if they have any additional information to add. I do not see any of the people who signed up to the motion; I do not see any of them. So, I will ask the honourable member who seconded the motion, hon. Alaso, to speak and after that, I will open the debate which will be limited.

4.14
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my colleague, hon. Betty Nambooze, for moving this motion. We are all aware that in Uganda the bulk of the mothers die of bleeding, sepsis and obstructed labour. The second issue is that they also die because of failed, bad or delayed referrals. Thirdly, they die because delivery is non-supervised by skilled hands. I have been in this Parliament for some time. This is about the sixth or tenth motion from 2001 when I got into this building. So, let me join in the lamentation about Ugandan women who continue to die.

If these Members of Parliament seated here tonight were pregnant ordinary women from Serere, they would all have died in 20 days. All of you would be dead in 20 days; 16 of you dying daily if you were poor ordinary women from Mubende. You would all be finished. There would be no Parliament, but I have been part of this lamentation for the last 10 years; motion after motion after motion.

There should be something the Parliament of Uganda, particularly the Ninth Parliament can do differently. Who does not know the causes of death? Even the ordinary women themselves know, the local governments know, and you and I seated here know why these mothers are dying. 

The minister knows; they compile all these reports and bring them to us in the Social Services Committee. The difference is, we do the same thing motion after motion, expressing sympathy, condolences and solidarity, year-in year-out.

I want to think, Mr Speaker, that if Parliament means to save these lives, they should stop expressing solidarity and put money in those areas which will save the Ugandan women. We passed the budget just a few months ago. Our committee made a submission where we hoped that Parliament and indeed, Government, would help us recruit an additional 2500 workers. How do you explain the death of a mother who walks into a health centre and finds no midwife? Who do you want to blame? You want to blame the cleaner or you want to blame the non-existent midwife. 

I think we should recruit the medical workers and we should put money. People do not get recruited by theory, by semantics or by pretending that we want them recruited. They get recruited when actual funds are appropriated by Parliament for the purposes of recruitment. Mulago Hospital where you find mothers - a pregnant mother waiting to deliver assisting another one who is delivering because there are 10 mothers in a row due to deliver. This one is pushing, the other one is crying, the other one - you know the water and all that type of stuff and there are only two or three midwives on duty. 

If a mother dies in such a circumstance, who do you want to blame? This woman or one midwife who is trying to deliver 10 mothers at instance go? Mulago Hospital told us that if we wanted to better the conditions of delivering in Mulago, we only needed to give them 30 midwives this financial year. We did not give them the money for 30 midwives. Those women will continue to die in Mulago until the next financial year.

I have heard of the pain and the specific cases expressed by the mover of the motion and they are very sad scenarios. When Nambozo, the lady in Mbale died, the Ministry of Health Directors ran to Mbale. Of course, there was anger all over the country; the women Parliamentarians, including me, were very upset. Do you know what happened in Mbale? The moment they reached there - this is the untold story - they reached Mbale and found three mothers waiting for caesarean section and they screamed at the doctors. The doctors said, “By the way, we do not have sutures -(Interjections)- sutures. I was taught this word in the committee the other day. They are called sutures technically. I think they are called sutures. Those things that they need to stitch back where they have opened to pick the baby from. 

And so, the doctor asked those three directors who went there and said, “Okay, what do you want me to do? Do you want me to open these mothers and not stitch them back? There are no sutures”. And the directors fundraised money that day to pay for the sutures, the gloves and the cotton wool and those three mothers got operated. 

Is that how we are going to run the medical system in this country? Okay, if these people had not come and fundraised, what would have happened? That is why you go to regional referral hospitals and the doctors will insist that a mother must pay Shs 70,000 because if she does not pay, there is nobody who is going to buy the sutures; but we pay taxes in this country and nobody is making maternal health a priority.

If you go to a hospital and you do not get medical workers on station, who will receive these mothers? I think rather than motion after motion after motion, year in, year out, Parliament must do something different. motions without money will not save a single mother in this country. A motion with money –(Interjection)- information -      

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kamateeka?

MS ALASO: I was receiving information from –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You were receiving information? I thought you had finished. Are you receiving information or you have finished?

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, my colleague had offered to give me some information and so I said, “Information,” and then I sat down.

MR GILBERT OLANYA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am on the Committee of Social Services and I would like to give information that when we went to Arua Hospital as a Committee of Social Services, we had a very bad scenario; we were informed that there was a lady whose child died in the womb. She was brought to hospital at around one o’clock in the night. When they went to look for a midwife, there was no doctor and the midwife was not there. She was there and suffering alone and the medical personnel came in the morning when the lady had already died. As a committee, we are not happy. 

I would like to inform my colleagues that in Uganda, we are very good at training the medical personnel, but very poor at retaining the medical personnel. Now we learnt that many of the medical personnel who are well trained in Uganda are going to look for –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, are you giving information or you are contributing? (Laughter)

MR GILBERT OLANYA: I am giving information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then please give information.

MR OLANYA: So, I would like to inform my colleague that we sincerely need to find a way of retaining our well trained personnel.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information received. Hon. Alaso, please conclude.

MS ALASO: Hon. Kakooza was the minister and you might want to listen to him.

MR KAKOOZA: I thank you, hon. Alice Alaso. You talked about money and maybe for the benefit of this Parliament, I would like to thank the Eighth Parliament, which in December, passed a loan of $130 million. This was for reproductive health and maternal child health and maybe this Parliament could be updated by the current minister about the same. About the money you are talking about, Parliament asserted itself and we passed that loan. We need to be updated. I thank you.  

MS ALASO: I thank you very much. (Hon. Members rose_)- Mr Speaker, what do I do? Maybe I conclude – I had to give the Minister –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are blocking debate on this matter. Please wind up so that we can open debate.

MS ALASO: I thank you. Mr Speaker, you know as honourable minister designate in this sector, it was important that you hear from him and that is why I gave him. 

But let me conclude by simply saying that with the current staffing of 56 percent, you cannot boast about functionality in the health sector, and I want to pray to the House to go back and re-read the report and the proposals of the Social Services Committee this financial year because it could inform us as we go forward. I thank you. (Hon. Members rose_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, these are serious matters and the facts are laid before us and we are not going into facts. The facts are well presented. We are going to make contributions on how we move forward from here. I think the honourable member has been very clear about lamentations upon lamentations and motions upon motions. Parliament wants suggestions on the way forward. (Interjections) The Speaker is speaking honourable members –(Laughter)– so, let us not bring statistics because they will not help us as the facts are known and let us provide the way forward. 

This matter is serious and I am going to give 45 minutes and each Member will take three minutes – strictly three minutes. 

4.25
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Nambooze for bringing this motion and my senior colleague for her eloquence on these matters. We need practical solutions and I think the first solution is that we should recruit and train enough midwives and also renumerate them sufficiently for their services so as to retain them, because there is no use in recruiting and training them only to have them leave. 

Usually, in the budget, there is money for workshops. We would like that the Ministry of Health puts aside this money which is supposed to be for workshops, at least for two years, and train enough midwives.

Mr Speaker, the recruitment and training of medical workers centrally is crucial. Some of the staff has been known to get onto the payroll of the local governments only to go away for further training, not that further training is not required, but it leaves the districts without any help. 

My own district of Mitooma had a case and when the doctor left, a woman died in labour and of course, the child also died and another one lost twins. It is, therefore, important that the medical personnel be recruited and trained centrally because then, when some are released for further training, there should be an arrangement to help the districts.  

Existing health centres should have well equipped maternity units with “mama kits”. So, many of these cases – some women have been known to die after being neglected because of failure to produce a pair of gloves because the medical personnel are afraid of getting involved with the blood of the victim. So, could we have the money that hon. Kakooza has reminded us of? Could we have the maternity units well stocked with “mama kits”? 

The issue of maternal death audit is important because if we know the causes of death of these women – not that we do not know - but at least case by case; if we know, then we shall also know how to address them. I do not agree that governments should be held entirely responsible for all the maternal deaths, even when they happen in hospitals, because there are many cases of death including domestic violence and poor feeding. I think this proposal will be counter-productive. 

So, we need all of us to be responsible for the health and well-being of mothers. Let us work together to ensure the health and well-being of the mothers of this nation. No woman should ever die while bringing life into this world. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you. Honourable members, please welcome hon. Sarah Nyombi, the former Member of Parliament for Ntenjeru North. (Applause) I remember that from the Seventh Parliament, when we were with them, she never left the issue of maternal health. I think she was stuck by that and we now call her the champion [Dr Amuriat: “Chief Mother.”] Chief Mother as I am being advised. (Laughter) She has been in that and no wonder she is here to observe how we are proceeding with this matter.

4.30
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank my colleague for moving this motion. I just want to remind this House that in the last Parliament, we actually passed a road map which had very good resolutions and I do believe that those resolutions were intended to help us to achieve the Millennium Development Goal No.5.

Mr Speaker, probably the minister would like to tell this House how far we have gone as far as those resolutions are concerned, because we passed a loan of $130 million to help us on maternal and reproductive health issues. It is so surprising that even as we speak now, we shall have a challenge in our health centres where by medical supplies are insufficient. 

Recently, I visited some of my health centres in Wakiso District and I was surprised when the medical workers told me that they do not have the sutures which my colleague had talked about. On the issue of gloves, Mr Speaker, you will agree with me that most of our women in the rural areas, especially the peasants who cannot afford to go to private clinics, prefer to produce their babies in the villages with birth attendants instead of going to the health centres. 

That is because she knows that even if she goes to the health centre, she will be asked to buy gloves and cotton. It is very sad that we passed that loan and nothing changed. The minister should tell us where that money is; we passed the loan and we need accountability for it.

Now, the other thing that perturbed me is the way our women are treated in the health centres when they go to deliver. Yesterday, I was in Entebbe. You saw on TV what happened recently, where a midwife was testifying to helping a mother to deliver twins using a torch of a cell phone. Why is that so, because there is no power? Entebbe Hospital has a power bill of Shs 60 million and Shs 50 million for water. 

I would like to ask the minister - in the last Parliament, we passed resolutions that Government should find a way of subsidising these utilities to help health centres and hospitals. We would like to find out from the minister, what happened to these resolutions? –(Member timed out.)

4.34
MS CHRISTINE ACAYO (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the movers of this motion and the colleagues who have given their submissions. My submission is that there should be a policy in this country that no health worker should ask for gloves or “mama kits” from mothers. 

I would like to add my voice to those of my colleagues, that even though we employ health workers, as long as they continue asking for these gloves, the women will continue shunning health centres and deliver at home. And when they are being taken to the health centres, it is often late referral and they end up dying. 

Hon. Members, you will agree with me that as you went on recess, Government supplied most health centres with drugs, mama kits and gloves. But you should not be surprised when you go to antenatal clinics and find health workers still demanding that women take gloves and mama kits, which Government has just supplied; that defeats my understanding. So, we have got to hold health workers also accountable. 

On top of that, I would like to make an amendment where it says, “Government develop a policy of compensation of families”; it is not only Government to be held accountable. Even the doctor or the health worker who was attending to the woman who died should be held accountable. In developed countries, they are even sued; that makes the health works to be responsible and to attend to their work. I beg to submit. 

4.37
MR WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you hon. Nambooze for moving this motion. Hon. Alaso is strong about lamentation. Some of us knew even before we came here that Parliament has always been discussing this issue of health and maternal health in particular. But we know the disease; we talk and prescribe, but we do not find the medicine. Why are our health services in the country always failing? The issue of buildings has been largely addressed; buildings which people call health centres are everywhere. But a hospital is not a building; a hospital is a doctor, medicine and a patient; this is what we should be addressing. 

In my constituency, we have many of those health centres II, III and IV and they are largely non-operational. They open at 11 O’clock and close at five and they are closed over the weekends. So, basically, they are just buildings not health centres. We should address that. 

The issue we have is about the medical staff. We do not have staff because we do not pay them. The doctors are underpaid and they will not serve us. They will not go and work in the health centres where they will not be paid sufficiently. We should address that issue as Parliament; doctors should be given more money. Why should we pay a doctor Shs 600,000 and expect him to go and work in a village where there is no power. What is the motivating factor for that doctor? Pay doctors and nurses more money and they will go and work for you –(Interruption) 

MR NAKABALE: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I am privileged to inform this House that due to the small pay of doctors, some social scientists have started masquerading as doctors. Of recent, in Kitwe Hospital, in Ntungamo District, we arrested a one Edison who was at the medical school for only two years. He left the medical school and went to do social sciences. He was fully employed as a doctor of the health centre IV in Kitwe. We came to know about this because many mothers were dying in his hands as he was making the surgeries. Many patients were not getting healed because of the poor prescriptions he was giving them. 

We took up the matter and investigated the man; the man later on confessed and he was arrested for not having papers. I think this should be an eye-opener to us as Government. I say this because this is Government – we need to increase the salaries of these people otherwise, we shall continue getting more of such people. Thank you for giving way.

MR OGUTTU: Thank you very much, honourable member. During the campaigns, I went around the country and we visited several health centre IVs and saw wonderful theatres which have not worked for ten years. That is across the whole country, and I am sure the minister knows that. Recently, I visited Western Uganda, we have visited health centre facilities and the health centre IV I visited had a lab which has not been operational since 1999; it has no doctor. 

These are things which we know; so why do we have to lament about them? My name is Oguttu. It means I was born behind the house, in a bush –(Laughter)– that is many years ago. Why should we still have women producing Oguttus in the bush. (Laughter) (Member timed out.) 

4.41
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First, I want to thank development partners because they have supported issues of maternal health in this country. Recently, I received a donation of equipment worth Shs 6 million from the Inner Wheel. It is a private group of people in Uganda. 

I would like to support this motion. I have observed that the involvement of men in maternal issues is low. In this country, when antenatal is going on; usually, the ministry is mainly targeting women. I think it is high time the men got involved. Let the men also be involved, especially in rural areas. The men are not involved. In all these workshops, you find only women. When you go down, men are bread-winners and when they are involved, at least by the time the woman is going to give birth; the man should be around. But by the time they give birth, this man is nowhere to be seen and it is a problem. 

I can assure you that I tried to go there because I was not attending antenatal, but when I reached the labour ward; I had to turn back because what I saw was not easy for me. If I had attended antenatal; I was going to enter; and it was the first born. With the second born, I had to attend antenatal and enter the labour ward. I can assure you the whole exercise was done when I was present. So, it is important to go and attend antenatal. Those who are not going there - I know they are there, Mr Speaker.

The mode of transport; especially in these newly-created districts – you find in a whole district that there is not even a single ambulance. It is very unfortunate to find that in a whole district, there is no ambulance; there is no referral hospital -(Interruption)

MS KHAINZA: Thank you very much, the honourable member, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that even in the hospitals or health centres where the ambulances are, normally, they say, “There is no fuel.” So, the ambulance is always parked there. Even if a person is dying, the person will die because there is no fuel. Sometimes, when a patient says, “Let us look for some money,” they hike the price. For a distance which can take fuel of Shs 10,000; they will ask for Shs 60,000, which a person cannot afford. That is the information.

MR MUGUME: Mr Speaker, I think the NRM Government has created many ministries. I think it is high time we came up with a ministry in charge of maternal health.(Laughter) Yes, you do it so that at least we can get a minister in charge. It will help because there is one of Kampala. It will help us because we shall get a direct budget to address some of these issues. You support me.

4.47
MR BENSON OBUA-OGWAL (UPC, Moroto County, Alebtong): Mr Speaker, I rise to support the motion. The last speaker, the one I am following, made a very serious statement. Some people think it is a joking matter. We need a ministry for maternal health because to have two or three ministers handling all these issues is overwhelming.

Ngugi wa Thiong’o once said we train very expensively in Afica for free export. This is very true in the health sector. We need to stem the tide. Recently, I met a very young doctor who was overwhelmed. She said she is a recent graduate and in her class, 25 medical doctors had already left the country and she was leaving anytime. This is what we are facing. We need to motivate our doctors and make them feel like they are part of this country in serving us. If they are emigrating to as near as Rwanda because conditions there are better; then as a country, we must wake up.

A point was made concerning an issue in Lira where a woman died. The name of Dr Achieng Ochero came up. This is one of the few medical personnel who have decided to remain here and serve this country very dedicatedly; just like the health minister who has been serving this country very dedicatedly. Such cases are being noticed. Dr Achieng Ochero has recently been promoted and is now the Director-General of Health Services because of her dedication.  

I am saying that much as we are pointing fingers, let us realise that four fingers are pointing back at us. Let us support health workers to carry out their work. Matters of health and maternal health in particular, are not political. We need to support our medical workers, otherwise, we are going to continue losing them. Research has shown that if all the medical doctors from Nigeria alone, who have left the continent, were to be brought back, Africa would need no more doctors. 

4.49
DR SAM OKUONZI (Independent, Vurra County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Namboze – there was one who died but this one is available – who has moved this motion. Mr Speaker, you said we need a way forward rather than just speak. 

First of all, I am frustrated that there has been motion after motion and nothing has happened. I have a feeling that even after this motion, nothing may happen. One of the things you may have to guide us on is; how does Parliament become relevant and effective in making sure that its resolutions are respected and implemented? I was in the Ministry of Health for some time and many things that are being said here are like songs to my ears. I have heard them over and over again. I also want to briefly say that I support the idea of centralised staff distribution very much because had it not been the case, I would never have found myself as a medical officer in Kalangala. And as you may be aware, after me, only one person was sent there. That is about 15 years ago. So, we need to centralise staff management.

But let me inform you that I happen to have done mortality studies with other people, in which we discovered four factors that contribute to the death of our mothers while in hospitals. One of these four is early pregnancy. More than 60 percent of the mothers who die are actually teenagers or at least they are less than 20 years of age. These early pregnancies have resulted into early marriages, leading to the existence of young mothers. I think we need a resolution in regard to this area.

The second was – and this study was by the way commissioned by the Ministry of Finance, Rt Hon. Speaker and not by Ministry of Health, though I happened to be selected to lead this team. 

So, as I was saying, the second factor is emergency obstetric care. This means that all the issues you have mentioned starting with equipment, staff and all the sundries that are needed – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, give the hon. Member one more minute.

DR OKUONZI: Thank you very much. I want to move some amendments around these issues. The third one includes the delays that occur at home, on the way and in the health centres or hospitals themselves. The fourth factor is just lack of staff. 

So, I would like to move the following amendments: One is that Government passes and enforces a legislation on –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which amendment are you proposing? You need to indicate the part against which you are going to move the amendment.

DR OKUONZI: Correction, I should have said that I would like to add –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you will then be adding more resolutions from number one. 

DR OKUONZI: Yes, and that Government passes and enforces a legislation to curb early marriages and pregnancies while funding and enforcing all the other laws relating to reproductive and maternal health. The pregnancy may be difficult to curb, but at least the early marriages can be curbed because they contribute to early pregnancies.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the age of consent is 18 years. So, are you saying that it should be brought lower or what?

DR OKUONZI: I am saying below 18 years.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The law as of now prohibits any relationship of that nature involving persons below the age of 18. What is your take?

DR OKUONZI: Well, Mr Speaker, that is why I gave a background to this study. This study may have been done in the context that there is no such law that exists. I am saying this because the mothers who are dying are mostly of the ages of 14, 15, 16, 17 – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, is there any need for a new legislation when there is already a law that clearly spells out the age of consent as 18 years? Would you need another law to do that?

DR OKUONZI: I do not know. Maybe I can be guided on that, but you need to note that that law does not work and that is why I am trying to bring it out here; it needs review.

The tenth one is that Government should prepare up a well-sought out phase and implementable plan to equip all hospitals and maternity centres throughout the country with emergency obstetric care facilities. And I am sure many people have spoken about this before; it is only missing in this motion.

The final one is that Government prepares a strategy to assist women to get to hospitals through the use of motorcycles which are cheap and can be distributed throughout the country. I am sure the country can afford these because each does not cost more than Shs 6,000,000. These motorcycles to be used as motorised ambulances, should be distributed to all parishes. 

There should be a law to compel or make it difficult for taxi drivers to refuse to transport women to hospitals when they find them on the way waiting for transport. This will help those helpless women to be taken to hospitals on time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there has been a proposed addition to the resolutions in the motion. Shall we deal with them later? So, we will come back to them when we start considering the resolutions in this motion. Yes, the honourable member from Apac District.

4.57
MS LUCY AJOK (UPC, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those from my colleagues. I would like to bring it to the attention of this House that Apac District is not any different from what has been described here.

My views are: One, is that I accept the issue of centralised recruitment of staff because one of the things that motivate our staff very much – in Apac, for example, you find a health worker at the same grade with a health worker in some district like Lira earning less money. So, we should take up the issue of the salary scale to have health workers of the same grade paid the same salary. This will help motivate them much.

I would also like to say that the Ministry of Health – because enough has been done by Parliament in terms of having legislations put in place – it is up to the Ministry of Health to put in place systems that really work. What we are lamenting about now is just an issue of implementation. Yes, the ministry is not blaming Parliament, but there are lamentations with things going wrong on the ground.

Secondly, in a joint approach, we need to devise means on how to train our medical staff. Yes, we are lamenting about their going to work abroad, but many of them undergo a lot of sacrifice in upgrading their education at their own cost. Some of them study while working; they sacrifice a lot of time. 

Given this situation, we need to devise some means of extending help to these medical staff while being trained in school. For example, there could be arrangements where they sign an agreement with the ministry for it or the government to pay their tuition, but that will be done on agreement that they will serve in Government hospitals for maybe five to seven years after graduation, but that they should be allowed to move out after that period.

Otherwise, as I was saying, it is true they are Ugandan doctors, but many of them are paying tuition to upgrade their education on their own with no support from Government. 

But also, we need proper systems in Government hospitals. We should not only be getting reports of the milk that is spoiled. We also need to bear in mind that when we approve money, how does it play back into those hospitals? How is that money used? Who is in charge? How do they report? We have many systems in this country that are not doing their work and this is 
where –(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter is very important. I had allocated time, but it seems many people still want to contribute. I am going to seek your consent to reduce the time to two minutes each so that we can accommodate many more people. If that is okay, then I will extend by another 20 minutes. 

5.02
MR GEORGE EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. My first point is about budgetary increase. We need to increase Government spending on health. I remember in the past budget we budgeted for nine percent for the Ministry of Health. If we could push it to 15 percent, such that the ordinary mother in Bukedea can also get the skilled attendant like a professional midwife, a doctor, attending to these mothers in Bukedea - even deep in Malera, they should also be able to feel the touch of these professional attendants.

We also have to improve on the health facilities in all districts. A place like Bukedea, which is a district, does not even have a doctor. If we don’t have such skilled personnel, then it means we even don’t have facilities where these expectant mothers can be catered for well. 

Somebody talked about transport. Transport facilities still need to be attended to. We need to increase the budget. Hon. Alaso said we are just lamenting, but this is the body that appropriates funds. So, if we are to improve on infrastructure - if we are to improve on these roads such that expectant mothers can access health facilities easily, we should be able to provide funds. 

We are beginning with the budget process soon. Let us show action by giving Ministry of Health a lot of money. Then we shall be –(Member timed out.)

5.04
MRS RUTH LEMATIA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am a senior midwife in this country. I learnt midwifery; I have practiced midwifery, delivered mothers. I have taught midwifery from enrolled to university up to masters level. I have directed training of midwifery. I am so happy to receive this paper and to know that my cry is being felt by other people. 

However, I want to make observations on technical issues. I will go directly to the issues because I know I have limited time. On page 1 of the paper, the mover proposed that the ratio of midwives should be 1:10. I feel this is too technical for the mover. Maybe she doesn’t know that there is the practical aspect of it and there is the theory part of it. The proposal she has made here is only suitable for the practical aspect of it. For theory, it is 1:40. So, that needs to be corrected because if this is adopted, it will have a bearing on nursing training in this country. Whatever will be adopted by the nurses here must be a workable one. 

On the same page, it says that the coverage of skilled birth attendants in Uganda is so low that a midwife in Uganda attends to about three or more –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One more minute to the honourable member.

MRS LEMATIA: That too needs to be corrected. I think further research needs to be done before this paper is adopted. 

I would like to thank her for mentioning family planning. You recall I have always advocated for family planning in this country. Sweden, which has got the best maternal mortality rate, which is only seven against Uganda’s 435, is so because they are practicing family planning. We are not practicing family planning. I think this paper needs to emphasize that. 

Recentralization: I wish this could be emphasized more in this paper. Medical workers are under districts or local governments as well as under central government. Paying allegiance becomes very difficult. Therefore, if we recentralized medical workers they would get better attention from the Ministry of Health because –(Member timed out.)	

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The very reason for which the health sector has been ailing over the years is partly due to inadequate financing to the sector. I note that Members are raising very serious issues today, specifically on maternal health, but not a single minister from finance is in the House. I also note that the Leader of Government Business is seriously “contemplating”. (Laughter) 

I think we must find methods of making sure that the finance minister is at least in the House to take note of the issues. (Interjection) I am glad to see that he has walked back. Now my fears have been put to rest, but in future, when we are dealing with matters to do with finance, we need a finance minister on board. 

5.09
MS ANN NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I first of all thank the mover of the motion because it is a motion for us and to see us live through the future. 

I stand to support the motion, but I would also like to contribute to Resolution No.4 about recruitment. Mr Speaker, I am privileged to be mentioned by the movers of the motion - Kyankwanzi district – not as an advantage, but in disadvantage because staffing levels in the district are alarming, and maybe that is why we captured the eye of the mover of the motion.Even yesterday, I wrote to the Minister of Health; the staffing level in the district is at 20 percent. 

I have been in local government; at least I am privileged to have moved to all the corners of my district. I have health centres from I, II, III, and IV. Kyankwanzi boasts of having many health centres in this country, but the problem is staffing.

Factors that affect maternal health, leave alone early pregnancies and late pregnancies; there are factors like where there are no health workers in the health centres.  

I commend the Ministry of Health now that we have had an improvement in the drug supply countrywide. There is a great improvement, but who will administer the drugs, if there are no health workers? We shall be at a loss because the drugs will rot from the health centres. We used to say that the midwives were one of the causes of -(Member timed out.)

5.11
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): I stand to support the motion moved by the honourable “teacher.” I would like to talk about the equipping of health centre IIs because this is where the mothers go first, and if the mother fails there, she is referred to health center III, then health centre IV and to a hospital. But we lose so many mothers in that process of referral. So, the solution should be that health centre IIs should be well equipped both in personnel and also equipment and medicine. 

I support this idea of centralising the recruitment of medical personnel. If I give you an example of Namutumba District; we have only one doctor in the district and that doctor is the director of health services! We do not have a doctor to work in the health centre IV.

The other day I went to the Ministry of Health and talked to the director general of health services. She told me to go and get two doctors, bring them to her, and she would recruit them. I have tried and failed. If Ministry of Health recruits these doctors themselves, they can be able to post them to the rural areas like mine of Namutumba and I will have the opportunity of having the two doctors that I require in the district.

I am also proposing that the family planning services be strengthened. Forty five percent of the girls in Namutumba get pregnant between -(Member timed out.)

5.14
MR MIKE MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): I would like to thank hon. Nambooze for the motion and the colleagues who have debated on this matter. 

When the NRM took power in 1986, the maternal mortality ratio was over 1,000 women dying out of 100,000. In the last 15 years, there has been progress, however, the maternal mortality ratio in the country has remained high for the last 15 years with no significant decline from 505 women dying out of 100,000 to 435 women dying out of the 100,000 making it a total of 6,000 women dying per annum.

Out of those women who die, there is also a major significant factor. One out of every six women who live or survive out of every woman who dies, six have very chronic complications. But again there is data that has not been assembled for cases like obstetric fistula, chronic pelvic infection, post-abortion complications and infertility.

I also want to put on record that out of every 100 who are pregnant, only 62 percent get skilled medical care. 

Now, what are the causes? One of the biggest problems is infrastructure, which includes manpower, equipment and so on and so forth. The second one is the referral system. The third one is equipment and supplies. The fourth one is emergency obstetric care. The fifth one is HIV/ AIDS which is endemic in our society at about seven percent now. The sixth is unwanted pregnancies. The seventh is unsafe abortion; and the eighth is the human resource capacity.

In all, to address the issues hon. Nambooze has raised, we must deal with the following: 

•	Budget allocation must be raised from the current 10.7 percent. The Abuja Declaration clearly indicates that we must allocate 15 percent to health in the African countries. WHO recommends 28 percent; World Bank recommends 32 percent. We must increase the budget allocation.

•	We must address the high fertility rates in this country. It is very important because Uganda produces an average of 1.2 million children per annum.

•	The third one is education.
 
If these three are not addressed, this motion will remain a matter that will be filed away. We must address the issue of budget allocation so that our women in the countryside and at home can now rise to the occasion because life-saving procedures in every health facility must be instituted.

In Rwanda, for example, every person contributes one dollar to insurance -(Member timed out.)

5.19
MR JACINTO OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): I strongly support the resolution which has been proposed by hon. Nambooze. I would like to propose that Government, especially the Ministry of Health, changes its policy regarding seconding health workers at non-profit and non-government health centres.

Recently, I requested for a clinical officer and midwife to be seconded by Government to my constituency, and I was really astounded to learn that Government does not second clinical officers, midwives and nurses at non-profit and non-government health facilities and it only seconds medical doctors. I believe if the Ministry of Health changes its policy and seconds these lower cadres of health, our people at the grassroots, especially the poor, will be well catered for. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is perfect timing; exactly 20 minutes after 5.00 O’clock and that is the time we had agreed on. Can I ask the honourable minister to respond and then we go to the matters, clause by clause, and see if we can adopt them.  

5.22
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (DR CHRISTINE ONDOA): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to respond. I would like to thank the honourable members for raising such important issues concerning maternal health and there are a few facts that I would like us to note as I respond. One is that the contraceptive prevalence rate in our country as per now is only 23 percent. This means that despite the fact that we have family planning methods at almost all health units, only 23 percent of the population accesses it. This is because of many other factors including attitude to contraception and the women not wanting to have those methods.

Secondly, the prevalence of women attending at least four antenatal visits is only 47 percent in our country. Mr Speaker, this is very important because if we are to detect some of the complications during pregnancy, we need the women to attend all the four antenatal visits. And so, we only have 47 attending the four visits. The other data I want to give you is that, the percentage of women who deliver under skilled care to-date is only 42 percent. That means that the remaining percentages attend unskilled birth deliveries.

I am going to respond to some of the issues raised. I want to begin with issues that appeared on paper. The first was that Parliament urged Government to carry out maternal death audits annually to establish the causes and publish its findings. I would like the House to know that in the Ministry of Health currently, every maternal death is notifiable within 24 hrs and all maternal deaths are audited within seven days. Actually, all maternal and neonatal deaths are audited within seven days and the reports are forwarded to the Ministry of Health headquarters. Also, independent assessment of the maternal death audits by professionals like the midwives council, the obstetrics and gynaecologists council, is now routinely done and they are audited.  

Central analysis of maternal death audits to identify major causes of maternal deaths is also routinely being carried out and as Members rightly said, we know what makes mothers die and we know what steps to take, if only we are supported financially to help some of these measures be carried out. A maternal and prenatal review committee is in place at all the regional referral hospitals and also in some of the district hospitals, and they carry out both maternal and prenatal death audits whenever they occur. 

The second issue was about Government developing a policy to compensate women who die as a result of maternal related causes. During the debate, Members rightly mentioned that the many causes of death - even if the mother died at a health facility – were cited as the three delays: the delay at community level; at home where most times mothers have to wait for their husbands to give them consent to go to hospital; then we have delays during transportation and when the husband arrives then he has to start looking for the transport, and that too causes a lot of delays. And by the time they arrive at the health facility, there will also be a third delay in case the facility has to assemble all the health workers needed to work on the mother. 

Also, in the Constitution, Article 93 alludes that any motion that involves charges involving the Consolidated Fund needs to be thoroughly debated. So, my ministry cannot commit to saying that this issue could be resolved without further consultations with this Article in the Constitution. 

Thirdly, Government undertakes to reform the midwifery training curriculum by enhancing the duration of training in maternal and child – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, are you responding to the motion as presented, one to eight, in which case I would now move for us to debate one by one and you make your response to them, or are you still making general comments on what has been said? If you are handling them one by one, then I could as well call the House to begin examining the clauses one by one so that you don’t have to repeat yourself when we come to that. For example, on proposed resolution No.1, you have made some responses, but you have not said whether you support it or not, or whether it is necessary or not. So, it might be of good guidance if that is the way you intend to go, so that I just call the proposed motions one by one, and you make your response to them and then the Members debate and see whether to adopt them or not so that we save time. Would that be proper? 

DR ONDOA: I think that would be better. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the minister has given some general remarks before beginning to handle the issues as presented in the proposed resolutions. Now, therefore, be it resolved by Parliament as follows - and she has handled 1, 2 and is beginning to handle 3, and I thought it would be appropriate for us to be orderly and systematic that since she is going in that order, we could as well handle them in that order and we come to a conclusion of this matter including towards the end when we dealt with hon. Okuonzi’s proposals for amendment. So, can I now propose on item No.1 of that resolution? Should we approve resolution No.1 as proposed? Hon. Minister, is resolution No.1 okay? Do you have any problem with it?

DR ONDOA: Mr Speaker, we are already doing this and it is routine in our ministry that we carry out maternal audits.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is routine, and so you do not have any problem with it? Hon. Members, I put the question that this particular one stand part of the resolution. 

MRS BAKIREKE: Mr Speaker, the gist of the matter is in publishing the findings because it is not good for them to make –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She has no problem with that and so, she will publish it. That is what she has said. You have no problem, hon. Nambooze. She has accepted and that matter will be resolved as proposed in the resolution. Any other issues with this particular proposal? 

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, I thought that the gist of this would be so as to do something about it. Have them published so as to do something about it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what the resolution is proposing. Isn’t it? 

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, I thought that we would publish these findings so as to find solutions; that Government would then work on these findings so as to reduce on maternity deaths in the country. I thought that would be part of this resolution rather than just say that they be published. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Bahati.

MR BAHATI: I appreciate the dilemma and I want to propose - I do not know whether this can help. After publishing findings and actions taken - you have established the causes, the findings and maybe proposed action that Government is taking.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we also, maybe we could look at 1 and 6 together. Look at 6. Would that be accommodated there?

MR BAHATI: Yeah, they become one I think.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It comes under there, hon. Kamateeka?  Is that okay? 

MS KAMATEEKA: Maybe, Mr Speaker, we combine both and make the resolution smarter rather than have both of them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, I think the way it is worded might be more productive than if you - 

MS KAMATEEKA: Okay we can carry them as they are.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can keep it like that? Thank you. So, we then say that we have unanimously adopted resolution No.1. Is that correct? I thought we were going in the order. We will come to six when we reach there. So, resolution No.1 approved by acclamation. Do I need to put to vote? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Resolution 2. Hon. Bahati.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I think the spirit of the resolution is to help Government and all of us to move forward and when we bring the word “compensation” we complicate issues. I have discussed this with hon. Nambooze that if it is possible, we could leave out this resolution because it will complicate issues. You can compensate for mothers, but also others will demand. Death is death, and I must make it clear, Mr Speaker; I am very passionate about this matter of mothers. I lost my mother at the age of three in labour. So, let no one mistake me that – but I think this resolution will complicate matters for Government and I propose that we leave it out.

MRS BAKIREKE: Mr Speaker, somebody would think that maybe Government will lose a lot of money. But the importance of this resolution is that Government takes steps - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the honourable member has said you discussed it and agreed. 

MRS BAKIREKE: Yes.     

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you now withdrawing the agreement?

MRS BAKIREKE: No, Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Or is he not telling the House the truth?

MRS BAKIREKE: No, Mr Speaker, may I come and - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please let us be orderly. If you agreed you have agreed. If you are withdrawing the agreement say it so that we move.

MRS BAKIREKE: Mr Speaker, the debate on this motion has been held in this House. The honourable colleague approached me, but when we reached here we were informed - this is the sixth motion of its kind. At times we must introduce penalties so that Government can really - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words, you are standing by resolution No.2?

MRS BAKIREKE: Yes and the reason is here -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is here. You stated it already. Please let us just move forward on this. You have already spoken on resolution No.2. It is only that hon. Bahati said something else which had brought it up. A suggestion or amendment to this particular clause, hon. Kakooza?

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to propose an amendment. I know it is a policy in health. When I was there, we gave a directive which is supposed to be brought by Government that any negligence of duty by a doctor, which causes death, becomes a coroner case like in European countries; that is what they do. But when you say that it is compensation of the family, it becomes very complicated and very ambiguous. So, if we amend and say that the government develops a policy on coroner case law as other countries in the – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What law?

MR KAKOOZA: They call it a coroner case. When there is negligence of duty by doctors, in the profession they call it a coroner case; and that is when it is defined either as negligence of duty by that doctor or it is the person who has not come to be attended to because when you say that compensation of families, it is ambiguous. How do you do it? Because the person who has died -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is saying the government develops a policy of compensation; it is not saying the government compensates. What the motion is proposing is that the government should develop - in other words, work out the best criteria for dealing with this matter.

MR KAKOOZA: It should be a law.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, hon. Kakooza, I want something new to this motion if it is there. Hon. Kakooza’s proposal does not improve on this motion. 

MR KAKOOZA: No, what I am trying to say, Mr Speaker, is that the government develops a law.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, instead of a policy you want a law?

MR KAKOOZA: Yes. There must be a law because the policy is already there. With experience you find that the negligence of duty in this country by the doctors as has been the Members’ concern that a doctor can go to a health centre III and operate on a patient without the equipment and they leave it at that - she reported a case in Lyantonde. There is no professional doctor who can go to the theatre to operate on a lady who is going to deliver without equipment. That is negligence of duty and there is no law which brings these people -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us focus on what is proposed and let us see how to improve on it. Clearly, if you want to improve on it, what is the area you propose to improve on? I am not getting what you are saying very clearly, hon. Kakooza. 

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, I do appreciate the circumstances under which this resolution 2 was moved and I do believe the intention of requesting for this policy is ultimately to get a framework for compensation. For me, we would rather deal with case by case when they arise. If you look in our Constitution, strictly speaking, this resolution No.2 will cause a charge on the Consolidated Fund and the way it is framed, this would be very enormous. It is not even calculated to say - because we passed a law here - to say if you are moving this you should have a certificate of financial implication.

So, I would like to draw your attention, Mr Speaker, to Article 93(b) of the Constitution – yes, a policy of this nature would definitely have financial implications.  
     
I do not want us to pass resolutions and at the end of the day Government is put to task when one resolution is ambiguous, but also when it is unconstitutional, and then you expect us to report on the progress of this resolution. Article 93(b) says, “Parliament shall not proceed upon a motion, including an amendment of a motion, the effect of which would be to make provision for any of the purposes specified in paragraph (a) of this Article,” and paragraph (a) says, “Parliament shall not proceed upon a bill, including an amendment bill, that makes provision for any of the following - (i) the imposition of taxation otherwise than by reduction 

(ii) the payment, issue or withdraw from the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda of any monies not charged on that fund or any increase in the amount of that payment, issue or withdrawal.” 

So, I think we all agree that the issues of maternal health are very pertinent and they affect all of us, but it is not proper for us to proceed on a policy of compensation of those who die in Government facilities and yet there is a provision for such cases to be dealt with case by case. I would like to propose that resolution 2 either be stayed or deleted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, be stayed or be deleted?
 
MS KABAKUMBA: Be deleted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, that is the proposal for the amendment. But honourable members, I would like to seek some views from the government because what is the charge? Is the charge on developing a policy? Or is the charge on compensation under this motion? Well, then the motion is not talking about compensation. The motion is talking about developing a policy. So, which is which, because the government develops a policy of compensation? It would be different if it was said, “The government compensates families,” well, I don’t know because I am just trying to understand it better so that we can move forward. Yes, hon. Omach, you are the financial person here, advise us. 

5.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When we develop policies, we have to implement them and this is talking about compensation within Government facilities. Even an ambulance could be interpreted to be a Government facility. If you are transporting somebody and he dies in the ambulance, you have to compensate them. So, the financial implication of this has not really been worked out and when it is worked out, definitely it will be very enormous. 

I would like to thank the hon. Flight Captain Mukula, who mentioned something about the Abuja Declaration, which is talking about 15 percent of our budget going to health services. Right now the Government of Uganda is doing very well; we are moving steadily towards that achievement. We are now at about 11 percent, which is quite commendable. But to bring this policy of compensation at this level will not been sustainable. So, I would request that we delete this from the resolutions. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.45
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I know it is in the interest of Government that we bring down maternal deaths in this country. I know that even as we speak now, the honourable Minister for Kampala has just stated that we deal with compensation on a case by case basis.  I don’t see anything wrong with Government coming out clearly that the NRM Government has zero tolerance to maternal death. And the policy is that we shall do all that it takes to handle or mitigate these matters, including compensation, where negligence has been proved in a Government health facility.  So, what we are talking about is just to develop a policy of compensation; we are not saying that Government should compensate. So, the Speaker brought it out very well; it is just a policy for compensation, which is in your interest.  But if we say that we delete it, it means Government is not ready to listen to anything to do with compensation. That is what the implication would be.

5.46
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL AND MINISTER OF CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I can see how passionate we are on this subject and I don’t want to disorient the debating mood, but as my other colleagues have stated before, both on this side and on the other side, certainly this is a matter that has financial implications and of course the law is tried knowledge. However, in our current dispensation of justice, there are many laws. We have the law of torts which is very broad. It covers matters of negligence. I remember when I was in second year, we were introduced to the law of torts. I still remember the case of Njakareta - but I don’t want to go into the details. That person was certainly given some compensation although at the end of the day when he considered the damages that he actually obtained being less than what he thought he should have obtained when he appealed, the court overturned his damages. But the law is very broad and these cases are regulated by law.

Secondly, in terms of compensation, we also have a principle. It is on a case by case basis, under the ex gratia principle, which is also applicable. However, to me if you feel strongly about this resolution, I can offer an amendment if it is tenable on that side and on this side. Rather than saying “develops,” in other words you are now obligating the government to develop. You could say, “Government considers developing,” because there you leave it in its ambit to see what is feasible and what is not feasible under the financial basket that we have. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there is an amendment that has been proposed that the government considers developing a policy of compensation. Hon. Ruhindi, if I could propose from the Chair and you consider this: “The Parliament urges Government to develop a policy,” I don’t know whether it is okay, which one is better?
 
MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, urging is certainly as much as “obligates.” Urging is very strong and this is a matter which has serious financial implications. Let Government “consider,” we shall go with that.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the proposal for the amendment is that resolution 2 be amended to the effect that the government considers developing a policy for compensation of the families of all women who die as a result of maternal related causes while in Government facilities. That is the amendment proposed by the honourable Freddie Ruhindi. Is the amendment seconded?

HON. MEMBERS: No.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ruhindi, it looks like there is no secondment to your motion. Is there any other amendment to the motion? 

MR YAGUMA: Mr Speaker, I would propose that we delete No.2.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the proposal is for deletion, is the motion seconded? Who is seconding? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I moved that we delete.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Oh! You moved it earlier? 

MR BAHATI: I moved earlier, but he is seconding me and I can see a number of colleagues seconding me too. We need to put it on record. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, the motion for deletion is, therefore, moved by hon. Bahati and he is seconded by hon. Yaguma.  Would you like to speak to your amendment in two minutes, hon. Bahati?
 
MR BAHATI: First of all, the honourable member from the Democratic Party, we agreed outside, but I am very - anyway this is not about politics; it is about our mothers and we need to have a resolution that is going to be supported by Government to help them. We are not here to be cosmetic saying, “Let us consider,” well knowing that it is not going to happen. I believe that  one, despite the fact that it has some financial implications, asking Government that every woman who dies in a Government facility is compensated – a policy is developed with a view of compensation. We don’t just develop policies to keep on the shelves. It will cause a lot of confusion because every life whether that of a woman or a man needs compensation. 
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as I keep reminding you, when I sit here, I observe the proceedings of the House and I understand the House in most situations better than most of the Members because I am watching all of you. I would not want a situation of this very important motion – I would prefer that we handle them by consensus. Where there is no consensus, we will not be able to push it. In the circumstances, if there is insistence that matters should be put to vote, I would not be able to. If there is consensus, we can move forward.  

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I think the matters were brought on table and reading from the Attorney-General, I would appeal to him, since he had brought the word “consider” which doesn’t actually vary so much from the word “urging,” because urging is not binding; it is not binding government, but only urging you. So, if you opt not to accept the urge, you will still not develop the policy. So, I would appeal to the Frontbench and also to my brother the Deputy Chief Whip of the Government side, that for consensus building could you accept the word “urging?” Because as a parliament, this is a very common language that we have used on this Floor to urge Government in almost all the resolutions we have passed and it would not compel Government. They are free to accept or not.

Earlier on, hon. Kakooza, who was the State Minister of Primary Health Care, had indicated to this House that there was already a policy.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He said there was money. 

MS BETTY AMONGI: So, I don’t see the contradiction when the former Minister –(Interruption) 

MR KAKOOZA: I think I was misquoted. What I was trying to say, Mr Speaker, is that with the experience in the ministry, we found out that such cases happened out of negligence of duty by doctors. And even patients themselves delaying to attend antenatal care as the minister has alluded to – when a lady stays without attending antenatal and gets to the incubation period and dies while delivering, it is not the responsibility of anyone that they have died in a maternity ward or Government facility so that they should be compensated.
 
What is done in the first world is that they have a law referred to as a coroner case. In Britain and America, a coroner case means that all those attending treatment in Government facilities are investigated and after finding out what happened, is when they are compensated. 

CAPTAIN MUKULA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I am seeking from hon. Kakooza and maybe the Attorney-General is that in law, there is what you call officious bystander, something that is obvious to an ordinary person. What I am seeking to attain from the Attorney-General is that from this motion, is No.2 pregnant with inconsistency with the existing law or is there a lacuna; or is it in conflict with the regulations of Government in terms of money? These are three things.

Two, where there is professional negligence by a doctor or nurse et cetera, can somebody be held culpable? Can the Attorney-General be held culpable? Now, if that is the position, what is the procedure? The procedure would normally involve a post-mortem or a criminal investigation, meaning that you must have a post-mortem carried out by the Police. 

For the ordinary person who is in the village, although the law says ignorance is no defence – I think the premise under which this motion has been brought is based on the fact that there are many of our mothers who have died in the hands of institutions of Government. Obviously, there has been a tendency for some time for the professionals to ignore or fail to provide blood, fail to provide oxygen during caesarean cases and so on. Now, the question is: How does Government own up? This is the crux of this particular motion. 

Maybe the Attorney-General and the Minister – the professional and the legal – could help us so that we could come up with something that brings Government to account for loss of life under the care of a government facility. That is the guidance I am seeking.

6.01
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I agree with this motion, but it has been proposed with lack of in-depth information and legal background. The Attorney-General has mentioned the Law of Torts – this law is wider; but this motion also confines itself on policy; asking for the development of policy. What happens after that? Policy is not law. 

So, I agree with the dilemma and concerns behind this motion, but I suggest that whereas the idea of dropping the motion is not good, passing it as it is will not achieve what she wants. My suggestion is that the two sides meet - the mover and our side – and discuss further to see the implications, in comparison with the existing law, before coming back here for the second part of the motion with better framed proposals. We should be given time to discuss the second part further. Thank you.

MR MUKULA: Mr Speaker, having seen that some of the issues here are pertinent to this country and our mothers - the matters here are weighty - and having cited what we call a bipartisan understanding, I, therefore, propose that we refer this matter to the social services committee and the legal and finance committees, so that they can come up with a clear position which we can then send to Government as something operational. 

It should not be a matter of sending motions to Government and the Government puts them aside. I really would like to see that the voters of this country, the mothers of this country, are taken care of. I ask my sister, hon. Nambooze, if that persuades you, we could come up with a position which could help all of us ensure that our mothers get the attention they deserve in health facilities, and I believe this will be a win-win situation. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the proposal by hon. Mukula is that we refer this matter to a joint committee of legal, social services and other committees, but this matter is very specific. There is nothing legal about it. It is a social policy issue and if there is a referral to be made to a committee, it should go to that of social services. If you still want to pursue your proposal, I suggest that you reconsider making it a joint committee issue.

MR MUKULA: Mr Speaker, I am most obliged by your well guided position. I, therefore, consider the position of referring this matter to the committee of social services so that it can be carefully calibrated to fit the intention of the motion mover and all of us who are very passionate about this motion and matters of health.

6.08
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Mr Speaker, I unfortunately have a different view. I was running through our rules and was asking myself what exactly we are conveying to the committee. At least if we had pronounced ourselves on this motion, we would then be conveying it for further exploration by the committee. However, if we stopped here now, then the motion would be hanging. Is it considered withdrawn? What has happened, technically, as we proceed? 

I would like to buy, so that we are procedurally neat, the proposal by the Leader of Government Business that a position is harmonised and thereafter a resolution is arrived at. It has been possible in this House a number of times that we stay the passing of a motion until the two parties meet and then we pronounce ourselves. If we do not pronounce ourselves, there is nothing you are sending to us in the social services committee because even the House did not pronounce itself on it. So, what will we be doing debating a motion which you did not pronounce yourself on? I think it would be difficult. 

I pray that we probably check the possibility of us harmonising things tomorrow. If we fail completely, maybe then we shall be advised whether it can go to the committee in this state.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, one of the cornerstones of parliamentary procedures is that every proposition brought to Parliament must receive a fair debate and a decision. The process of reaching that decision cannot be only one way. You can use whatever processes you need to arrive at that decision. You will not have stopped the process of making the decision; you will have only added value to the quality of the decision you will make as a result of what you do.

Two proposals have been made. One, that the two sides which seem to be having divergent opinions on this matter should reconcile and come back to this House with a position that is common. The other that has been proposed is that for the matter that has been debated - because the motion is formally before the House - it is within the authority of this House to do whatever it wants with that motion - refer it to a committee, do whatever we want with it. It is up to the House to decide because it is already property of the House. Even if a decision has not yet been reached, the motion is properly before this House, it has received some fair debate and it has reached decision time. 

If the House is not in a position to take a fair decision on that matter, it can still decide to consult on the matter through a committee, or through whatever mechanism, to arrive at a proper decision. So, both propositions are still proper as far as the chair of the House is concerned at the moment. 

The question I am proposing is - there is one which I am not able to proceed with, and that is the one that will require making a pronouncement as a House by vote. That one, we would have a difficulty proceeding along those lines. With a motion of this nature, we do not want to lose time and wait for the next session of Parliament to proceed with it. 

If my guidance is understood properly, then we need to take a proper decision on how we want to move on this matter. Should we decide that we want to make a decision now and we find that we are unable to make a decision, then you will find that this matter might not have been given fair treatment towards the end of our conclusion of the matter. I hope I am clear. 

So, how are we going to move? There are two propositions: going to committee, the one from the Rt Hon. Leader of Government Business, and let the two parties sit and have a discussion before we move forward. Which one are we taking? We cannot take both. Hon. Kakooza, on what point do you rise?

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to second the amendment made by hon. Mike Mukula.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That is clear.

6.13
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Mr Speaker, I am also rising to support hon. Mukula because as a member of the social services committee, I know a number of these issues have been discussed by the minister. On some of the issues, we are in the process of arriving at a consensus on how to deal with the matters. So, I would feel that if the matter goes to the committee, it will receive the utmost importance it deserves and the committee will come out with a more comprehensive report, with a strategy. 

A committee report will be not only detailed, but it will have recommendations which can even be binding to the minister. The minister will appear before the committee and the mover of the motion will appear before the committee. We shall also have some of the civil society who could have supported this matter to appear before the committee and we deal with the matter substantively, instead of it moving only some new lines and we do not deal with the depth of the matter. 

So, I appeal to the mover that for a more detailed scrutiny of the matter, with a view of getting more acceptable and more tangible results, as a way forward I support that we take it to the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now want a different view to what has been proposed, if there is any. Are you supporting?

DR OMONA: Mr Speaker, I just wanted to put one or two points across -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please. Are you supporting what has been proposed?

DR OMONA: I support.

6.15
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a different view. I think by now it is only prayer No.2 in the resolution that is generating a lot of debate. I would buy the idea of us staying over it as we consult, the way the Leader of Government Business had proposed, so that we consider the rest as we harmonise our position on No.2. 

We have a lot of business to consider in this House, but by pushing work to committees all the time, even on a small matter of this nature which we could resolve in a bi-partisan way, I think we would be piling a lot of work on our committee. I pray that we continue with the rest as we consult on harmonising prayer No.2. (Ms Nambooze Bakireke rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On the way forward? Honourable, that is your position, I suppose. Let us consult before. You are the owner of the motion and we are trying to see how best to process your concerns. Way forward, hon. Mukula, different from what you proposed?

MR MUKULA: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the time we have spent here talking, many women have gone down never to be seen again. I am of the view that the body content of this motion is very weighty to this country. The purpose of us referring it to the committee is very crucial and very important to this country. There are many mothers here who do not have the voices to speak now. I would like to say that the representation in this House is a collective responsibility for them. 

I really would like to pray and urge colleagues, hon. Epetait and hon. Nambooze, that let us give this motion the content it deserves so that it is owned and it is strengthened. Once we have a very strong argument - I have been in Government as a minister - the honourable minister will have no other way and the government will have no other way but to come up with a more comprehensive budget to encompass this recommendation.

6.18
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support hon. Mukula, but there was an important amendment, which we did not carry, and this was to add the fact that those families to be compensated would be of those women who die out of negligence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, it does not help if we bring that one.

6.18
DR JEREMIAH TWA-TWA (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the proposal which has been brought by hon. Mukula. This resolution No.2 is very weighty, but at the same time, it is a little bit restrictive to government facilities, but as far as I know, the causes of maternal mortality in this country are at various levels. There are various women who are dying under the hands of private practitioners, under the hands of private and not-for-profit facilities, and there are various women who are dying in the homes. So, if we are developing something either to reprimand or compensate, or whatever you call it, it must be all inclusive. 

Since I know that the social services committee is all inclusive and everybody is there - that committee has a number of honourable ladies, it has a number of men and all of us are very supportive and we would like to see that maternal mortality is reduced in this country. So, I really second the idea that this motion or this proposal or resolution be forwarded to the Committee on Social Services. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I defer discussion on the proposed clause 2 of this motion. We continue with the rest of the provisions and see how far we go. Proposed motion No.3 says, “That Government undertakes to reform the midwifery training curriculum by enhancing the duration of training in maternal and child health modules.” Is it approved? 

6.21
MR WILLIAM KWEMARA (NRM, Kyaka County, Kyegegwa): Mr Speaker, I have some reservations to the effect that the resolution is pointing the problem to the curriculum. I thought the problem was numbers and not the curriculum. It says, “That Government undertakes to reform the midwifery training curriculum by enhancing the duration of training in maternal and child health modules.” But in the problems, there is nothing that is pointed out that the issue is with the curriculum. I think the issue is with the numbers that are being trained. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you looked at No.4? There was an issue raised about the comprehensive nursing which they thought was problematic also. It is a curriculum issue. They said midwifery was only given five weeks or something like that. I think it was a concern that was raised. 

DR ONDOA: I thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. The curriculum is actually being revised concerning even the comprehensive nursing training, and the revision process will be completed by the year 2012/2013. 

The Ministries of Health and Education that carry out the training have formed a joint committee that is responsible for addressing the training issues for all the health workers. In this resolution, we have also addressed the numbers and we are saying that from next year, the numbers for training for midwifery should increase by 40 every year. So, it is actually being addressed now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, in other words, you have no problem with the resolution as it is proposed? 

DR ONDOA: No objection.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No objection. Clause 3 is adopted by consensus?

(Question put and agreed to.)


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No.4: “That Government re-centralises the recruitment of medical personnel and addresses the critical shortage of medical professionals particularly through recruitment at a minimum of more than 2,000 well trained, motivated and equitably deployed midwives in order to reverse the current rate of deaths resulting from preventable maternal related causes.” 

DR ONDOA: Mr Speaker, we have our paper in Cabinet. A Cabinet Memorandum was presented last year, which we are again presenting, for re-centralisation of the health workers. So, it is in Cabinet and we are waiting for the Cabinet debate on that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you have no problem with it?

DR ONDOA: No. The Ministry of Health has also started implementing the direct deployment of health workers right from school to the districts and then they employ directly. So, we are actually addressing that.

MR MUKULA: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I just want to seek clarification from the minister and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. 

The motion, as it stands, I do not know whether it infringes on the Local Government Act and also the Constitution, as it were, as we have adopted a decentralisation policy, which is in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. Does this not infringe on the provisions of the Constitution and the Local Government Act? So, if you are making any amendment or motion, we would like to seek guidance from the Attorney-General before we move.

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Mine was also related to hon. Mukula’s. According to the Local Government Act, the local governments are responsible for the health staff including in district hospitals and all the health centres. The ministry only determines the recruitment by providing a ceiling. 

Secondly, it is only that the wages of the health personnel are budgeted for under the Ministry of Health, but they are paid through the local governments. I would like to be clarified if this does not cause a problem in the law. According to the minister, Cabinet had made a decision on that and I would like to be clarified if anything can be implemented when it is against the Constitution.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What she has said is that there is a Cabinet Memorandum. A Cabinet Memorandum could even be proposing an amendment to those laws that may be affected by this decision. A Cabinet Memorandum may be a memorandum proposing amendment of those kinds of laws to bring this into effect. It could even be proposing amending the Constitution, I suppose. But she stopped at the level of saying that they have presented a Cabinet Memorandum on the issue of recentralising the recruitment of medical personnel. I am sure there are processes that it goes through. I do not know the details but that would be my understanding of that. Honourable Minister, would you like to clarify on the issue of the details of what you are talking about and how it impacts on the laws here?

DR ONDOA: It is true that at the moment, health workers from the district hospitals, right to health centre IIs, are decentralised and are under the local governments. The Ministry of Health directly deals with those health workers who are in the national referral hospitals, the regional referral hospitals and the other institutions like the blood bank and other related institutions.

Last year in 2010, a Cabinet Memorandum was presented to Cabinet to see if we can recentralise the health workers and it is still in Cabinet. After the first presentation, we were referred to consult with local governments and also with Public Service on how this can be done. So, it is still there at that stage and I cannot say it will be passed or not.

6.29
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a former LCV Chairman and I remember that we had consultations when I was still chairman. Local governments did accept, especially with the doctors, that the recruitment and deployment of doctors should be recentralized. 

We are here, but we are deceiving ourselves; there is not even a single district in this country that can recruit and retain a doctor. Our health centre IVs are supposed to have a minimum of two doctors, but go to the districts and you may not even find the person heading the health department. All the positions are “acting”. You find that health inspectors are the DHOs in most districts. 

So, I think that for this one, honourable members, we should not even ask about the law contradicting, but as Parliament, we should do something and pass this one. I support this one. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.30
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On this resolution I support recentralising recruitment of medical staff. However, while we recentralise, I think Government should also consider the issue which was mentioned in this motion concerning areas that are hard to reach. Even if we increase salaries and recentralise recruitment, this country is not developed equally; there will still be areas where medical doctors will go and find their way out in the private sector or back to the towns and Government will think they have deployed yet there will not be doctors on the ground.

I, therefore, think that while Government is doing this, we should consider taking affirmative action so that certain categories of Ugandans also get doctors to serve them. This can be done by putting up some additional allowance for those serving in hard-to-reach areas. If we do not do this, we shall still realise that –(Interruption) 

MR OCHOLA: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. The reason as to why we should have the medical officers recentralised is because of the hard-to-reach areas. If you are in a district like Kalangala and you recruit a doctor and that doctor knows that he is going to be in Kalangala for the rest of his life, he will never accept to be recruited there. However, if he knows that he is going to be recruited in Kalangala for one or two years and then the next two years he will come to Kampala and also go to Serere and Mbale, then he can go to Kalangala. That is one strong reason, and I want to advise you on that. 

If we are to have doctors and other health workers in those hard-to-reach areas, then we should recentralise. But if we are going to have the districts recruiting, you will never have doctors or health workers in those areas. 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, honourable member. On what the Member is talking about, when I was still in the ministry we interacted with the social services committee and this is what the ministry is talking about. One of the recommendations made by the social services committee was to recentralise recruiting of doctors, and that was used to develop the Cabinet Memo which the ministry is talking about. So, since there is a process, why don’t we wait and see what Cabinet will say. 

You recommended that they deal with it. They can do so by amending the Constitution and the Local Government Act. When I was still in the ministry, we forwarded that Cabinet Memo with the recommendation from Parliament. So, I think this resolution should wait for what comes out of Cabinet because there are recommendations from the report of the social services committee.

MR AYOO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am totally in agreement with them, but I still have a concern. A doctor working in Kalangala is not the same as a doctor working in Kampala. It is the mind of the doctor serving the people which matters most. So, Government should consider hard-to-reach areas and give them additional allowances. Thank you.  

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, this motion has two aspects. One is recentralising health workers but also recruiting 2000 midwives. Can we legislate in anticipation? We have clearly been informed that the current laws decentralised medical personnel and Government, through Cabinet, is considering recentralising the recruitment and posting, but we have not finalised the process. So, shall we pass this resolution in anticipation that Government will recentralise?

I would rather that as Parliament, we urge Government to expedite the process of recentralising the recruitment and posting of health workers other than saying that Government is recentralising. It is a process. We must amend the laws, after consultations and agreeing in Cabinet, then we shall pass the laws and then they will be recentralised. 

The 2000 is the cap that was given to the Ministry of Health to recruit; that is another aspect. But once we sort out this, then the others will fall in line. So, the guidance I seek is: Can we legislate in anticipation?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, my view is that whatever we consider in such motions should be considered within the four corners of the law. There are many ways of urging Government to propose amendments to laws and we all know that. 

I would like to take the line hon. Kabakumba is taking, but a bit differently. In view of what I have said, instead of urging Government to recentralise, it should be by way of noting the progress. The best we can do here is to note the progress presented to us by the sector minister on this matter and urge them to expedite presentation of their proposals for consideration by Parliament. We note and urge them to expedite presentation of their proposals on recentralisation and recruitment of staff on this matter to Parliament. 

MS NAMBOOZE: If it is about fast-tracking the implementation of this – that Government does it quickly - then I do concede because it all adds up to the same thing. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We still have an unresolved situation here. There is the one of urging – hon. Kabakumba are you dropping what you proposed and buying what hon. Ruhindi has proposed so that we can remain with one issue? Is that correct? I need to understand what is on the Floor before you propose your amendment.

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, I think hon. Ruhindi’s presentation adds value to my proposal. We go with his proposal.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member has conceded that the motion should be – hon. Ruhindi, please restate what you said, which has been conceded to by the mover.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, “that this august House notes the progress presented by the Ministry of Health today on recentralising the recruitment of medical personnel – then as the resolution goes - and urges Government to expedite consideration of the ministry’s proposal and presentation to Parliament for debate.” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The first part could go somewhere else because the substance of the proposal is that Government recentralises. You are saying this process is already on and Parliament should only urge Government to expedite; is that what you are proposing - that Government should expedite the process of recentralisation and recruitment? Because by saying “expedite”, it means they have already recognised that there is already a process.

MR RUHINDI: By clarification, the sector minister did not say Cabinet has already considered this proposal. Cabinet has not yet considered this proposal. Cabinet may come out differently and give reasons to that effect. This is why I was saying that we urge them to expedite consideration of this proposal and come to Parliament for debate and inform us so that where there is need for debate, we debate.

MS AMONGI: Thank you. I want to clarify to the Attorney-General that the Committee on Social Services made that recommendation and it was adopted by this House and, therefore, it is a position of this House. Actually, three days ago, we were also with the staff of the Ministry of Health at a retreat in Munyonyo and the committee restated that position and Dr Ezati, who was then acting as PS, also restated that from next year, they intend to recentralise. 

In view of the fact that this is already a position adopted from the report of the social services committee, wouldn’t restating this just be strengthening the earlier report already adopted by this august House through the Committee on Social Services? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there seem to be too many things happening about this matter - in the committee, in Cabinet, in Parliament itself, in the sector. It looks like there is activity everywhere. The information is just filtering through as we move. I am getting tempted to think that we may need a proper examination of these matters, a fairly comprehensive analysis to focus on the details. We need to think about it clearly. 

The way we are proceeding, we will not be able to even take a decision on this matter. Therefore, I am using the prerogative of the Chair to refer this matter to the Committee on Social Services to do a fairly comprehensive analysis of the issues raised in the motion and come back to this House within two weeks - that should be by the 13th of next month - so that we can take a proper decision. Consult with the ministry, bring all the issues on the table, and I think that will be the best way to move. Thank you. I have so ordered.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF
PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT
TO ESTABLISH A NATIONAL SALARIES
AND REMUNERATION COMMISSION
		
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is coming to 7 O’clock. This particular motion, and the issue contained in this motion, was a subject of debate when we debated the budget and the Committee on Public Service and Local Government made clear recommendations. The motion is like a back-up on what this Parliament has pronounced itself on. It is not very new before this House. Therefore, I am going to allow the mover of the motion to proceed with his presentation and we see how far we go with it. 

MR KAKOOZA: As I was perusing through the motion, I realised that this motion has ever been brought on the Floor of Parliament; the Seventh Parliament. I do not know whether it is constitutional to set up a commission of this nature described in the motion, which is going to be presented by the honourable member. When you read Article 85 of the Constitution, it says that some self-accounting bodies can determine their emoluments like the legislative sector and others; won’t it be wrong now to debate a motion which is unconstitutional? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, have you read the motion? If I may just help because the text of this motion was circulated during the last sitting of Parliament.

“...NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:

1. That it collectively urges Government to table a Bill establishing a National Salaries and Remuneration Commission that shall be responsible for harmonisation and determination of salaries of all officers of Government ministries, departments, agencies and local governments.

2.	That Parliament urges Government to table the National Salaries and Remuneration Commission Bill within three months.” 

This is what was proposed. That is why I am asking whether you read it because it was talking about something different from what we discussed in the Seventh Parliament. Can we allow the honourable member to present his motion? Yes, honourable member, who is very fresh.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Incidentally, I am not fresh because I have been attending a serious committee meeting since morning. Mr Speaker, this is where I am seeking your guidance. It is a very important motion which, in my heart, I would love to support and add my voice to. However, it is equally important that we have this motion, read it and understand it before we make an informed decision. 

You pointed out that I am very fresh and what came to my mind is, I do not know whether my colleagues are not fresh. So, a combination of exhaustion and lack of information may not give us the best results. With your guidance, Mr Speaker, and subject to your ruling, I would think this is a matter that we cannot ably attend to without first getting information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this motion came in the last sitting of this House and was one of the motions that were deferred to today to be specifically handled. On that day, I fairly recall that copies of this motion were circulated to all the Members who were in the House, and every Member is always supposed to be in the House. So, if you have not seen a copy of this motion, you could be entering a plea of guilty that you were not in the House on that day, which might not be appropriate. 

Anyway, honourable members, in all fairness, it is coming to 7 O’clock and it looks like most of you are not very prepared to proceed with this motion. In the circumstances, can we have fresh copies circulated to the Members so that we can have this motion as our first item when we resume our sitting. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Thank you.

(The House rose at 6.51 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 30 November 2011 at 2.00 p.m.) 



