Thursday 23rd November, 2000

Parliament met at 2.50 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala
.
PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

(The House was called to order)

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:

Mrs Maria Lubega Mutagamba

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mrs Lubega Mutagamba, on behalf of Parliament I wish to welcome you. We are looking forward to benefiting from your past experience in this House, and the experience you have gained outside. So, you are most welcome, and I wish you well - (Applause)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS BILL, 2000

Clause 23

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You remember that yesterday we stopped on clause 23, and we had a problem with this issue on public media.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yesterday I wanted to offer a solution to this amendment. The current amendment proposed by the chairperson reads as follows: “All presidential candidates shall be given equal time, space and access on the State-owned media to present their programmes to the people.”  

I would like to offer an amendment to this provision, which will take into account the aspect of the candidates meeting their own expense, so that it is not construed that once this is offered such candidates will have access free of charge. So, the amendment I propose is to insert the expression “at their expense” on the second line, between the word “media” and “to”. 

The sub-clause would now read as follows: “All Presidential candidates shall be given equal time, space and access on the State-owned media at their expense to present their programmes to the people.”  

If this amendment is acceptable, it will be made known that equal treatment should be given and access should be given, but it will not be something free because it is state-owned media. They will meet their own costs. I beg to move.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman, with due respect to hon. Patrick Okumu Ringa, I am not so sure about that. I do not think this Parliament should really go into deciding whether these people should be charged or not charged. That should be left to the organisation, that is the media themselves. So, we could say something like this, “all presidential candidates shall be accorded equal treatment as to facilitation by state-owned media to present their programmes to the people.” 

Now, the issue is treatment. If those organisations decide to charge everybody, let them charge. If they decide to give them free time, give everybody free time.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Okumu Ringa, do you accept that?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I do not accept that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: He is saying that it may be free. Why do we engage ourselves in determining whether it is free or not? Why don’t you leave it at that, because you are given equal treatment? If the conditions are that you have to pay, then you pay, but if they are free, you go along with that, instead of us anticipating that access would require payment. I think that is what he is trying to say. 

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Yes. I beg to withdraw my earlier amendment and support the amendment of the Minister.  

MR. RUZINDANA:  Mr. Chairman, I have got a problem with limiting these candidates only to the presentation of their programmes. Why don’t they have equal access to the media for whatever they may want to say?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think this is done in respect of their campaigns for their election. I suppose that is the reason. So, I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Sorry, did you have something to say about clause 23? Let us hear it. 

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Mr. Chairman, you will find that all the charges that have been described in clause 23(6) are not applicable to the incumbent President as a candidate. They affect only one side. The others are not protected, but he is constitutionally protected. In the circumstances, I thought it would have been better if we deleted that portion. We cannot go into details and amend the Constitution to make the incumbent President also liable for whatever his agents or he will say. In any case, you have to consider what time these charges will be brought and how long they are going to take to be solved. So, when I read 23(6), I thought it was unnecessary. It will cause confusion amongst the candidates.  

23(6) refers to making statements containing sectarian words or allusions. If somebody goes to Busia and makes such a statement when he is campaigning, at what time and at what stage are you going to call that man to be charged in court? And if it is the President, will you also call him to be charged for the same offences? So, since it is not universal to all of them, this subsection should be deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But hon. Nsubuga Nsambu, there are laws created for various offences, and these offences can at one time be committed by a President. Should we say because there is a constitutional provision protecting the prosecution of the President, therefore, we should delete all laws because the President is exempted from being prosecuted?

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU: On the contrary, Mr. Chairman, this is specifically for the candidates, it is not for all of us. It is for the candidates and probably a few people who will be their agents. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But if you are a candidate, would you not want to be protected from malicious accusations assuming you are not a President!

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU: When we shall come to the act of electing parliamentarians, that will be different, but here we have four or six people. We have made a law, which affects the five but does not affect the 6th.  I feel that it is a bit inequitable! 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, you have heard the amendment by hon. Nsubuga Nsambu on this Article. Instead of being bogged down, let us deal with it and proceed. 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: I am craving the indulgence of the learned Attorney General, because he is really an expert on this. There should be a distinction between a presidential candidate and the President. Somebody happens to be the President at that time.  We are not legislating for the President. 

Secondly, an incumbent might not be standing as a candidate. 

Thirdly, I am not so sure that the President of this country, by law, is entitled to commit civil wrongs against other people! About the criminal aspects, he may be sued afterwards by the state after he has completed his term of office. I do not really see why we should change this law because at a point in time the incumbent may also happen to be the President of the country. I think we should leave it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, now you have heard arguments for and against. I put the question.

(Question put and negatived)

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU: I also wanted to say something about (8), but it follows the first one. If the first one has been rejected, I drop the other one.  

Clause 24

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr. Wandera Ogalo): Mr. Chairman, although it appears here as clause 25, I think it was meant to be 24. We seek to delete clause 24 1(a), which reads as follows:  
“(1) No person shall use or attempt to use – 
 (a) while the movement political system is in force, any political party colour, or  symbol or any political party” 

It was left at that, and we propose to delete it because this is already provided for. Actually, if you look at the Bill, matters dealing with symbols are already provided for. It is misplaced here, and that is why we propose to have it deleted. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Supposing the Political Organisations Bill is not passed when this law comes into force, what happens? According to our Rules, while you are legislating you are not allowed to anticipate.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: That is true. Well, the Committee thought that the regulation of political party activities ought to be in the Political Organisations Bill. But taking into account what you say, Mr. Chairman, it was not a very serious matter. I can withdraw it.   

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 25, agreed to

Clause 26, agreed to

Clause 27, agreed to

Clause 28

MR. WANDERA OGALO: In clause 28(1)(a), I propose to insert the following expression between the word “constituency” and the word “and”: “at least 14 days before nomination day”. 

The justification for this is that the period within which the list should be availed should be specific.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose to insert a new sub-clause (2) to read as follows: “The Electoral Commission shall not create any new polling stations after the period stated under paragraph 1(a).”  

The justification for this is to avoid uncertainty. After the polling stations are known and gazetted, to avoid uncertainty and accusations of malpractice, the discretion should not be left to the Electoral Commission. In other words, when the Electoral Commission is creating polling stations, it should be specific and create them once and for all.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But hon. Chairperson, what would happen if el nino or something like that came and a bridge leading to the place where a polling station was gazetted is washed away? Accessibility would not be possible to that particular point, so what would happen? As you may remember, the law under which the Electoral Commission operates also has provisions for the Commission to deal with situations of emergency. What would happen if you say they cannot create polling stations after that period? Can’t you see that possibility? That may be a possibility and, therefore, this may require change.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, what would happen there would not be the creation of a new polling station. The polling station will already have been created, but because of el nino or any other matter, it will just be a question of transferring it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay.  Now, you have heard the amendment.

(Question put and negatived)

MR. ONZIMA: Mr. Chairman, I have a problem with clause 28(b). It is possible that machines can always make mistakes. It could be deliberate or it could even just be without the intention of the Electoral Commission officials. Now, this is a list of the names of the candidates nominated in alphabetical order, with surnames first. One fact is that a greater percentage of the electorate in this country can neither read nor write, and they depend on the thumbprint. And also, we are aware of the fact that when we are campaigning for presidency or even MP’s, we normally tend to tell the electorate what number we will be on the ballot paper. Now, by any accident, should this order that is gazetted change, and my name, which should have been number one, is pushed to number three, the people who should have voted for me will vote for another person whose name will have been brought forward as number one. Now, what do we do in such a situation?  I would like the Chairman to clarify to me, because I want a sub-clause here -(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, if the law has said that names should be gazetted according to alphabetical order, this presupposes that even on the ballot itself the names should follow that order. If that is not done and people are misled as a result of that, do you not think this is a serious irregularity that can call for a petition?  So, should we really legislate for such an error when actually the intention here is that the voters should know the order in which their candidates appear beforehand? Why should somebody then change that order that the law has approved as the correct order? Because if we accept that we all make mistakes and you can change or reverse what is expected, then what are we doing? 

MR. NKANGI: Anyone who cannot read can always ask for assistance on how to vote.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In fact, I think this is for the candidates themselves. They will be able to tell you that on the ballot they will be position number one or the last one, so that when you go, you know you are voting for your candidate.  You will know where to put your tick, instead of looking at the ballot paper and looking for the position.

MR. ONZIMA: Well, if it means you have to take the long channel, going for a petition through the courts and so on, I think that would be rather more cumbersome. If only it could be made in the law, so that as soon as that mistake is made people get to know that they have to go for fresh elections. I think that would be better than saying you should go to court. Sometimes you do not have the money to go to court and lawyers want a lot of money. Why don’t we make it automatic that once this mistake is made, people will know that the order is not as was gazetted, therefore, people will have to go for a by election or whatever. Why don’t we make it straightaway and we reduce on this business of going to court and doing this and the other?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Maybe you can assist us. What would you rather have (b) read as?

MR. ONZIMA: I do not have the legal language, but the idea is that should there be a mistake in the order as has been gazetted, then the election in that constituency will be nullified and we will go for fresh elections. The draftsman will have an idea on how to put it because I do not have the legal language.

MR. KATUREEBE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am not quite sure I understood the objection, but clause 28 (1)(b) must also be read together with 28(2), because those lists will not only published in the gazette but they have to be forwarded to all returning officers. The returning officers are required to make sure that they are given wide publicity in each constituency, and the whole aim is for people to know in advance how the names of their candidates will feature. If there is a mistake and a candidate is misplaced or is left out, that would indeed form a ground of objection or petitioning, but you would have a basis in the law on which to base your petition.  I see no problem with this one.

MR. ONZIMA: Well, it is alright. I concede. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, I put the question that clause 28 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 29

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, the Committee proposes to insert the following after clause 29(3): “In the process of voting, no voters shall be allowed to carry a bag or anything that can be used for concealment.” This is to avoid fraud.

THE CAHIRMAN: How about a person like me. I need my spectacles and they are carried in this way. Anyway, you have understood the purpose.  Now I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 29, as amended, agreed to

Clause 30

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, in clause 30(2) I propose to replace the word “forty” appearing in the fourth line, with the word “twenty”. And also replace the words “one year” appearing in the last line, with the word “six months.” 

The justification is to harmonise sentences. We already did this with clause 7 and clause 18.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 30, as amended, agreed to

Clause 31

MR. OGALO: In clause 31 (2), Mr. Chairman, I propose that we replace the word “may” appearing at the end of the second line with the word “shall”. This is to make it mandatory for the presiding officer to inspect the fingers of the voter before issuing a ballot paper. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OGALO: And I propose to amend sub-clause (3) by adding the following at the end: 
“and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding one hundred currency points or imprisonment not exceeding three months or both”. 
This is to provide for punishment under section (2).  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I do not know whether Members will address themselves to this, but supposing I came and refused to be inspected, and then I walked away and I do not vote, what happens?

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, if you refuse to be inspected and you walk away, then I do not think any offence is created. The offence should be created if you refuse and the whole process goes through.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But then why do you allow the process to go through? You have said you want to inspect my finger and I have refused, why do you allow me to commit an offence and vote before my finger has been inspected? Why don’t you stop me, and therefore, no offence will be created and there will be no loss?

MR. OGALO: Well, Mr. Chairman, it depends on what we want to present. We wanted to ensure that nobody votes twice.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, then why don’t you make it clear so that we know that he has refused to be inspected and he has voted. Because if he does not vote, I do not see what offence is created.

MR. OGALO:  Obliged, Mr. Chairman. We can add that phrase and leave it to the drafting people.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, please move, if you can.

MR. OGALO:  This would then read: “any person who refuses to be inspected and  -(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: After that you can say you do not allow him to vote and that ends the problem.

MR. OGALO: But, Mr. Chairman, there would be a problem.   That would then mean that we are saying that any person who refuses to be inspected is not allowed to vote.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes.

MR. OGALO: Okay, then I can take that formulation and provide so.

MS. NAMUSOKE: Mr. Chairman, I think his statement is good, because how do we know that somebody can come to the station and is refused to vote, and then the presiding officer will say this person refused to be inspected. We should try to avoid any attempts by presiding officers to refuse people from voting. They can use this as a ground to deny people from voting. So, we need to consider a situation as well where people are allowed to vote but then they get punished for refusing to be inspected.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: I would like to draw the attention of the hon. Chairperson to clause 80. This might answer your problem. That clause says:“Where no penalty is expressly provided under this Act for an offence other than an illegal practice, the offender is liable, on conviction to a fine…” 
That is the general penalty, unless of course we say that refusing to be inspected is an illegal practice.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, but I come to the station and you want to inspect my finger and I say no and walk away and I do not vote, the problem is he says that I have committed an offence! This is what this particular provision is saying. Without elaborating further, he is merely saying that because I have refused to be inspected and I have walked away and not voted, then I have committed the offence. We are wondering whether that should be the case.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: I know hon. Ogalo does not really want to say that refusal to be inspected and walking away is not a crime, and therefore, the only thing we want is to prevent abuses. So, we could say, if you refuse to be inspected, then you may not be allowed to vote. 

MR.KATUREEBE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, arising from what my hon. Colleague has stated, then the situation is covered by clause 31(2). If a person refuses to be inspected, then the presiding officer will not give him the ballot paper, he will not vote and he goes away.  That can be the case, unless we want to criminalise a situation where someone does not vote, probably then the Minister may consider deleting sub-clause (3) and then we would have no problem. 

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, if the Minister is agreeable to deleting 31(3) in the Bill, then that will be okay with me.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is an amendment by the Committee chairperson to delete (3).

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. ADROA ONZIMA: Mr. Chairman, supposing a person, maybe through trickery, had actually voted and wanted to come and vote a second time and he refuses to be inspected, isn’t that criminal?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, but that is different. That is an offence because you are attempting to vote when you have already voted. I think it must be somewhere else. Chairperson, is there an offence for voting twice somewhere?

MR. OGALO:  It is there. We shall come to it.

Clause 31, as amended, agreed to

Clause 32

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that in clause 32(2) we replace the phrase “addressed to the returning officer in respect of each district who shall transmit them to the respective presiding officer at each polling station”, with the words “and presented to the presiding officer at each polling station”.  

The justification is that the responsibility should remain with the candidate rather than shifting it to the returning officer.  

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 32, as amended, agreed to

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, in clause 33(2), I propose that we delete the expression “and persons required for essential duties”. These are not specifically defined and it is likely to be abused. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose to insert the following new sub-clauses after sub-clause (3): 
“(4) The polling agents shall be seated in such a place as to enable them observe and monitor clearly the voting process. 
(5) The polling agents shall have an official copy of the voters’ register of that polling station at the candidates cost.”  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 33, as amended, agreed to

Clause 34

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, in clause 34(3), I propose that we replace the words “claiming to vote”, appearing at the end, with the word “voting”. This is typographical, and just to be more specific.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Sir, I would rather the chairman did away with the word “voting”, because the person will not actually be voting at that time. So, instead of ‘claiming’, I would rather say ‘wanting to vote’ or ‘intending to vote’.  Am I clear? I know at that time that person will not actually be voting. So, we either say that someone wants to vote or someone intends to vote.

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, ‘intending to vote’ would be okay with me.

MR. RWAKOOJO: Mr. Chairman, the way sub-clause (3) is presented assumes that all the ballot papers will have this space provided for the name of the station to be written. And now that things are changing, we know that it is likely that the name of the polling station could be pre-printed on the ballot papers. This sub-clause however is saying that you have to write it on top of the ballot paper. If the format changed or if the polling station was pre-printed on the ballot paper, this may not be necessary. So, why can’t we say that the presiding officer or polling assistant shall provide a ballot paper with the polling station printed on it?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Do you mean the polling station being printed on the ballot paper? Do you mean constituency or polling station?

MR. RWAKOOJO:  Even polling stations. It is possible to pre-print them and send them to polling stations. It was done in Tanzania recently. It is very possible that they could be pre-printed when they are printing the ballot paper. So, why can’t we say that the polling assistant will provide a ballot paper with the polling station printed on?

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, that presupposes that actually ballot papers will have polling stations printed on them, and that is for all polling stations in the country. That is speculating, supposing they are not actually printed? Aren’t we safer with providing that they will be written on, so that you know that this ballot paper was cast at polling station X, rather than thinking, and maybe wrongly so, that we are going to have the polling station printed on the papers.  

MR.RWAKOOJO: Mr. Chairman, I think that if it is pre-printed, it would obviously prevent fraud, but if it is not possible to do that, then you can write on them. But when you say you have to write on them at the top in the space provided, I assume that we are going to have a format on a ballot paper that will never change as long as we are using this law. I thought we intended to say that the ballot paper should have a name of the polling station at that polling station. I thought that is what we needed to do.

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Mr. Chairman, the hon. Member is talking about an ideal situation. But as he knows very well, elections in Tanzania have been a fiasco before, and that may be one of the reasons. You know very well that at times you even have fewer ballot papers provided for certain polling stations and you have to go and get more ballot papers. Now, if these are already pre-printed, then you will have a serious problem.  I would rather you agree with him that the name of the polling station is written at the top of the ballot paper, but when you want the polling station printed on the ballot paper, you are giving the Electoral Commission too much work. And it may make it very difficult for them to avoid mistakes. Therefore, I suggest that writing of the polling station’s name on top of the ballot paper is the easiest way out, and the easier the way the less chances you have of making mistakes.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, we have two amendments, one was from the Committee and the other one from hon. Rwakoojo. I will put the question to hon. Rwakoojo’s motion.

(Question put and negatived).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, I will put the question to the amendment by the Committee. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 34, as amended, agreed to

Clause 35, agreed to

Clause 36

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that clause 36 be deleted. For hon. Members to understand it better, I will read it:
“(1) Where a person represents himself or herself to be a particular voter and applies for a ballot paper after another person has voted in the name or number of that person, the second person shall only be entitled to receive a ballot paper and to vote after making before the presiding officer the declaration of identity, in Form ID in the Sixth Schedule to this Act and otherwise establishing his or her identity to the satisfaction of the presiding officer”   

This, in effect, means that a person can come and say that his name is ‘Y’, and even if he is informed that ‘Y’ has already voted, he insists that he is actually the ‘Y’. This section is now giving the presiding officer the authority to allow him to vote as ‘Y’, although earlier on somebody claiming to be ‘Y’ had voted.  

Our justification is that this cannot be possible, because apart from the name, there is also a number. It is not possible to have two people with the same names and the same numbers on the register. So, even if it is the same name, the number should be different, so he should be identified. There is no way a second person coming to say he is ‘Y’ will be ‘Y’ with exactly the same number on the roll. That is why we propose that this section be deleted.

MR.LOKERIS: Mr. Chairman, the deletion and refusal of that provision might promote malice. Supposing somebody who shares a name with another person wants to malice the other person? Or even the election officers may want to malice a candidate at any level, so they make somebody vote and after voting the candidate is told that he cannot vote. He would be regarded as a non-registered person, and therefore, ineligible to be elected. So, I think it will bring more confusion. Once a person has clarified that this is an anomaly and I have not voted but this is my name, this people should be given some kind of latitude to vote, in case he is a candidate.

MR.ERESU: Mr. Chairman, we have all been to polling stations at one time or another, and I am sure hon. Lokeris must have voted many times in his life time. Really, the voters’ card has a number, and this number is also in the records on the voters’ register. Even if my name is Peter Lokeris and he is also Peter Lokeris, there will be another distinction, and that is the number. You could be Peter Lokeris No. 210 and I could be Peter Lokeris 211. And we are also anticipating voters’ cards, which will have photographs. So, the element of malice does not arise. For us to retain this, we are really legislating for a leeway or a floodgate of election mal-practices of the highest order, which we shall never have had in this world. I support the amendment by the Committee to have this particular clause deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, isn’t there a possibility of somebody finding his way and voting in the name of Ssekandi? Actually, he may have thought that Ssekandi was in Nairobi and therefore he forged a card and went and voted, and yet I may have happened to come the previous night. I would go to the polling station and say that I am Ssekandi and I stay in Flat ‘X’, I have not voted, and I am supposed to vote here. Now, what would happen to me if somebody had already hoodwinked the officials? If in such a situation the owner of that particular number comes, you will have two identical cards, one forged and the other genuine. What happens to me? Should I be prevented from voting and yet I can prove that this is my card, although it happens to have the same number with a card another person used to come to vote?

MR.ERESU: Mr. Chairman, I have a feeling that we are being reliably being informed that the next voters’ cards will have photographs.  So, really – (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It will be okay when those cards are there, but assuming that they have not materialised and you are only using registers. You will look at the register and at the number and you tick, and yet you are ticking the wrong person, because the other one is still on his way to the polling station. 

MR.MED KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Your situation would arise if you were voting in a place where you are not known. But since we vote in our respective LC I areas, I take it that there are bound to be people who know Mr. Ssekandi. Even if that failed and there was a forgery of the same number, I think in the interest of fairness he should be stopped from voting.

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, even with what hon. Kaggwa has just stated, I think the clause should remain.  All that he is saying is that they will know anyone and they cannot make a mistake. Supposing they make a mistake, supposing some of them conspire to exclude someone? 

I would like to draw hon. Kaggwa’s attention to Article 38 (1) of the Constitution. It says:
”Every Uganda citizen has the right to participate in the affairs of government individually or through his or her representatives in accordance with law.”  

To me affairs of Government include electing who is going to govern you. If someone comes and carries out some sort of malpractice and I present myself and they say somebody has already voted in my name, I will say but I think somebody else has made a mistake, why should I not be allowed to exercise my right?

MRS.KABAKUMBA MASIKO: I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to support the amendment. If we accept anybody who comes and he finds that somebody has voted in his name, you never know we may have several of these cases and they may distort the results. I would rather we provided that when somebody comes to vote, he or she should identify himself or herself by shouting their names out loudly so that all those who are around know that this is the real person. There will be no chance of somebody else voting in your name after that. Otherwise, if we leave it as it is, it will be open to abuse.

MR.KYEMBA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am contributing along the lines of those who are preaching caution in this particular provision. The people who are likely to come around and find that somebody has voted for them must of necessity be very few. If the number is large, then we must assume that there is an administrative arrangement to try and rig the results. Because, if you have got two Kyembas voting with different numbers, and possibly with the same photograph appearing on both, I would be extremely suspicious that these cases could really require a special provision. But now that we would like to make some provision, I would like to suggest that if an aspiring voter turns up and somebody has voted in his place, then he should have a form as suggested. And that form should be recorded and retained by the presiding officer. So, if we discover that there are 1,900 voters who were denied the ballot paper because of that kind of exercise, then that should be a legitimate cause for challenging the results in that particular polling station.  

You are shaking your head, Mr. Chairman, but I think it is important that we should not allow a situation where the real voters turn up and get to vote for Kyemba, for Mukasa or for even anybody else and then we also give other claimants to the voter’s cards the right to vote as well. I think that is likely to cause us even more problems than solutions.  Thank you.

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Most of these provisions are derived from our own experiences, and this particular one is one of those very experiences we have had at one time or another. It is not something hypothetical. It has happened. I disagree with honourable Medi Kaggwa, who assumes that in every case the voters around will be in position to know who is going to vote.  This is just impossible! Let him remember our own constituencies, for example. You can go and vote when the bulk of the people have already voted and gone away. You can find only about seven people, and somebody comes up and says that he is so and so. He can shout out that he is so and so, but you have no ground to say that he is not the one if you do not know him. And in many cases, in urban areas it is very difficult for people to know each other so closely. 

So, from our own experience it has happened, and not once, not twice. So, the point is for us to consider what the Minister has said. I come genuinely to vote and I find a tick against my name yet I know I have not voted, should I be sent away? There is already a tick against my name, and therefore, do you expect me to walk back? In my own view, that would be very unfair. Therefore, that is why we need to go along the lines hon. Kyemba is suggesting, so that you do not deny a genuine person his or her right simply because somebody ticked their name.  

Lastly, you know that we still have problems. In some of our areas it is very easy for this person ticking or giving out ballot papers to do something deliberately.  He may say he is gone, so I will allow you to come and vote for one reason or the other. So, I think this should not be overlooked, because it has been a fact and there must be a solution provided.  Thank you.

MR.SEMBAJJA:  Mr. Chairman, I am seeking clarification.  All of you have gone through this exercise, and you find that there are certain areas, which are very hostile to people. The presiding officer can be hostile and the station is also hostile so much so that they come and tick names. By the time a few people who support you come, they have already ticked their names. So, I think that situation must be catered for. I think we should put a provision here not simply to dismiss it, because we know such hostile stations are there in our constituencies.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think we have exhausted this matter and you have made up your minds. The Committee was moving that we delete this particular provision for reasons that were given by the chairperson. But there are others who say that we should maintain this provision for reasons that they have given. I now put the question to the motion for deletion.

(Question put and negatived)

Clause 36, agreed to

Clause 37, agreed to

Clause 38

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that clause 38 be deleted, as it gives the Commission powers to make special provision to take votes of people in certain areas such as hospitals, places for the aged and similar institutions, and restricted areas where there are soldiers and security personnel. The justification is that monitoring in these places is difficult. I beg to move.

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: I think that the substantive rights of citizens under our Constitution should really be respected. The right of these people to participate in the Government should be respected. If I happen to be incapacitated, the hon. chairman is saying that they should forget about me. Is that right? Why forget about me if the Electoral Commission can make arrangements for me to participate? If you are going to distrust the Electoral Commission, then God help us. Who is going to win the elections? There has to be a limit.

MRS.KABAKUMBA MATSIKO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do not support this amendment, but before I finally decide, I want some clarification. Look at a scenario where we have our sons, the soldiers in the Democratic Republic of Congo, are you saying that the Commission should organize and maybe name it one of the special areas, and yet even Government and citizens do not know how many soldiers are in the Congo? I do not know how these candidates will ascertain the number of voters in Congo so that they know how many votes have been put in and that the numbers are not exaggerated. I would like some clarification from the Minister.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Does this mean that your understanding of this provision is that the Commission can go beyond the territorial jurisdiction of Uganda and create electoral areas?

MS. KABAKUMBA MASIKO: That is my understanding; since we have Ugandans there and they are entitled to vote.

MR.KATUREEBE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all this provision is meant to recognise the constitutional provision that every Ugandan has a right to vote.    

Secondly, the language of the provision is permissive.  It says that the Electoral Commission may make special provision. Where it is not possible for the Commission to make special provision, it will not. But to say that we should not make an attempt to accord our citizens the right to vote because administratively it may be difficult for us to supervise, I think, is to abscond from our responsibility. The provision is innocuous, it helps to enforce the Constitution, and we must trust the Commission and allow it to function as the Constitution allows it to do.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Learned Attorney General, how will the candidates know that the voting in these areas is done in a similar way as is done in other open areas? I think that was the chairperson’s concern. Is this being addressed?

MR. KATUREEBE: In a way, Mr. Chairman. The last sentence there says, “…the Commission shall publish in the Gazette a list of the restricted areas under this section.”  
That publication is meant to serve notice, to show which areas are under consideration, and therefore, notify everybody that they can crosscheck it.

LT.COL. MUDOOLA: I would just like to ask whether every candidate will be allowed to send his agents to these restricted areas.

MR.ERESU: Mr. Chairman, these restricted areas like hospitals, to me, are transitional places, because a person is admitted into hospital when he is probably a registered voter in another place. Now, when this person is allowed to vote, will his name be ticked on the list where he is registered? We are likely to raise confusion with time. We must be specific on how these things are going to be carried out to avoid elements of confusion and people voting twice. I could be in the hospital today and I vote there, and I am discharged in the afternoon before 5 o’clock, and I go to my polling station and vote.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, the question is which register are you going to use? Maybe, why do you call them restricted rather than special areas?

MR. KULE MURANGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We always have civic education before voting takes place, who will go there to educate these people in those places?

MR. SEMBAJJA: I seek clarification from the Minister as to whether these restricted areas include prisons, and whether there is any law barring prisoners to vote. Is it there in the Constitution? Should prisoners not exercise their human right to vote? These are also restricted areas, so is there any law? 

MR.KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Both the Minister and the Learned Attorney General have emphasized the constitutional right to vote. Maybe the Minister could help me, but why care about the sick when there are those at the embassies who are not sick and can vote? Are they going to also provide for them? 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Sir, let me answer the last one first. I have no problem if you can provide for those in our foreign embassies. After all, the Americans have got this system of postal voting.

As to the question of the prisoners, you virtually caught me there, because I know of a provision preventing someone serving certain sentences from being a candidate, but I do not know of any that says that such a person may not vote. So, as of now, my answer is no; prisoners may vote.

On the question of restricted areas, as far as I am concern, hospitals are not restricted areas. I can see that whoever put this here was thinking of the army. I think that is what they were thinking about. They do not tell you, but that was what they were thinking about. 

On the issue of barracks being restricted, they are not restricted from the point of view of exercising certain rights. So, the restrictions do not concern the voting in this country. It concerns restriction to other aspects of access. So, it is incumbent upon the Electoral Commission to provide for them. If it is a question of agents of opposing candidates making sure whether this is correct, let it be the duty of the Electoral Commission to facilitate the agents to monitor. They should be there when the votes are being cast rather than say there will be no voting there at all 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You first answered the query from hon. Medi Kaggwa about our missions, and you said they could vote.  If they can vote in foreign missions, will citizens outside the country go to these missions and vote? And what will you do with the registers there?  

MR. NKANGI-MAYANJA: Mr. Chairman, as far as I am concerned, if anything can make it possible for citizens of this country to reliably and truthfully vote, they should vote. So, the mere fact that ‘X’ and ‘Y’ is sometimes disabled, it is just organisational disability or administrative disability, we should not close out everybody who can otherwise vote.   

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, it is dicey, because if you look at this provision in terms of the soldiers in the Congo and then embassies, the answer is almost obvious. If you talk in terms of a home for the aged in the country or soldiers who have been deployed legitimately in one area but who cannot come for voting, in my view, we should ask the Commission to make arrangements to make sure that these people vote. But be specific about the people outside the borders of the country. I would just like clarification from the Attorney General. If I was in a home for the aged and I did not vote, and I went to the constitutional court, would a case on the fact that I was denied the right to vote be sustained?  

DR. CHRISTINE MWEBESA: Thank you, hon. Minister. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to seek clarification from the hon. Member holding the Floor as to how many homes of the aged people we have in Uganda, if we have any.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, they are providing a law for us as well as for posterity. I would like to inform you that in my own constituency I have a group of the elderly who meet every Saturday, and some of them are brought from their homes and taken back. This is in Bukoto 1 parish. They could give you some information.  

I see a situation where tomorrow or two years from now these homes will be established. So, you cannot say that because they are not there, therefore we cannot provide for them, and yet we know we can provide for them. To me it is a matter of looking at the situation objectively. For example, I put a question to the Attorney General, if the Attorney General says that such a person would have no grounds, then this helps me take a position on this. If he says that there are grounds for somebody to go to court, why then, hon. Members, shouldn’t we address ourselves to that?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, it seems that this particular provision has problems. It has merits and demerits, and maybe it requires the originator of the Bill and the Committee to sit down and look at the implications. If the Minister agrees that ambassadors can vote at their missions, then how will you prevail over somebody in London who says they want to go to your mission and vote?  Will you be able to manage that? Because once you open up and say that the people at the mission can vote, then they are entitled to vote. What will he do with people in UK, in America, in India where there are missions?  

People in the missions are voting, and I am a citizen, and I want to vote, what will happen? These are things that I actually think we should address, and I am suggesting that we skip this particular provision. While you think about it and find a solution, we can proceed to another. I do not know what the chairperson says about that.  

MR.OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I think you have put it very clearly. And logically, it is not possible for a citizen in London to be able to vote when he says he wants to vote because it is his right. Therefore, do you think the creation of this special provision for some people, which leaves out others, will be constitutional? So, I think the best way really is to proceed and delete this - (Applause)  

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Mr. Chairman, I do not remember exactly where it is, but the Electoral Commission is empowered by this Act to make management regulations to allow the smooth running of an election. They are allowed to make certain arrangements, changes and so forth from time to time, to make the election practical. Now, this provision is giving the opportunity, if it is possible, for certain citizens of this country to be allowed to vote. However, I do not think that we can legislate for something that is impossible to implement. For example, I do not think we can legislate for a Ugandan living in Greenland to come to London and vote. It is incumbent upon these people to present themselves where provisions for voting have been made. But it is not the duty of Government or the Electoral Commission in the country to make it possible for everybody to get there.  We make the provisions and it is up to you to get there.  

Lastly, what we should note is that they will make provision for the taking of votes. In other words, if it is a military barracks, for example, the polling station does not have to be inside the barracks. It can be actually stationed immediately outside the barracks, and outside the barracks is not a restricted area. We have all been to barracks. As soon as you get out of the gates of the barracks, you have entered an unrestricted area.  And the rules outside the fence are completely different.  

My Colleague was saying that candidates should send their agents to these places. Of course the fear is that you may present yourself at the gate of the barracks and you are not allowed to enter. But they could provide for the polling stations immediately outside the gate, and soldiers could come out, vote and go back into the barracks. So, I think that this provision is good. It enables the Electoral Commission to give as many Ugandans an opportunity to vote.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, I think there are other problems, which you have to address in barracks. Even if a barracks is in Gulu or Tororo, there will be people from Rubabo or from Nyabushozi, how will you arrange for a soldier who is in Tororo to vote for his candidate in Nyabushozi or Bukoto Central or Ayivu? If it is a presidential candidate, are you going to restrict it to presidential elections? If so, then the principle will come in. Because, if the principle you are talking about is a constitutional right, then you will be faced with a problem during parliamentary elections. If you are fronting a constitutional right, definitely the same principle has to follow with parliamentary elections.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr. Chairman, I do not think it is correct to say that I must submit to your suggestion.   Various elections are governed by various rules. For example, if we are electing an L.C.5 chairman in Rukungiri District, hon. Ssekandi is not allowed to vote there. It is his constitutional right to vote in Uganda, but it is not his constitutional right to participate in voting an L.C.5 chairman for Rukungiri. And neither can Kagonyera go and vote in Masaka. Therefore, we can, and I think we should, make different provisions depending on whom we are voting for. The President is voted for by every Ugandan, and Members of Parliament are elected by people in the constituencies. So, I think this provision is okay for presidential elections but not for the others.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But, hon. Minister, the problem was that the foundation of the provision was a constitutional right enshrined in Article 38. That is a common right, be it for presidential elections or for other elections. So, I am only telling you about problems that may come up. You will not be able to sustain this in an election where you have 214 constituencies, and you may find people in Moroto barracks who come from different constituencies.  How will you manage? And yet you will have created a precedent that it is a constitutional right to vote, therefore I must accord you the right to vote.

The other problem you may face is that you may not designate all restricted areas, and if you do not, you become selective. The Commission may then say that they went to prisons because they knew that the prisoners would be sympathetic to such and such a candidate.  

MR. KATUREEBE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, I support your suggestion that we stay over this matter and think about it. Because it should be narrowed down to, if there are people we cannot reach, then we might as well rule them out. I think we must think carefully as to how we may be able to reach some that we can reach.  

Somebody asked whether there are homes for the elderly. There is the Bakateyamba home at Lubaga, for example.  Can the Electoral Commission make a special arrangement for those Bakateyamba to vote? This is the way I look at this type of provision. So, instead of saying that we cannot reach everybody therefore let us exclude everybody, I think we should sleep over it and we discuss it further with the Committee. We may come out with the formula.

MS. KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think the worries of some hon. Members of Parliament are already catered for in clause 28, which we have already passed.  That clause says that the Electoral Commission should provide a list of polling stations in each constituency, and we gave them some time. And we have defeated the motion, which was trying to say that after this list has been gazetted and sent to polling stations, the Electoral Commission could not create more polling stations. 

If they think it is fit to create a polling station at the Bakateyamba home, I think they are already covered.  The Electoral Commission has also been mandated to organise elections, and this does not mean that it will not reach the restricted areas. They can reach the restricted areas even abroad, if they can afford to and if they can manage. So, I think this clause 38 is redundant and it should be deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, I have a motion. The Committee brought an amendment that for the reasons given we delete the provision. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 39, as amended, agreed to

Clause 40

MR.OGALO: I propose that clause 40 (1) be amended by replacing the word “two” appearing in the seventh line with the word “three”. The justification for this is that two days are not sufficient if you are going to travel to distant areas. I beg to move.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, repeat the amendment.

MR. OGALO: Clause 40(1) reads as follows: “If an employee who is a registered voter notifies the employer before polling day that the employee requires leave of absence to vote at the election, the employer shall, if the leave of absence desired is necessary to enable the employee to vote at an election, grant the employee permission to take leave of absence without any penalty or disproportionate deduction of pay for such reasonable period, not exceeding two days, as is necessary to enable the employee to travel and vote at the election”.  

It is these two days, which we propose to amend to three days, it says, “not exceeding three days”. In doing this, we are looking at far off places like the remote areas in West Nile, where one would need one day to travel and one day to return so that the third day will be for voting.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Do you mean a public employer or any employer?

MR. OGALO: Well, the Bill says any employer. It just says an employee or an employer. So, it is any employee.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: Mr. Chairman, I have a problem here.  Supposing somebody is in the UK and he wants to come and vote?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is only dealing with the situation here. We have no way to deal with UK situations.

MR. KYEMBA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If I remember correctly, not too long ago we were confronted with registration of voters in urban areas, particularly in Kampala here. We insisted that these people go and register in the places they desired to, and I think we made sure that all the voters went back to the areas where they reside. For a recommendation to come here proposing that we now consider three or two days for voters to go back to Kabale, Arua, or Moyo to vote, I feel very uncomfortable. I think we should be consistent.  We want voters to be recognised by the LCs, and now we are providing for people who normally do not reside in Arua or Kabale to go there just to register. When it comes to voting day, we now must provide them with as many days as we can to enable them to travel hundreds of miles. I am not prepared to support that proposal. Thank you.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, my helper at home originates from Kisoro, and the law allowed him to register either where I reside or in Kisoro where he originates. He asked me for permission to go and he gave me his reasons. From here to Kisoro you take one day by bus. Let us imagine the voting is tomorrow, you will take another day to come back. Given the realities in our country, in Kampala, in Jinja and so on, why do you deny upcountry voters the right to go back and vote? The chairman's amendment, I think, is very fair. It only recognises the fact that in two days one cannot go to Kisoro or to Moroto to vote and come back within those two days. Let us look at the realities on the ground rather than see ghosts in every shadow that we might come across.

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform hon. Kyemba that for the presidential elections, it is okay to register where you reside. But when it comes to parliamentary elections, people want to go and vote for their candidates at home, so they need to go and register at home. So, those three days, I think, are necessary.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I do not know whether the chairperson could also read out sub-clause (2) of his particular provision. 

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, clause 40(2) reads as follows: "No employee shall obtain permission to take leave of absence under subsection (1) unless that employee intends to use the leave of absence to vote at the election".

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Supposing I do not intend to vote, but I say I am going to vote and I ask for leave and you give me leave. How will you make sure that when I get this leave I have used it to go and vote? Secondly, what are the consequences if I refuse to grant leave to this person for two days?

MR. WANDERA OGALO: The consequences for refusing to grant leave are provided in sub clause (4), which says: "An employer who contravenes sub section (1) commits an offence and is liable, on conviction to a fine – 
    (a) if the offender is a natural person, not exceeding twenty currency points". That is only (4) (a) and you can see that it is provided for there. 

As to your first question, Mr. Chairman, if an employee asks for leave and is granted leave specifically for purposes of going to vote and instead of going to Bugiri to vote he goes on his own frolic in Arua, then that is between the employee and the employer. He would have presented to the employee the reasons for that leave.  The regulations in the contract between the two should operate. If it is punishment for that, so be it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But there is no punishment provided for, so I am asking why you put it there. The employee in Kampala or in Jinja will not be able to know what I have done in Kisoro. 

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Yes, Mr. Chairman. But we cannot, in my view, legislate here in the Bill for what happens if that employee does not take the leave.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Then do not put it there.

MR. BIDANDI: Mr. Chairman, the only proof or basis on which an employer gives this permission is the employee presenting his or her registration card. Once he or she has that, and you see that the station is in Rukungiri or in Moroto, then that is the basis. Otherwise, the whole of Kampala is full of so many people registered upcountry but working here. I think it would be very unfortunate if we did not consider the interests of those who have to go back to vote where they registered.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister that was not the case. I was saying that these two provisions, which we have considered in the same section, are not enforceable.  That is the point we are making. You put it there, but I will not be able to know whether you voted or not. So, the question of leave to any voter during election time is granted and you just leave it like that. 

MR. LOKERIS: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Employment is a contract, therefore, it should not have exogenous encumbrances so that when it reaches some time people just ask you to give them leave through law. I am talking about a factory, for example. Let us take a scenario where all the workers in factories in Kampala, maybe apart from the sweepers, are from Kabale, Karamoja, FortPortal and Moyo, and then you are confronted with this issue and they all want to go away. What will the implication be for the factory? In fact, it is injurious to the economy of the country. And this is what we should except. The least developed countries enjoy holidays, they do not mind because everything is plenty here, even sunshine is plenty and there is no cold!  

So, if we want to do anything here, we should allow it to be negotiable, according to the employer’s view. Because once the economy is affected on that day, then we are losing. You will see how the economy will be ravaged, and it will even harm the Parliament here. Let us not give these people leeway. Where do they go? If they know it is difficult to go there, they will register where they are. That is all. Otherwise, it will injure the economy of the country. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. If this is truly a Presidential Elections Bill, then I think this section is not necessary, because during the referendum it was made clear that one had to register where you are working or where you were born. In that sense, you could vote anywhere, because the question was one, or it was two in one. Now you can vote for any candidate of your choice anywhere you are. You do not need the two days at all. But my opinion is that this provision is extremely necessary when it comes to parliamentary elections, because you must have an MP of your own choice at your own place of work.  

Secondly, when we make the leave mandatory, have we taken into consideration the costs? Does this provision imply that the employer will also give transport costs or it just assumes? Because, some employees can use such a provision to claim some transport costs. So, it has to be made clear, and I would like the chairperson to clarify this. 

In my constituency, when we had the referendum the investors in Kasese cobalt plant had to battle this out at the office of the Resident District Commissioner. The employees were demanding that they be given mandatory leave to go and vote at their places of birth. But at that time the law was so clear that since it was a referendum, where you had to answer yes or no, you could vote in any place. I therefore request and insist that these being presidential elections, one can vote anywhere. You do not have to go to your place of birth.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The hon. Member wanted clarification from the Minister. He wants to know whether because this is a presidential election, a person registered in Kisoro but happens to be in Moroto could vote in Moroto without necessarily moving from Moroto to go to Kisoro where he or she registered.

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: I do not think he or she can, unless he or she has transferred his or her vote to that particular area.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Why don’t we vote on the amendment by the chairperson. He wanted to give more time. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that in clause 40(4), we replace paragraphs (c) and (b) with the expression “not exceeding twenty currency points in respect of each voter to whom leave of absence is denied”.  

The justification for this is that the sentence that referred to a natural employee was distinct from the one referring to a body corporate. We thought that we should not distinguish between the two. If it is an offence it is an offence, and it should be applicable to them uniformly.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In suggesting these penalties, do you take into account the situation you are creating for that employee who causes his employer to suffer such a punishment? What will the consequence be in as far as their relationship is concerned?  Will he be able to retain his job for a very long time?   

MR.OGALO: Mr. Chairman, we considered that, and it is not as provided for in this offence, but it is in the Bill. The position of the Government was to provide for 40 currency points against the body corporate, and what we have done, taking into account what you suggested, is to reduce this sentence to 20 currency points.  

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Mr. Chairman, it is a little bit unfortunate that I would stand here to oppose this provision. I am tempted to request the House to heed to what hon. Bwambale and hon. Lokeris have said. There is tendency in this country for Government, and that includes the Legislature and everybody, not to be sufficiently aware of the needs of the business sector.  You consider the amount of abuse such a provision could bring up by employees of certain businesses. You get a factory closing for a day and that is millions of shillings, and for three days, that will be billions!  And once employees of a business know that they have this opportunity, even if they do not want to vote anyway, they will certainly take this leave to go to their houses and drink.  

We have no provision to punish anybody who abuses this provision, and you know our workers, we do not have to persuade anybody about them. You have them in your homes, you have them at your farms, and you have them everywhere. My strong view is that this clause actually be deleted. The entire clause should be deleted, let there be private negotiations between employees and their employers so that we are not seen to be –(Interjection)

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I am raising on a point of procedure. This policy of granting two days- (Interjection)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the hon. Member from Rubabo is just speaking out his mind, and that is what he thinks. So, if you bring in another factor, then that becomes a problem. Let us finish, because at the end of the day, I am going to put the question as to whether this clause should stand. I think you have been notified that somebody will move that we delete it. But let us hear the kind of amendments that are being made.

MRS. BWAMBALE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I beg to move that clause 40 (4) be deleted. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now we have two amendments. If we delete the entire thing, then you do not need to belabour on a sub-clause.

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, if it is at all possible procedurally, I request that this clause be stood over for us to think about it until next week.  I will tell you why. I can see real possibilities of these things affecting the economy, particularly sugar factories and things like that. So, if it could be done procedurally, let us think about it until next week.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The motion by the Minister is that we stand this over. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 41  

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose to make the existing clause 41 sub-clause (1), and to insert a new sub-clause (2). During an election and while the polls are open, every returning officer and presiding officer is a keeper of the peace and has all powers of a justice of the peace. And what he or she may do is listed down.  So, we propose a new (2) to read as follows: “The Returning Officer or Presiding Officer shall, where he or she causes the arrest of any person under sub-section (1), report the arrest giving details and reasons of the arrest in the form provided under the fifth schedule.”

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: I would say yes Sir, except that the fifth schedule here is headed “declaration of income, assets and liabilities.”  Is this the one you intend to use?

MR. WANDERA OGALO: No. The fifth schedule as appearing in the Bill, which deals with the declaration, fell by the way side when we deleted the section yesterday. It also went because its basis was declaration. So, we will provide the fifth schedule ourselves.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Then in that case do not talk about a schedule. It is not there as yet.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: The fifth schedule I am talking about is on page 22 of the report as a proposal. We have provided it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We shall either name it fifth schedule or any other number. I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 41, as amended, agreed to

Clause42

MR.WANDERA OGALO: I propose to rephrase sub-clause (1) as follows: “Where there is no Police Officer to maintain order in a rural polling station and the necessity to maintain such order arises, the presiding officer shall appoint a person present to be an Election Constable to maintain order in the polling station throughout the day.”  

This is just for clarity. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 42, as amended, agreed to

Clause 43

MR.WANDERA OGALO: I propose that in clause 43(1), we replace the expression “arms or ammunition” appearing in the second line, with the expression “deadly weapon or ammunition”.  

The justification is that this takes care of everything else that is likely to cause injury or death. It is wider.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 43, as amended, agreed to

Clause 44, agreed to

Clause 45

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, in clause 45(3), I propose to replace the word “is” appearing in the first line, with the word “in”. It was just a typographical error. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 45, as amended, agreed to

Clause 46

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, clause 46(1) reads as follows: “(1) Where polling at a polling station is interrupted by a riot or violence or any other event while there remains, in the voters’ register, voters who have not completed the polling process, the presiding officer shall adjourn the polling to the next day or to any other time of the same day and shall immediately inform the returning officer of the fact.”  

We propose to insert the following expression after the word “immediately” at the end of the fifth line: “seal and transfer the ballot box to the nearest sub-county headquarters and inform the returning officer of the fact”.  

The justification is to avoid tampering with the ballot box.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 46, as amended, agreed to

Clause 47, agreed to

Clause 48

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose to insert the following new sub-clause before sub-clause (1): “At the close of voting, the presiding officer shall first tally the voters’ register with the number of voters and ballots issued before opening the ballot box and counting.”  

The justification is to provide for an audit of the ballots. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that we amend clause 48(2) by replacing the word “lanterns” appearing in the third line with the word “light” because it is wider. Lanterns are specific, but light can be got through other sources.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that we insert a new sub-clause after sub-clause (4) to read as follows: “Votes cast for each candidate shall be recorded in both figures and words and then countersigned by polling agents before the declaration of the results.”

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that in sub-clause (5)(e), we delete the expression “sub-section (4)” appearing at the end thereof, just for clarity. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 48, as amended, agreed to

Clause 49, agreed to

Clause 50, agreed to

Clause 51

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that in clause 51(1), we delete the words “of results” appearing between the words “as” and “follows” because they are redundant.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that in sub-clause (1)(d) we replace the words “to any voters present claiming to represent the candidates” with the words “to be retained by the presiding officer who shall transmit it to the returning officer.”   This is to ensure that the candidate has access to the form, other than giving it to unauthorised persons. I beg to move. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 51, as amended, agreed to

Clause 52, agreed to

Clause 53 

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, clause 53 (1) reads as follows:  “The returning officer shall be responsible for the safe custody of all election documents used in the district in connection with an election until the documents are destroyed in accordance with the directions of the Commission.”  

I propose to add the following expression at the end: “but the Commission shall not give such directions before the settlement of disputes, if any, arising from the elections.”

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 53, as amended, agreed to

Clause 54, agreed to

Clause 55, agreed to

Clause 56, agreed to

Clause 57

MR.ERESU: Mr. Chairman, clause 57 (3) reads as follows:  “The results shall be published in the national media and Commission shall as soon as practicable, cause them to be published in the Gazette.”  

I would like to move an amendment to read as follows: “the results shall be published in the national media and the Commission shall immediately cause them to be published in the Gazette, in any case, within seven days.”  

The reason that I move this amendment is because I think the Gazette is the fundamental point from which all the results which have been made known to the public, are finally documented for the public to have reference to. And they must be immediately available to the citizens of this country. The Gazette, therefore, is the only document that can easily be accessed by people. Any citizen of this country who is a voter can ascertain who has won and by what margin and so forth.  Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What is the deficiency in the present formulation?

MR. ERESU: Mr. Speaker, the present formulation talks of practicability. The measure of practicability and ‘as soon as possible’ is relative. It does not give a definite position and a definite time when the Gazette can have this information published. With the present formulation, it may take as long as any time the Commission deems necessary, but my formulation binds the Commission and makes them liable to produce this information for public interest within a specific time.  

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr. Chairman, first of all I would like to oppose the proposed amendment. The authoritative results are announced by the Commission, it is not their appearance in the Gazette that authorises the results. 

Secondly, it is not correct to say that the Gazette is actually freely available for public consumption.  I do not know how many of us last read the Gazette.  Therefore, it is not correct to say that the printing of these results is for public consumption.  

The results are announced authoritatively by the Commission, and as soon as the Commission announces the results they are official! As a matter of fact, people even get sworn in before the Gazette appears, and anyway, we would not wait for the gazetting.  So, in my opinion, the gazetting is for the official documentation of the results. It has absolutely nothing to do with the Commission’s work.  Therefore, I oppose the proposed amendment. 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, you might never know that the printing press in Entebbe channels out these Gazettes. And the hon. Member is saying within seven days, it might have problems or it might have broken down! How can you use seven days!

MR. KATUREEBE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just to allay the fears of my good Friend, hon. Eresu, if there were to be a dispute on the question of who was elected President, then you would go to clause 57 (7), which says:“A declaration executed by the Commission under subsection (1) of this section and bearing the seal of the Commission, shall be evidence that the person named in the declaration has been elected President” 

So, it is not what will be subsequently published, it is the declaration certified, which is evidence as to the results of the election. 

MRS. MUSUMBA: Mr. Chairman, I am just bothered by the hon. Minister’s lack of sensitivity to the need to be efficient in Government and in electioneering as we go into the 21st century. He is making all sorts of excuses not to have a deadline. In my view, this provision would make the Electoral Commission work towards efficiency, and so I wish to support the amendment. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Musumba, the Minister’s observation was that the Commission does not own the printing press, so he was saying supposing the machines themselves have broken down and yet you have given seven days, what happens? Do you punish the Commission? I think that was his observation. 

MRS. MUSUMBA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to have a contingency built in, but to make it operational, my view would be that we plug all those loopholes for only presidential elections.  Just plug all those loopholes and this happens once in every five years.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Sir, I will be very happy for the hon. Lady to give us the contingency to be put in the Bill. 

(Question put and negatived)

Clause 57, agreed to

Clause 58, agreed to

Clause 59

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that in clause 59 we add a new paragraph, (c), to read as follows:  “that an illegal practice or any other offence under this Act was committed in connection with the election by the candidate personally or with his or her knowledge and consent or approval.”

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that in sub-clause (9) we replace the expression on the seventh line beginning with “Director of Public Prosecutions” up to the end of that sentence, with the following expression: “court may consider relevant and appropriate for the Director of Public Prosecutions.” 

The justification is that the DPP is not in a position to know what can be relevant. Since it is the court that has the information, it is better for the court to be the one to decide. I beg to move.

MR. NKANGI: I seek clarification from my learned friend.  The DPP cannot be ordered by anyone to prosecute. So, what is the import of this amendment?

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, for clarity I think let me read it out and then give the explanation. It reads:“Where it appears to the Supreme Court on hearing an election petition under this section that the facts before it disclose that a criminal offence may have been committed, it shall make a report on the matter to the Director of Public Prosecutions for appropriate action to be taken and shall state in the report the name of the person, the nature of the offence and any other information that the Director of Public Prosecutions considers relevant and appropriate.”  

At that stage the DPP is not really in the know.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Chairman, before we pass this section, I would like to seek clarification on two grounds. One is with reference to what is happening in the United States of America, where a country so advanced in technology has had to undergo a recounting exercise in Florida. Could the Minister in charge of Justice and Constitutional Affairs allay my fears as to whether the same exercise could not possibly occur in a scenario where we lack modern technological advancement?  

Secondly, in order to allay the fears of a challenger to whoever is elected President, is it not prudent for me to propose that there should be a time limit in between? Because the Bill here leaves it so open that by the time you start off the challenge and the man is sworn in as President, it may become difficult for you to carry the matter any further. I would like the Minister of Justice to allay my fears as to whether it would not be proper if we created a scenario where a challenger could come in before the man is sworn in as President.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, I thought there is a constitutional provision dealing with these situations.  Would you like to look at Article 104 (1) and (2) of the Constitution? It says, “(1) Subject to the provisions of this article, any aggrieved candidate may petition the Supreme Court for an order that a candidate declared by the Electoral Commission elected as President was not validly elected 

(2) A petition under clause (1) of this article shall be lodged in the Supreme Court registry within ten days after the declaration of the election results.”  

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Chairman, I still want to get a response from the Minister, because you are the chairperson and you should not contribute an answer for him.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I was not contributing the answer. I only showed you the source. Are you testing the Minister?  

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, is it in order for hon. Ken Lukyamuzi to deny guidance from the Chair and interpret it as an answer and, therefore, demand that such guidance must come from the Minister and not from the Chair? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: He is out of order.  

MR. LUKYAMUZI: This is something else, Mr. Chairman. You have ably answered query number two, but the first scenario was not responded to. It was in regard to the experience I referred to in Florida in the United States.

MR. NKANGI: I think the hon. Member is jumping the gun.  Here we use manual counting, so until we do the other thing, let the matter lie.

Clause 59, as amended, agreed to

Clause 60, agreed to

Clause 61

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, in clause 61(2), I propose that we replace the word “person” appearing in the second line with the word “candidate”. The justification is that a petitioner can only be a candidate as provided in the Constitution. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 61, as amended, agreed to

Clause 62, agreed to

Clause 63, agreed to

Clause 64

MR WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that in clause 64 (1), we insert the following expression between the words “voter” and “commits”, appearing in the third line: “with the intention of inducing the person to vote for him or her”.

The justification is that the giving of a gift cannot be an illegal practice unless it is given to induce the person to vote in favour of a particular candidate. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that sub-clauses (2) and (3) be deleted for the same reasons as given above.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 64, as amended, agreed to

Clause 65

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that the word “procures”, appearing in the first line, be replaced with the word “persuades”, just for clarity.  I beg to move.

MR. NKANGI: I do not know why the hon. chairman does not want that word. It is stronger. ‘Procure’ is stronger than ‘persuade.’

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You may persuade and fail. It is an attempt, but with procuring you succeed.

MR. OGALO:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I have no objection.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 65 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 66, agreed to

Clause 67, agreed to

Clause 68

MR.OGALO: In clause 68, I propose that we amend paragraph (a) by deleting the words “one hundred and” appearing in the third line, and by replacing the word “years” at the end of the fourth line with the word “months”.  

We also amend paragraph (b) by replacing the word “eighty” with the word “twenty”, and replacing the words “two years” with the words “three months”. 

This is to harmonise with the sentences, which we have dealt with in earlier clauses. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 68, as amended, agreed to

Clause 69

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I understand hon. Okulo Epak had an amendment to clause 69. I do not know who is going to speak for him. Let us start with the chairperson.

MR. OGALO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I propose an amendment to clause 69(1) to replace the word “eighty”, appearing at the end of the eighth line, with the word “twenty”. I also propose to replace the words “two years” in the ninth line, with the word “three months”. 
This is to harmonise the punishment provided for. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Mr. Chairman, hon. Okulo Epak and hon. Dick Nyai had proposed the following amendments, and I think the papers have been distributed to the Members.  On the paper that has distributed, they said 62 was a typing error, the correct clause should have been 69(1). They pray that the Committee delete sub-section (1). And their reasons are as follows: 
    (a) Where is the time available during campaigning to indulge in litigation? It can be misused to intimidate fellow candidates only.

    (b) The candidate so affected can and should rebut the allegation himself or herself.       

    (c) Other legal provisions accommodate this case and can be used even after the elections.   

    (d) It could mutilate freedom of expression for both the one alleging and the one who should rebut the allegations.    

    (e) In most cases if the allegations are weird or the candidate inflicts damage to his or her own integrity, let the people mostly be the judges of the matter of campaigns.      

    (f) Campaigns may or may not or can provide very good opportunity to expose the wrong doings, corruption, hidden criminal acts and embezzlements or thefts committed by candidates, which the IGG, CID and Auditor General may take advantage of and follow up.     If people know that their bad dealings can be exposed freely during campaigns, they will behave if they plan to stand for elections. 

Those are the reasons.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I wish we had that before, because he is saying what we should actually delete. Now I put the question for deletion of 69(1).

(Question put and agreed)

Clause 69, as amended, agreed to

Clause 70.

MR.OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that clause 70(1) is amended by inserting the words “disrupting and” between the words “of” and “preventing” appearing at the end and beginning of the second and third lines respectively. This is just for clarity. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR.OGALO: In clause 70(4), I propose to replace “twenty” with “five”, and “six” with “one”.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 70, as amended, agreed to

Clause 71

MR.OGALO: In clause 71, I propose that the word “to”, appearing between the words “is” and “required” in the third line, be deleted. It was a typographical error.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. ONZIMA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to be assisted by the chairman of the Committee. When we were handling another clause earlier, something was said about the misconduct of the electoral officials in the respective polling stations. We talked about things like ticking somebody’s name as if he has voted and yet the person is yet to come, and other things. So, I want to know whether there is a punishment meant to streamline the behaviour of these electoral officers at that level. Definitely you know that there is no way these electoral officers can be impartial. They have their candidate to support, and they have this and the other to support. So, I should think that if it is not somewhere, maybe we should find a way of also inserting a sub-clause to deter these electoral officials from behaving in the way we described. So, I just need some guidance from the chairman as to whether it is somewhere or it is not there at all.

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, it is provided for and we will come to it in clause 74. That is where electoral officers do wrong things.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 71, as amended, agreed to

MR. OGALO: I propose that in clause 72(e), we add the expression “without reasonable cause” at the end of that paragraph. The justification being that the person might have reasonable cause for possession.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 72, as amended, agreed to

Clause 73, agreed to

Clause 74

MR.OGALO: In clause 74, I propose to delete (b) to (f). The justification for this is that these offences are for breach of duty, which is adequately catered for under clause 37.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 74, agreed to

Clause 75, agreed to

Clause 76, agreed to

Clause 77

MR.OGALO: In clause 77(3), I propose that we replace the word “forty”, appearing in the third line, with the word “five”. And we replace the word “year”, appearing in the last line, with the word “month”. This is for harmonisation of the sentences provided.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 77, as amended, agreed to

Clause 78

MR.OGALO: In clause 78, I propose to replace the word “six” at the end of the second last line, with the word “three”. And in sub-clause (2), I propose to replace the word “forty” at the end of third line, with the word “twenty”, and replace the words “one year” with the words “three months”. Again this is to harmonise sentences.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 78, as amended, agreed to

Clause 79, agreed to

Clause 80

MR.OGALO: In clause 80, Mr. Chairman, I propose that we replace the word “eighty”, in the third line, with the word “twenty”, and replace the words “two years” with the words “six months”. This is just to harmonise the punishment.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 80, as amended, agreed to

Clause 81, agreed to

Clause 82, agreed to

Clause 83, agreed to

Clause 84

MR.OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that clause 84 be deleted, because this offence is provided for in the Penal Code. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 85, agreed to

Clause 86

MR.OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that the letter “a” appearing in the second line be deleted. It is simply a typographical error.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 86, as amended, agreed to

Clause 87, agreed to

Clause 88

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Chairman, before I move that clause 88 be deleted, I would like to seek some clarification from the Minister of Justice. The little I know about the emergence of political systems worldwide is that political systems generally evolve from programmes and political thought. You do not simply wake up in the morning to pledge a political system. It is supposed to evolve over acts of democracy over the years. So, why should we be interested in keeping clause 88? I would like to hear from the Minister before I move for a deletion.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairperson, as long as the Article 74 remains part of our Constitution, we are bound to legislating this way. As soon as the hon. Member moves for deletion, then of course we shall have a situation as it is now, because this is part of our Constitution. It provides for changes of political systems, and for that reason we are saying that, let this clause remain there as protocol, because it is necessary to cater for any change of all political systems under Article 74.  

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Before I move the deletion proposal, I seek additional clarification. I still maintain that political systems evolve from political acts and programmes. With reference to the coming presidential elections and parliamentary elections, assuming that 90 percent of the voters vote for a multi-partyist in a situation where about 200 Members of Parliament are also multi-partyists, what do you anticipate? Maybe if you answer me properly I may withdraw the proposal- (Laughter).

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: I do not know what my hon. Friend wants me to do, but even if 90 percent or 100 percent of the voters voted for a multiparty candidate, that would not change the Constitution. He would have to come here with his support in Parliament and change the political system. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 88 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 89

MR.WANDERA OGALO: In clause 89 (3), I propose that we replace the word “eighty” appearing in the third line, with the word “twenty”, and replace the words “two years”, appearing in the last line, with the word “six months”. This is to harmonise punishments.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 89, as amended, agreed to

Clause 90, agreed to

Clause 91, agreed to

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We stood over clause 40. So, we may have to stop here so that you make appropriate consultations.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House does resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to).

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, now that we have only one clause and the schedules to consider, I suggest that we get the report on Tuesday. Once we finish this, we shall be able to make a decision for the Third Reading. We shall either reject the Third Reading or have the Third Reading. So, at this juncture, the House is adjourned until Tuesday 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.39 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 28th November, 2000 at 2.00 p.m.)


