Wednesday, 29 November 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House.

PRAYERS

The Chairman (Al Haji Moses Kigongo), in the Chair.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE INSURANCE BILL, 1995

(Debate Continued.)

MR KAHERU:  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.   I wish to add my voice to the support already given to the Insurance Bill, 1995.  In all developed economies, the insurance industry plays a very important role.  Now I have got some interests in insurance industry and that has enabled me to see a few things, which are happening in the industry.  A Decree was passed in 1978, which we are about to repeal but I would like to point out the basic weaknesses in the insurance business.  It is not so much the law.  It is the other things other than the law, which are most lacking.  The first area is the empowerment of the Commissioner for Insurance.  We already have a Commissioner for Insurance.  So, one would ask, why has the Commissioner for Insurance not done a number of things to regulate the industry?  

Now on empowerment, I would like to state that up to now, the commissioner for insurance has not been adequately empowered and I fear that even in the current bill, there may be a flaw and I would like to request the hon. Minister to clarify particularly on section 16 where the authority, whether it is Bank of Uganda or Ministry of Finance can give directives to the commission and the commission has to comply.  It will all depend on what type of directives are given to the commission.  If really only general policy matters regarding the economy are given, there will be no trouble but if general directives which will involve tying the hands of the commission in its professional work, then we are bound to have a problem.  

The second area is the facilitation of the Commissioner.  Currently, the commissioner for insurance is not properly facilitated.  The Commissioner needs to have easy transport and other facilities so that he can keep on checking on the industry anytime.  Since the heart of this law is the performance of the commission and subsequently the performance of the insurance companies, I will concentrate on the commission, on what extent are we going to facilitate the Commission?  I will give some examples.  The Commission, if it has to carry out the responsibility entrusted to it by this Statute, it will have to have able, adequate and competent staff.  So far, the small department in the Ministry of Finance under the commissioner for insurance has not got adequate staff and we would welcome the Minister’s clarification on the adequacy.  

Initially, I would like to suggest that since Uganda has got a limited number of people trained and experienced in insurance and the limited number are busy running insurance companies, I want to propose that in order to establish this very important commission, the Minister for Finance makes arrangements with some expatriate staff, a few of them who are experienced in the regulatory area of insurance business to come on contract, train some Ugandans and then after a few years, they could leave on the same lines that we have in some other authorities under the Ministry of Finance.  By saying so, I am not implying that the commission should be necessarily dominated by expatriates but I am referring to the fact that the regulatory responsibilities of this commission are new and therefore, we should start off on the right lines.  

Now, Mr Chairman - (Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  May I inform the hon. Member on the Floor that in some countries especially developing countries, what they did was to set up an institute for insurance so that the knowledge in connection with insurance could spread all over the country and hear it on radio, television and in newspapers.  Maybe this where the Minister can thing about because it is not included in the Bill.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR KAHERU:  Mr Chairman, the other issues follow from what I had already said and that is the business approach of the commission.  I would like to appeal to the Ministry of Finance to ensure that at least initially, the commission starts operating on a business approach because in the past, the previous Decree required a number of returns to be sent to the commissioner for insurance.  But after these returns were sent to the commissioner, the insurers would get no response after all the accounting records and other insurance records were sent to the commissioner; whether it was because of common sense or facilitation, the insurance companies were not receiving the guidance or corrections from the commissioner for insurance.  So, really ultimately the test of the pudding is in the eating and therefore what will matter most is how the commission has been effective.  

Now, I will give you another example of what I have been talking about.  For example, the Decree of 1978 made requirements that insurance companies should invest both the insurance funds and other funds according to certain criteria.  But since that law was made, the people who were responsible for insurance were not following up to find out whether this investment portfolio of the insurance companies were being operated according to law.  So this is the reason why I am saying that ultimately the test of the pudding will be in the eating.  

There is also part of the bill, which is talking about solvency margin.  I would like to welcome that one but I would like to add that so far, I have not seen a section talking about liquidity margins.  By liquidity margins really we are talking about the availability cash to enable an insurer to meet his obligations and it is important that this cash flow management is good enough for all insurers to be able to meet their obligations to the public. 

In this connection, there has always been a problem of insurance companies not being able to meet claims from the public, claims which are actually very genuine.  This has been a constant complaint by the public.  Now up to now, again the commissioner for insurance has not really gone deep into this.  In other words, when we create this law, the commission should address the problem of the claimants whose claims are not properly settled.  In many other countries, including our neighbouring country here in Kenya, the commission or whatever authority there is, make sure that they look at those claims which have not been met by the insurance companies and this becomes very crucial.  They look at them, whether they look at all of them or they do it by sampling but it protects the public.  I would like to suggest that this is done.  

Secondly, I would like to suggest that the timing is also important because there are a number of insurance companies, which have been taking long before settling claims and some businesses yearn under because of the time taken.  Some countries insist on a specific period within which claims are either settled or the claimant is told why the claim is not settled.  There is also an innovation which I would like to suggest that up to now, members of the public who are frustrated by insurance companies go to lawyers to assist them and the experience so for has been very frustrating to members of the public.  There are many lawyers who probably initially write to the insurance companies but after a bit of resistance by the insurers, the lawyers either give up and still charge the claimant or at least they do not adequately address the problem and the innovation which I wanted to suggest and it is also in other countries, that is if a member of the public is not happy with the way the insurance company has settled his claim, he can actually go to the staff of the commission and staff of the commission would address that problem, they would look at the claim whether there was justifiable cause for not settling that problem; and I would submit that that arrangement should be better than the current one where the member of the public is left to struggle on his own if the lawyer does not help him and of course by this suggestion, it means the member of the public will be given a free service since part of the funds financing this commission are coming from taxation.  

The other issue that I want to raise is the appointment of the commission.  There has been a trend in this country of government appointing people on boards of directors and the authorities who appoint these directors do not give the directors terms of reference, they do not give them targets to achieve, they do not get reports from the directors. Therefore, the whole issue just remains a question giving jobs to the boys.  But I would like to submit that an appointment - we could start with this Commission; an appointment to the Commission should be accompanied by terms of reference.  It should also have regular targets and I would like to suggest there should be preliminary seminars organised for the members of the board of the Commission so that the members of the board of the commission know actually what they are going to do, the problems of the industry, the usual weaknesses and other key areas so that they are enabled to control the commission properly.  

I will also like to propose that both the Ministry of Finance and the commission take a serious view of insurance agents.  The insurance agents play a key role because they are usually the contacts with clients.  But a number of insurance companies here have been employing agents who are neither well trained, nor controlled by the insurance company which appoints them and I would like to say that since we are passing this legislation, we should be very serious on these insurance agents. Many of these insurance agents just go in to get money without adequate explanation -(Interruption)

HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that most of the insurance companies we are having in Uganda are employing insurance brokers who are already employed in other fields; which means that they are not doing full time job.  They are doing part time jobs in addition to what they are already doing and that is why they are not performing up to the maximum.

HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the Member on the Floor that the problem originates from the way we draft our company laws.  I was reading an Article of Association of a company.  The man had included all activities including insurance.  When I asked him about what is insurance, he could not define to me what insurance is and yet in his Article of Association, insurance is one of the activities he is taking as a business.  (Laughter)

MR KAHERU:  I would like to thank the hon. Members for their information.  This confirms my contention that the insurance agents should be well trained and controlled by the insurance companies.  In fact the commission should insist that these agents go into contracts.  Recently, just like in other areas of business, there has been a surge in insurance activity mainly because of the new investors in the insurance business.  But unfortunately, a tendency has come in of undercutting the premiums in order to attract the business of clients and I would like to warn the public that while on the surface this tendency may be attractive, it is dangerous because there is a minimum amount of premiums which are necessary to be collected if actually claims afterwards have to be settled.  So people should not merely go by the low figures and in this case, I would request the commission to assist the public by making sure that some of the insurance companies do not misbehave in this area.  

My last point is that actually I would like to congratulate the Minister for Finance for the thoroughness of the bill, for the consultations and the committee also played a very important role but I must say that for the information of some Members, the Minister for Finance had already done some consultations with insurance industry before the bill came to the committee.  But the committee did a good job and I would like to commend both the Minister and the committee for a job well done.  Thank you Mr Chairman. 

MR AKIDA GABE (Jonam County, Nebbi):  Mr Chairman Sir, thank you very much for giving me the Floor.  Before I go to the Bill, I would like to say that I am here because of a by-election that took place in Jonam County.  As you remember, the by-election was precipitated not by the desire of the people but by the great calamity that befell our brother the late Wadriff.  By his demise, Uganda has lost a great son dedicated and lawyer.  During his absence, the constituency was unrepresented.  There was anxiety in the constituency, people did not know when election would be held but nevertheless, it was great that an election was held and they picked on me.  (Applause) They elected me on principle not just for the sake of electing a candidate.  They elected me knowing very well that they have ushered in a new era in the constituency.  The family of the late have requested me to come and convey their sincere thanks to the House and also to the government for the assistance rendered to the late at the time he was indisposed and also during the time of his burial.  They are very, very grateful.  

The people of Jonam too have requested me to come and convey their greetings to this House.  They have also requested me to say they are fully behind the government -(Applause)- they support the new constitution and they have noted with great satisfaction the success the government has scored in areas of security, economic infrastructure, business incentives and general guidance to the nation.  They would like to associate themselves fully with the government determination to protect this nation and develop it.  

Mr Chairman Sir, I would not like to say much about what has passed neither do I want to say much about the bill.  I came in when I found the bill was already in its Second Reading.  Sincerely there could have been many things said yesterday.  Though I had prepared myself yesterday, I thought it was wise at least to listen again to the debate in respect to the bill. 

The bill as it stands is a good bill.  I have gone through it and I find that the ideas and objectives are pertinent to the development of this country.  We cannot develop unless we have got very sound economic policies and the rest.  I found some difficulties I would like to highlight.  Article 6 and 7; the financial discipline as set up in article 6 and 7; it talks about capital, security deposit.  After that when you go to section 33, it reinforces financial compliance.  Now with all those in detail, I find that there is no logic that article 11(2) should seek to interfere in the internal organisation and structure of an insurance company, which is entirely a private company.  I say this - I stand to be guided but if you read article 11 clause 2, it says: “No board member shall have any blood relationship or relationship by merit or adoption with more than one other board member.”  I stand to be guided.  I do not see anything wrong if I have my wife there, I have my brother there.  Many things are missing in this bill.  It was otherwise, the section I wanted very much to dwell on and if that has been belated, I find myself unable now to proceed on because that is the only section I thought I would competently contribute towards.  In any case, I would also like to recognise the warm welcome I received in this House when I was ushered in.  I am sure that I will learn a lot from this House from experienced Members and from professionals but I believe too that perhaps I may have an area where the House may benefit from should that time come.  With that Mr Chairman, I support the bill.

HON. MEMBER:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I would also like to add my voice to those who are supporting the bill.  I would also like to comment on some sections in the bill but before I comment, I also would like to state that there are many other laws which are supposed to have come to the House which have delayed and are very important to the nation.  Specifically we have Workmen’s Compensation Act, which is terribly inadequate in a sense that if a person dies while at work, the survivors or the beneficiaries receive only UShs 34,000 and that is very terrible.  Now regarding clauses of the bill, I would like to talk about the commission.

There is some fooling here in the House that actually there are no people to manage the Commission, which is very wrong.  We have very well qualified people, we have about 30 professionally qualified people from the London School of Insurance, from the Indian Insurance Institute and we have even some fellow around.  The only problem is, these people are paid seven digit figures and government perhaps could not afford to attract these people to take on the job in the commission.  So, I discourage totally the idea that we should go for expatriates to come around here and try to teach us how insurance should be done.  As of now, already I have three names of people who are warming up to contest for the commission jobs.  

Furthermore, as a lecturer at Makerere University, I have taught a set of not less than 30 people who can take up these jobs.  So please, do not be worried, if you set up the commission, there are people who can take up the job and do it very well.  Regarding other sections, I would like to comment about the insolvency margin issue, which was raised by hon. Kaheru who has been on the Floor.  Section 31 of the 1978 Decree actually caters for the problems, which were being mentioned as regards the insolvency margin issue in the bill we are discussing.  That section well defines what insolvent company is and there is no need for us to incorporate another clause talking about liquidity solvency.  It will be redundant.

MR KAHERU:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, if I may inform the hon. Member on the Floor, it is that what was being referred to is the liquidity margin and not insolvency margin.

HON. MEMBER:  Thank you Mr Chairman but what I wrote is a confusion, semantics just.  When we talk about liquidity margin or liquidity insolvency or whatever, actually we want to input what insolvency margin feels would want to carry and universally in all the laws we have, we use the phrase solvency margin to define the liquidity of a company and its ability to pay claims The Decree which I am talking about, section 31 well defines what are liabilities, what are assets, what is premium income on which we shall base the solvency of a company and therefore its ability to pay the claims  So, I would suggest that the text of section 31 of the 1978 Decree should be adopted with some few improvements.  Otherwise, the section which is there in the bill does not cater or does not well define what a solvent company is and what liabilities are but just is written without guidance.  

Regarding capital, I would suggest that we follow the lines of the Financial Institution Act which we passed recently and not have the ratio of 5 to 1 in our bill as it is but just do it as it is for the banking institutions; because the demand of 5 to 1 ratio in as far as foreigners are concerned vis-à-vis the local companies are concerned will discourage foreign investors whom we actually need because when you look at our companies here so far, they are quite weak and much of reference premium is being taken out.  Actually for some companies, which are operating here and are originating from outside like Sheraton, they normally demand that 90 percent of their business which they place in the local company must be placed abroad.  This means in real terms that we are talking about 300 million shillings or 300,000 dollars for such clients which is going out because they feel the companies here are weak.  If you encouraged these companies coming from out to operate from here and which are adequately financed, we shall minimize the outflow of premium and therefore build the capacity internally.  Regarding section 11, I am very happy that the Minister decided or was advised and deleted that section and actually not deleted but rewarded or rephrased it.  Reason one, historically we know of very many big companies in the world which we are proud of, which were started as family companies.  When you talk of Ford, when you talk of Daimler Benz, you are talking about almost family companies.  In Uganda when you are here, when you talk of Madhvani, when you talk of Metha, when you talk of Sembule or Greenland, you are talking about companies which were formed along those lines and are doing well.  Perhaps those who do not know, the word Sembule just comes from two names; Sembule and Buwule the late who formed their company from a small organisation in Natete now to a manufacturing company and we are proud of it as Ugandans.  So if we had brought this law before, Pan World would not be there because Sembule and Buwule are there and perhaps their children are there and then we would miss an opportunity.  Again the spirit of section clause which creates insurance companies will be defeated.  These are companies which are formed by people in similar trade.  

I will take a simple example of hon. Mayengo’s place where you have almost all people; fishermen.  These are brothers and sisters in the sense that because the population is small, they have married from each other’s clan and therefore we end up not being able to form a company in such a situation.  So, I support the paraphrasing of the bill in as far as this section is concerned.  Regarding section 93, it defines insurable interest and it basically takes literature representation.  That is the small quarrel with it but my biggest quarrel is that when you define insurable interest in as far as life policies are concerned, you should also take it upon yourself to define what insurable interest is in the case of pecuniary and property insurances or else the definition here will not carry a lot of sense.  

So, either we delete it because it is just an application of the established doctrines of insurance law and that one of them is insurable interest, utmost good faith, etc.  If we go on like this, we may end up bringing in all these definitions here in our bill.  So I suggest that it be deleted because it is catered for in the general principles of insurance law.  Regarding utilisation of local insurance capacity, this is a bit outdated. The requirement of right of first refusal used to be practised in socialist economies or quasi-socialist economies.  The purpose was intended basically to control interaction with the rest of the world and perhaps avoid capitalism.  Now this one is not practicable now as we liberalise because we are free in as far as liberalisation is concerned to deal with whom we want for reasons we have and only business exigency will guide us.  This clause does not tell us where you report to if you have satisfied the local capacity before you go outside the market.  I therefore suggest that that section also be deleted because at the end of the day, it will be redundant and inapplicable in the real world. I can make general remarks about the operations of insurance companies.  There have been accusations here in the House and outside that insurance companies actually do not pay claims. I am happy to report that I look at many of the faces of hon. Members who have happily received a cheque from insurance companies and therefore the general allegations could be false. The only problem which arises –(Interruption)

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, it is not that the complaint is that the insurance companies do not settle claims.  They do settle small claims faster, big claims, very, very slowly.  That is what we are talking about.

HON. MEMBER:  I thank the hon. Member for the information.  But what I want to tell the House and the rest of society is that when you buy a policy, you are talking of a contract.  My experience has been that most members of society who buy their policies actually do not read them.  When they buy them, they put them under the drawer.  When they have a problem, they start fidgeting and when they go to the insurance company, they actually do not know under which section they are claiming.  For example, we have cases where somebody comes to insure merchandise and he says I have a burglar policy.  During the course of the burglary about 20 million shillings is also stolen.  Now, if the company is still explaining and the person cannot understand, who is to blame?  But I will just urge the Members that they are actually protected by the policies but that protection can only be emphasized if Members read their policies.  In fact I would urge Members here that after this insurance bill, we have another bill which we can bring to protect our customers and this is done in other countries.  In Britain, we have what they call the Policy Holders Protection Act.  Whoever is not satisfied, there is an ombudsman who decides cases even when going to court.  

So, you Members can come together and draft another bill which I will come here and defend very ably and all of you are actually catered for.  Then there was another issue regarding medical insurance.  Members were of the opinion that actually medical insurance should come up, for the reason that many people are falling sick and are not actually catered for.  One thing I have to mention is that insurance companies are business companies and if the public feels that there should be a product, which can sell, they will also produce it.  The only problem which arose with medical insurance actually arose in the 1970s.  This policy was there in the National Insurance Corporation but the fraud which the company experienced was so much that almost it killed the company.  It was almost a third party insurance law which was there at that time and the NIC had to close down the medical insurance business.  

As of now, I am happy to report that at least four companies are providing this cover namely: Greenland Insurance Company, Pan-World Insurance Company and Statewide Insurance Company.  So for those who feel there is very much need for insurance in as far as medical expenses are concerned, please contact these companies.  You will get the best service you can meet in this area.  So with those remarks, I thank the Chairman and the House for the opportunity offered to me.  Thank you.

HON. MEMBER:  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  The hon. Minister stated clearly in his introductory remarks that he did worldwide consultation.  I am wondering whether he did this consultation with the Bank of Uganda and the existing insurance companies.  If he did with Bank of Uganda, why did he not come before with the amendment of section five which states clearly that the Bank of Uganda is to supervise, regulate, control, discipline financial institutions, insurance companies and pension funds and institutions?  Secondly, if he did consult the operating insurance companies, what problems do these insurance companies face with this commission when it was operating under the Bank of Uganda?  

As you know banks and insurance companies are equally financial institutions because their work is purely on money transactions and this involves huge amount of money.  And secondly, the insurance companies and banks also involve in external trade.  Take for example, when you are opening a letter of credit through a bank, you combine the insurance and the value of the goods which usually known letter of credit and this all falls under Bank of Uganda.  Financial institutions and insurance companies are also internationally associated.  Any bank in Uganda, any insurance in Uganda must have a counterpart overseas in form of a branch office or a commission agent because most of these banks and insurances are involved as I said before in international business, which falls directly under the Bank of Uganda.  To establish an autonomous insurance commission is in other words to say we are establishing another central clearing house equivalent to Bank of Uganda which is dealing particularly with insurance.  Now the question is, how will these two institutions cooperate to form economic policies which are clearly stated under section five of the Bank of Uganda Act?  Because you will find insurance is separate, Bank of Uganda is separate.  Now at international level, they are dealing mainly with trade in foreign currency.  So here, I am a bit confused Mr Chairman.  

Now, coming to Section 24, page 21, this is the financial position of the Commission.  Usually we establish such parastatals, when it comes to financing resources, they do not earn enough money from the services they give and always they always rush to the Treasury for grants.  Formerly, the parastatals were supposed to make a surplus, a part of which goes to the consolidated fund. I can cite an example of Lint Marketing Board, Coffee Marketing Board; these were major parastatals which were financing almost 50 per cent of the national Budget, but today, you are creating a parastatal, when it comes to financial requirements, it is not able to meet these expenses from the source of funds within the areas related.  

Now, if you look at these items one by one, last fee payable by Insurance and Intermediary Loss Assessors and Loss Adjusters; okay, I do not know how many Insurance Companies we have in the country, I am sure they are not more than 100.  Now, how much are you going to charge each Insurance to raise enough revenue to run this Commission, even if you put a fee of 100,000/= you will never reach.  Definitely, you are going to run to the Treasury for grants and that is one of the reasons why we are ever running a deficit Budget; for two reasons:

(i) We are taking taxpayer’s money to sustain non-revenue earning parastatals, although they can give you some services.

(ii) These parastatals, which are supposed to make surplus (I am using Government terms) profits, which they have to pay to the Government, they do not do it.  So, when we are creating parastatals, we must look at their financial resources.  

Now, if we go further for grants - that is what I have complained about once approved to the Commission by way of revenue, how, revenue from where, because what the Commission charges us License is already revenue; what other revenues.  I see here when you are introducing these Bills, you should be a bit specific - donations, I do not know from where - loans, grants and the Commission by the Central Bank other than other Banks or any other financial institutions.  But, when you a loan, you have to pay it; that is not an income.

Such other monies include - this is a very, very, - If all the Insurance Companies do not breach other sections which would lead them to a sign, if they all comply, so you will not get money under this; that is why I say, you can go and line up ten items from where the Commission may get revenue, but at the end of the day, some items will not give Commission revenue.  

Now, coming to the Amendment, these amendments are just replacements, because Bank of Uganda appears almost everywhere on this Section. For different reasons, some are partly technical, some are because, the Bank is the Central financial institution, but if you replace simply with the Minister, how would the Minister really fulfill some of these sections dealing with loans and so on.

Finally, my suggestion to the Minister is that, the Minister either accepts this Bill to be passed in its very draft status so that this Commission continues to exist under Bank of Uganda or he withdraws this Bill, re-draft it properly, so that it becomes autonomous and direct under the Bank of Uganda.

With these few observations, I thank you very much.

MR NKALUBO WASSWA  (Nominated Member):  Thank you Mr Chairman. I stand to support the Bill. People have been complaining that I am contributing for the second time.  Actually, yesterday, I was just clarifying the question of UCB, which had been raised by hon. Kanyomozi; it was not my contribution.  

Before I start my contribution, I wish to use this opportunity to extend the condolences to the family of the people who died in the accident where we lost about 20 people on Masaka Road.  Well, I understand from today’s Police report, that they were 22. This is a great loss to this country.  When there was an accident in Abaitababiri where four people died in an Aircraft, the Government came up with a statement, hon. Gasatura was involved, a report - Commission of Inquiry was set up, but when we loose about 22 people, we expect the Government to come up at least with a statement, the Ministry of Transport.

That one goes back to a Statute we had concerning the Third Party.  The Third Party, the maximum you can collect from an accident which can be shared by those involved is 10 million, that is the maximum in one accident.  I think we have to revisit that Statute and revise the maximum amount which say, can be shared by the affected people; otherwise, it is now a token sum which has no use to any family, if we are going to loose people at this rate.

Also, may be I would appeal to the Police to be more effective in its operations. Now, that there was an accident, you find them scattered everywhere; after one week, they will go back and sleep.  That is enough as far as the accidents are concerned.

I wish to inform this House, that while the Minister had the draft Bill ready for debate in April, he went ahead and abolished the Department of Insurance in his Ministry; he retrenched all the people and he assumed that this House - (interruption)

MR RUKIKAIRE:  Point of information.  I think the hon. Member, Wasswa Nkalubo is a bit misinformed.  When you abolish something, it does not mean that you have abolished the function. What we did was to reorganise, we abolished the post of Commissioner, of Insurance in accordance with the new Public Service Restructuring of Government, but transferred the responsibility of Insurance to the Macro Economic Department.  So, the function continues although the post he is referring to, does not exit; it will exist if you pass this law but for now, the function is being performed by another department of the Ministry of Finance.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO:  Thank you for the information, but all the same, you jumped the gun, you hoped that the thing was going to Bank of Uganda.  Any way, I would appeal that in future, we should be patient a bit, have the law in place, not the other way round; that is why when we come in here, the Members are assumed to be rubber stamping the decision of the executive.

When we look at this Statute under Section 3, sub-section (ii) (d), the Minister is proposing that foreign companies should not insure goods imported from other companies, except personal effects.  Now, you will appreciate for some of you who are very conversant with the importation, that when you import, you anticipate losses in transit, and once there is loss, your Insurance should be able to indemnify you and you should be able to import the same items. That is why normally, when we are importing, we normally quote CIF say, Kampala, Jinja. 

Now, with this Insurance status in Uganda as of today, very few companies, if you had to take an Insurance policy with them, would be able to compensate you to the value of the goods.  I would appeal to the Minister not to discourage our importers by saying that other than personal effects, let every trader, since you have liberalised the trade, you permit every importer or exporter to take up a policy with the company he is sure of compensating him in case of any loss, but this restriction will not be in the interest of our traders; because some of these companies which will be local, it will be about two transactions and you will be out of business. Now, we are saying the maximum that - at least the capital for local business is about UShs 200 million.  Now, with only two transactions of goods being lost on the way, if we are to insure - there was a Green something Insurance Company.  If it has to meet UShs 200 million today and UShs 200 million tomorrow, it will be out of business unless it has re-insured. 

HON. MEMBER:  Point of information. I actually, would like to inform the Chairman PAC, hon. Nkalubo, that Green something, is one of the most capitalised and well-managed Insurance Companies in the country.  So, he should not be worried if he insures with Greenland Insurance Company.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO:  So, what I was saying that it is so important; that when you are restricting the Companies, which can come in and take up Insurance, you look at the capital structure. Recently, there was an importer who lost his merchandise in Mombasa, the loss was estimated at about UShs 250 million.  Now, if he had to come back to a local Insurance with a capital sum of about UShs 200 million, then it would mean, that it had to wind up to meet the claim of this insured man.  Now, it is so important that we should not restrict the Companies which should come in and then if we want to liberalise, why do you want to restrict the Insurance; let who ever is competent come in and compete.  If you cannot, please, do other business, you join me at the farm, you become a weekend farmer, what is wrong with that?  So, we do not protect inefficiency; let those who can compete and render services remain.

When we look at Section 5 sub-section (ii), the Minister is proposing not to permit such local insurances to give import and export guaranties.  Well, for me, I do not see why we should restrict this. As importers, sometimes you may bring in goods, they reach Mombasa when the documents are not yet available, then the Insurance in Mombasa would say, can you get a guarantee from either the Bank or from the Insurance; so that they can release the goods to you.  Now, - (interruption) 

MR RUKIKAIRE:  Point of information.  It is a pity that these Amendments were circulated a bit late but I want to assure the hon. Member holding the Floor, that among the Amendments proposed and agreed by the Sectoral Committee of this House, this is being amended and removed from the Bill.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO:  Now, I thank the Minister for having seen that loophole and I will support his Amendment in advance.  The other problem, which has cropped up, is where the Minister is proposing to amend Section 11, to delete sub-section (ii) where the original idea was that no Board member shall have any blood relationship or relationship by marriage or adoption with more than one other Board member.  Now, we may think it is a laughable thing, but so many companies have been started and the families have taken us for a ride; we need to have some control, because, as business, it is alright, but then for Board members, once you say, okay, I can start a company with my wife, my son, and then tomorrow, we swindle the public and go underground; we need at least a control of knowing who is forming this company, what relationship these fellows are.  I know in business, we say, we have liberalised, we can say, muginga nawumia’ but we should protect Ugandans.  What have we not seen?  We had a good Building Society here; it was Premium.  Premium set up one house I think in Mbuya, the Managing Director slept in the house, all the other share holders are languishing, there is nothing - I think he is the only beneficiary and may be with his wife.  We should know who is forming this company, and may be the Equator.  I think it is high time we controlled who is forming a company, though we are encouraging Ugandans to come in, but if we say okay, everybody can form a company, but we have to look at the level of our fellow Ugandans, how many people can look at the papers, you know, we can be easily taken by good salesman.  I would request the Minister to include that Section, to protect fellow Ugandans who may be unsuspecting of Wasswa, that with my family, you say, if you have a minimum of so many Directors, you can form an Insurance Company.  I may have every other objective and then we swindle these fellow Ugandans.

The other point, I looked at Section 22, I would request the Minister to tell me under Section 22, he is saying, there shall be a Secretary to the Commission who shall be appointed by the Board on terms and conditions that the Commission may determine. Can the Minister tell me, which Board, because, when you say, there will be a Secretary appointed by the Board, now, can he tell me - I would like the Minister to tell the House, when he speaks of the Board, what Board, is he informing a Commission, is he informing a Board and I was looking at Section 2 under the definitions, he has not given me what he means by the word Board.  What is this Board he is referring to, Mr Chairman.

HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the Member that under Clause 17 (v), the word Board also appears and it is not defined.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO:  Well, I thought I was the only person who is  - now I am being told that under Section 17, he is referring to the Board.  Now, can he tell us which Board he is referring to?  We are looking at a situation where we had a department with a Commissioner, now we are getting a Commission with a Commissioner.  Now, I would like to know the difference between the two; the former department and the new one he is proposing; how different are they going to be?  Otherwise, he has to tell us that the new one under the Ministry will be a better Commission than the other one which he chucked out and put it under the macro - I do not know, one is the heir of the other or it is the other one resurrecting, coming for the second round, because, we do not just form Commissions for the sake of Commissions, we pass laws for the sake of laws, just we change the guards.  We have to just to tell us the benefits of having this Commission as opposed to other department.  

Now, I would also like to know whether it will be more independent than the one which has been there, where it had the long strings attached and could pull the Commission from the long distance.  I would like him to assure this House, that this Commission will be more independent than the department.  If it is going to be independent of him, I am very sure, he will get the support of this House, but if he is just extending this into another department, I would rather say, we shelf this Bill up to the time when we are in position to have an independent Commission or for that matter, it would sound more - if we say the fellow revisit the Board, if we could call it Insurance Board independent of the Ministry of Finance.  

We look at the most proposed Amendments, we are entrusting the job of this Commission the control in the hands of the Minister.  I would request that we create a Commission which is independent of him, you see, creating a Commission where the Minister can direct, the Minister will do this, that is why we are failing; you create a Commission and wait for a report, but if you are going to do this, the Minister will direct and the Commission will follow; you can as well take over and you have just a small department, then you can direct.  Otherwise, it is useless, creating a Commission where everyday, you can direct and they will follow, because this armory will be armory and then we can say, okay, but then, let us have an independent Board, independent of the Ministry, which can deliver and you can hold them where they have failed.  But you see, this creation of Boards, where you have to control, I think it is high time we refrained from that.

Mr Chairman, the Minister has proposed that this Commission will not be paying - (interruption)

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  Point of information.  Mr, Chairman, I think that under Section 11, the Board which is being referred to is the Board of an Insurance Company, but under the Section of the Commission and in particular reference to sub-section (v), that is 17 (v), I have no doubt that the Board there is not correctly put; it must be the Commission, not the Board.  

MR WASSWA NKALUBO:  Well, I think it is up to the Minister to tell us what he wanted to understand by his submission. Mr Chairman, the Minister proposing that this Commission will not paying Corporation tax; were are not all that very rich to exempt this Corporation in whole sale.  Now, this Commission is going to charge a levy and is supposed to do business, because, it is going to do a lot of money; if you take into consideration this levy and I do not see why we are saying it will not pay Corporation tax.  It should pay Corporation tax so long as it has made profit; we do not encourage lazy Corporations, which he has crippled from the start by exempting from paying tax.  He should pay tax if makes profit.  If it makes loss, then, well, it can carry its loss to the next financial year.  

You know, once you start by saying, oh, you see, we are protecting it; protecting it for what?  If it is inefficient from the start, let us scrape it, we are tired of subsidising these parastatals which are actually crippled us, we put in money, it does not make any profit, then the following year, you subscribe, no profit, why should we keep these?  We should privatise, we leave it to those with Insurance Companies to run it, if it cannot run on its own.  I think it would do a better job like Uganda Manufacturers Association, I think it is doing a better job, a good one, other than this one where you are proposing to protect it from the start, you are encouraging laziness.  I think we should stop and let it, if it cannot survive, we should come back for its last funeral rites here and I will attend if I am still in the House.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR RUKIKAIRE:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I want to thank all the Members who have contributed to this very important discussion and I will try and be extremely brief by initially noting that there has emerged a consensus in the House on the main issues which were presented to you yesterday and which have been subject of extensive discussion in the Sectoral Committee and let me repeat here that the Amendments which are being proposed and circulated plus the main points made in my statement yesterday, are results of intensive discussions within the Sectoral Committee with the Ministry of Finance and reflect a consensus which developed between us and the sectoral Committee; they are not say, just presentation of the Ministry of Finance, but they are a result extensive consultation which has gone on.  Now, the main issues about which I see a consensus emerging are:

(i) The Commission is necessary and should be included and,
(ii) That instead of the Commission being put under the direction of the Central Bank, it is more aptly put under the Minister for Finance who will then be responsible to this House.
Those are major issues and I believe that the consensus has emerged.

(iii) A consensus has also emerged in my view with some minor variations on the question of capital levels and some minor Amendments have been put there, but the levels of the capital to be paid by both local and foreign Insurance Companies remain as they are and I do not see any major deviation from those three areas and I am extremely happy and grateful to that consensus.

Now, I will not touch on everything that has been said; I am just going to pick up issues where I believe we need to respond, because they are substantive issues, which may constitute some Amendments.  First of all, I want to thank hon. Rwakakooko for saying that the company law should be updated as it will help even to facilitate the smooth operation of this Statute.

Secondly, the revision also with the financial institutions; law is called for also made by the same Member and I think that on that, we have all agreed.  

Hon. Mayengo made several points and before he left this House, he wrote to me a note indicating that he will be moving some Amendments, which are not far-reaching, but he is not here now and if we proceed, I hope we may have to change these things without his Amendment.  But his main point on capital levels and also on suggestion that we could perhaps in order to accommodate the interests of Ugandans, make a provision that foreign Insurance Companies should have Ugandans as share holders.  I believe that, that is a substantive proposal which should be considered and should be subject, perhaps for an Amendment of this law at a later stage, because, if we have to go and re-draft this one, accommodate that provision which may affect other investment laws, I will not believe this is the time to deal with that and therefore, while I respect and accept his suggestion, I think that the time to deal with that one, should come later.

There has been quite a lot of reference about Health Insurance and I still also think that this is a very important area, but I would like to accept the proposal made by hon. Yona Kanyomozi that, perhaps it would be better for us, for the time being leave the question of health insurance as a matter to be dealt with by Government and evolve an insurance scheme for health which would then be operated independently and when our insurance industry has grown sufficiently, then we can see how later on, the health insurance could also be integrated in the overall insurance by the private sector.

Hon. Wanendeya, who is not here, yesterday said we should regionalise insurance by having for example, 50/= million as the level of required capital and we should have small insurances established in various corners of the country.  I do not believe that this is viable or is possible, because, I think you would be putting at risk the money of many people and I do not believe that Government would be prepared to take a risk by putting the level of capital for insurance merely to accommodate those who cannot afford to start Insurance Companies at that level.  So, I do not support that proposal.

Now, there has been a mention here that Article 93 will be subject to abuse and this was raised by hon. Yona Kanyomozi who is not here.  Unfortunately or fortunately, let me make it clear that the purpose of this Article is to make sure that there is no fraudulent establishment of insurance policies which are meant to benefit people who have determined that so and so is going to die before me and therefore, that is why it is trying to make sure that where a parent insures a minor or vice versa, the purpose for that kind of insurance is so close between two people who have a close relationship, that the thought that I could kill the other or he could kill me, really does not exist.  If hon. Kanyomozi has any other reason how we can accommodate his views, while maintaining this particular thing, I would welcome to have a look at it, but that is the purpose and therefore, I propose that we retain Article or Clause 93 as it is.  I am happy that hon. Sebaana Kizito yesterday was able to tell us that his own Insurance company is in the process of simplifying the documentation which is a welcome sign and therefore, this would simply and ease the work of the Commission.  

I support hon. Sebaana Kizito’s point that one should not limit the scope internationally covered by an Insurance company. In other words, it is being stated that an Insurance established here in Uganda should not insure in another country and vice versa.  We debated this at great length in the Sectoral Committee, a propendulent view there was that we should open up this Insurance, so that the policies can be covered across the border, but the majority of the Members of the Sectoral Committee felt that this kind of segregation to protect perhaps the invasion of the Uganda Insurance business by foreigners was necessary, but I took the point he made yesterday and I believe that once this new law we are going to introduce has been working, it will be necessary and helpful, to take into account the point made by hon. Sebaana Kizito, with a view of amending it after we have seen the working.

Hon. Kaheru has made very many useful points and he has particularly mentioned that the Commissioner of the Insurance was not adequately empowered.  I want to make it very clear and also in the same vein, assure hon. Wassa Nkalubo, that the provisions under this Statute, are meant to empower the Commission to be able to deal effectively and autonomously with the insurance industry and various functions have been spelt out, the manner of its work has been spelt out and there should be no fear whatsoever, that the Minister for Finance is going to interfere in the work of the Commission unless he is required to do so under the provision of this law.  

Recently or last year was it, we passed a new law making the Bank of Uganda an autonomous body and I can assure you that the system you established so far, is working extremely well and we have made sure that we have the minimum amount of the interference with the work of the Bank of Uganda and therefore, I want to assure the House that the Commission will be fully protected by this law and the Ministry of Finance will have no interference, except as required by the law.

Hon. Kaheru has also talked about there being no response from the Commissioner previously and also accept that.  He has also made a point; if a member of the public is not happy, he should go to the Commission.  I agree with you entirely, he is not here, hon. Kaheru, unfortunately, I agree with him entirely and I will be proposing when the Amendments come that one area which we had amended to cut out reference to any other relevant responsibilities which the Commissioner may have to carry out rather than specific could be re-introduced; so that we are able to give them a bigger latitude to deal with some of the issues which Members have raised, but which are not covered specifically by the individual functions of the Commission.  

Now, there is the hon. expert behind there, and I would like to meet him perhaps tomorrow morning so that he can enumerate me before if we are not going to do the Amendments today on some of the issues he has raised; one is the first refusal, I would like to know more about that one, but the deletion of Article 83 which we have proposed, I do not believe that, that is correct 93 - I see, okay, well, that one I have already taken care of and I explained why I think it must be maintained; I thought you were referring to 83 which I thought must be maintained at all costs.

Now, let me rush quickly, to the points made hon. Wasswa Nkalubo.  Here, again, now I am at interndemn with his proposal that we should open up in insurance, particularly the coverage of imports and he made reference to a particular section of the Clause so that foreigners can cover it.  This would be my view, but here again, I am trying to be as democratic as possible and to try and avoid new conflicts, because, we have spent so much time in the Sectoral Committee and this is a consensus.  I therefore, while agreeing with him, I want to be sure that when we introduce this Amendment to cover what he is saying, it should not be opening up a pandora’s box and this also refers to another section, I think he referred to in the same vein and we can deal with it when we come to Amendments.  I have explained the question of the Secretary to the Committee.

Now, Hon. Wasswa Nkalubo’s point which is well taken and I must apologise about the Board.  I have been informed by our Legal Adviser that this was a typographical error and where we have referred to the Board, we are supposed to be referring to the Commission and I apologise for that and I thank hon. Rwakakooko for the clearance which he has made.  

On the question of Corporation tax, I really do not think this is a major issue.  This is a service institution set up Government, not as a profit making body but as a regulatory body as we will be setting up many regulatory bodies as we liberalise; we have one on coffee, we have one on cotton, we are going to have one on telecommunications, we have so many others, which are not profit making bodies and therefore, we should not impose on them the need for paying Corporation tax.  Otherwise, you will turn them into unscrupulous Government bodies and before you know where you are, they are chasing more of a profit rather than protecting peoples insured money.  So, hon. Chairman, with those few words, I wish to conclude my summing up.  Thank you.

HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I would like to get some clarification from the hon. Minister on Clause 17, that is about the composition of the Commission where it says, that is Section (g) where it says, one other person.  Where is that person going to come from and may be what body is he going to represent or what criterion is he going to use to choose that one person?

MRRUKIKAIRE:  Mr Chairman, this is not an unusual practice because, in many other Bills and Statutes which have been established by this House, I can recall that the question of adding in some other eminent people, some other persons, to make the Commission or the Board more representative is something that happens.  We have reflected representatives of particular areas apart from the Chairman, the Deputy, we have now a Commissioner for Insurance from the Ministry, we have a representative of the Central and we have representatives of the Insurers Association and we have also a representative from other Uganda Insurance Brokers, as an addition of one other person is to provide flexibility for the appointing authority to be able to bring in some other very competent person to represent general interests rather than simply sectional interests.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the Bill entitled the Insurance Bill 1995 be read the Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

And with that, we have come to the end of today’s Session.  We adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.

(The Council rose at 3.30 p.m. and adjourned until 2.30 p.m. on Thursday, 30th November, l995).

