Wednesday 29th November, 2000

Parliament met at 2.43 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair

(The House was called to order)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you must have received a circular from the Clerk, but again I want to say that yesterday the Business and Welfare Committee met to consider the issue of handling pending business before we go for the Christmas recess. 

The Committee noted that we have the following Bills to consider: The Political Organisations Bill, which we are going to start dealing with today, the Parliamentary Elections Bill, the Land Act (Amendment) Bill. Others are the Land Regulations Bill, the Budget Bill 2000, NPART Statute (Amendment) Bill, the Condominium Property Bill and the Local Government Act (Amendment) Bill.  

Though I would have wanted to finish this business before we go for Christmas, I have noted that we have about 11 days remaining, and we want to finish as much business as we can. So, it was decided that starting next week, we shall start our meetings in the mornings. We shall have sessions in the mornings and in the afternoons on Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and also Friday morning, so that we can finish some of this business which is pending. It was further decided that we cut the time given to Members to contribute. So, you will be given five minutes, after five minutes you will be expected to sit down and then some other person makes his or her contribution.

I have also been asked to remind you that tomorrow at the Nile Hotel gardens there will be a civil society exhibition to which you are invited. It will be between 9.00 a.m. and midday. Please arrange your schedule to include this important event.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have no intention of derailing the process, which you have ably stated. We should go through this as fast as possible.  But I would like to get clarification on some issues from the Leader of Government Business. 

It is on record that the Second Reading of the Political Organisations Bill has been delayed deliberately by Government. It has been delayed to the extent that as we deliberate today, we do not even know whether this is the fourth edition of the report of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. In view of the elaborate constitutional provision, which necessitates the passing of this law, why has Government deliberately delayed the discussing and passing of this Bill?  

Secondly, the Members of Parliament, I am sure, would be interested in knowing how we are moving. Has it been ascertained that the copy in front of us now is the real copy we are supposed to be discussing? We have had several versions and we are in a mess. Many of us would like to know the specifics of what we are going to discuss.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think there is a bit that the Leader of Government Business should answer, but there is also a bit that this House should answer. The Political Organisations Bill was tabled in 1998 or 1990 and it became our property. I think we had a Motion by the Minister of Justice for a Second Reading, but after his Motion, we had some problems and we wanted to revisit this matter and study it. So, the Bill has been pending with Parliament and not with the Executive. This is a fact, and I think the chairperson can bear me out. The Bill was not returned to the Executive, but it has been with us.  

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What he is saying is true. After the Second Reading there were differences of opinion about the construction of the Articles of the Constitution, which were 269, 270, 72 and 73. This led to a stand off between the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and us. So, that is where this matter stands.

PROF. APOLO NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you know, there is a Minister in charge of this very Bill, and with your permission, I have no hesitation in requesting hon. Nkangi Mayanja to handle the question posed. I thank you. 

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Speaker, I can see that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister does not want to be a punch bag. The Bill I am holding and piloting through Parliament is dated 1998. Although I intend, at the committee stage, to ask for amendments to clause 24, and positive amendments at that, everything else is the same.  

MR.DICK NYAI: Mr. Speaker, while I was in the Business Committee meeting, I did mount a vigorous campaign for the early introduction of the Political Organisations Bill on the Floor of this House. At that time, you will recall that the substantive Speaker of this House told the Business Committee that Government has a right to withdraw a Bill and that Government had withdrawn the Political Organisations Bill. Mr. Speaker, can you now advise this House what methodology we adopt for Government to resubmit a Bill to this House? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I am sorry, hon. Dick Nyai, although I attended that meeting, I do not recollect the Speaker saying that the Bill had been withdrawn. I do not recollect, maybe hon. Babihuga does. But as far as I am concern, the Bill that we have for consideration is the Bill that has been here and which had a First Reading sometime ago. But since the Minister is here, could he please assist us on this.

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Speaker, as you know, I was, course in that Business Committee meeting. This Bill is one of two or three Bills that were saved specifically.  This Bill has been before Parliament.

MR.NYAI: Mr. Speaker, the reason I used the word ‘withdrawn’ was because on the Floor of this House, the same Minister of Constitutional Affairs said that this Bill had been so mutilated. Those were his own words.  Now has he brought a Bill that has been put together and is whole?

MS.BABIHUGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I seek clarification regarding our Rules of Procedure. If the Minister says that he did not withdraw this Bill for any action, our Rules of Procedure are very clear about Bills which stagnate in Committees. We are assuming that this Bill was in the Committee and has spent more than two and half years there. How come then that this Bill is not automatically law, as our Rules of Procedure prescribe?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Members, I thought we want to debate and pass the Political Organisations Bill. I remember that last week I told you that as soon as we finish the Presidential Elections Bill, we would go on to the Political Organisations Bill. And I have come today hoping to start debate on the Political Organisations Bill. I am not aware of any new Bill, I am aware of the Bill that has been with us. Why don’t we proceed with the business, hon. Members?

MR.LUKYAMUZI: This is the last submission from me. Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, in his own words, accepts that the Bill was saved. In using that word, it is one way of accepting that Government participated in that process. And when I rose up on behalf of the people I represent, I sought an explanation from the Leader of Government Business as to why that situation was arrived at, while knowing that the Constitution is clear about the provision that necessitates the putting into force of such a Bill. I have not got the explanation from the Leader of Government Business.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, when Parliament was being prorogued, there were existing Bills which had had First Reading or Second Reading, but proroguing Parliament would have meant that those Bills would have been put off. Because we did not want that, we saved these Bills, including this particular Bill. That is why we still have it. Otherwise, a new Bill for the First Reading would have been required, but now it is not required because it had the First Reading, and now we are going to the Second Reading.  That is my understanding.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: But why is Government reluctant to explain why it caused that undue delay? These are important state matters, which concern everybody, and Government has no right to delay.

MR MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Speaker, this Bill is dated 1998, and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs does not determine when this sort of Bill may come on the Order Paper. Secondly, I stood here twice and moved for a Second Reading of this Bill and twice the Committee in fact asked for more time from Parliament, and Parliament granted that time, and the hon. Member is part of Parliament.

MR.OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Either this Bill was withdrawn or it was not. Now, if it was not withdrawn, do we now take it that it was the Business Committee that was sitting on this Bill for two years in this building here?  Is that the position we should take?  

I was in the House when the hon. Minister withdrew the Bill. But I can recall that the Bill was saved. Even if it was saved, my understanding is that you save it to the next session. You cannot save a Bill or a Motion for all times. It should have been brought in the next session following the one in which it was saved. I would like this to be clarified. Thank you.

MR KYEMBA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is true that when this Bill came before this House some several months ago, the Minister did stand, and I am sure the record is there, and he appealed to this House. He did appeal to the effect that, as hon. Dick Nyai has said, the original Bill that he had presented was so mutilated that it necessitated his going back to the drawing board. 

I know the Bill was saved and we got a report from the Legal Committee, but is this report taking into account the mutilation which the Minister referred to? I have no problem with continuing with the debate, but I want the assurance that this report, which we have now from the Legal Committee, did take into account the anxieties of the Minister on the mutilation of the original Bill.

DR. OKULO EPAK: I thank you, Mr. Speaker. As far as I remember, we saved this Bill in 1998, and when we resumed in 1999, it was brought for Second Reading. That is when the Minister could not allow us to proceed because the Bill was badly mutilated. I do not know whether the Bill has since been given to a surgeon for reconstruction.  But the report of the Committee we have here is exactly the same report, which the Minister objected to. It would appear to me that the Second Reading was stopped and therefore we were no longer expecting any Second Reading.  My questions are: 
    (a) To what extent does a Bill get saved? Does it get saved indefinitely?
    (b) How many times do you subject a Bill to Second Reading?  Because this will seem to be the Second Reading? 
    (c) If we proceed the way we are and according to the Order Paper, we would be in trouble of trying to know whether the hon. Minister had reported back to the Committee, because this report of the Committee that we are receiving does not contain any new development. So, on what basis are we proceeding?  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, should I take it that this House does not want to debate this Bill and it requires another Bill? Is that the position? The observation attributed to the Minister that it was mutilated, I think, must have meant that in view of the recommendation by the Committee, the Bill was mutilated. He was entitled to make that observation. But that should not mean that we do not proceed with the Bill, consider the report of the Committee, consider its views and decide.  

But if you think the Bill is no longer there, then I think I will adjourn the House so that we look for the records and ascertain what is there. Or if the Minister wants to withdraw this and bring another one, it is really up to him. But as far as I am concern, we still have this Bill. If your view is that actually the Bill was withdrawn, then I think that ends today’s business and we shall adjourn.

MS. REBECCA KADAGA: Mr. Speaker, I would be very uncomfortable to proceed on speculations and anticipation.  We have not heard from the chairman of the Committee, we have not seen his report, and we do not know whether he has said that there is no Bill. How can we speculate that there is no Bill when we have not even started business? I think it is very dangerous for us to run the business of this House in that manner. I appeal to you, Mr. Speaker, to allow us to proceed. Let the chairman present his report and we proceed.

MS. BABIHUGA: I thank you, Sir. Is the hon. Minister in charge of Parliamentary Affairs, the Minister who is supposed to monitor the progress of Parliament and proceedings and the discipline of Parliament, in order to mislead this House? She is saying that we are speculating whereas every member knows that there has been no Bill and no communication through our pigeonholes or on the notice board regarding the business that we are handling today.  Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. chairman of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, is your report on Parliamentary Elections Bill ready?

MR.WANDERA OGALO: It has not yet been run. It is not ready.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the report on the Land Act (Amendment) Bill ready?

MR.DICK NYAI: I would like to seek some procedure, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What procedure? Let me ascertain this so that we see how to proceed. There is uncertainty about today’s business, namely the Political Organisations Bill. Now, if this uncertainty is there, I have to ascertain what the true position is, meanwhile we proceed with other Bills. I am trying to ascertain whether the report on the Land Act (Amendment) Bill is ready. I do not know who can assist me on this.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, the report is ready but it seems my chairperson is nowhere to be seen.

MRS.SALAAMU MUSUMBA: Mr. Speaker, I am really disturbed by the way we are moving. I am aware that we have a Business Committee. They should be sorting out this business in an organised way. How can we be – (Interjection) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you came in late. I told you that the Business and Welfare Committee sat yesterday and lined up this business. As far as the Business Committee is concerned, today we should be dealing with the Political Organisations Bill, but Members have indicated that they think that the Bill is not there and that the records will show that the Bill is not there. So, I have to ascertain this by checking with the records. Meanwhile, I do not want to waste your time with no business. That is why I am trying to find out which business is ready so that we proceed with that business meanwhile we check our records. This is what I am trying to do.  

MR.BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr. Speaker, two months ago I got communication from the hon. Aston Kajara, chairperson of the Sessional Committee on Natural Resources, that the Committee report on the Land (Amendment) Bill 2000 was ready. 

Similarly, I got further communication from him that his Committee had accomplished the consideration of the Land Regulations, 2000 and a report is also ready. If it were possible, after about 15 minutes we could start on this business. Because even an hour ago, I met the chairman of the Committee, hon. Aston Kajara, in the lobby and he said that our business is ready, and maybe tomorrow, when the other business is finished, it could be handled. But even today after 30 minutes, I am quite sure this business could be handled.

MR.OKELLO OKELLO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am a member of the Committee on Natural Resources. It is true that the report is ready, but as we all know, we do not have offices here. We keep our documents at home. To come and tell this House that in 15 minutes time our documents will be here is not proper. So, we do not have the document. The report is ready but we cannot debate it today because the documents are at home.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. It seems we have doubts about the Political Organisations Bill, the Parliamentary Elections Bill is not ready, the Land Act (Amendment) Bill is ready and I think the Land Regulations. Today we do not have any other business. So, I will adjourn the House until tomorrow when we shall consider the Land Act (Amendment) Bill. The House is adjourned. 

(The House rose at 3.13 p.m. and adjourned until 2.00 p.m. on Thursday, 30th November, 2000)

