Wednesday, 30 November 2011

Parliament met at 2.43 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you for this sitting. We have a lot of work today. The Members would like to raise some matters and I need to make a statement about issues of public importance. They are becoming many and some of them do not qualify. The qualification for this kind of matter is that it must be urgent. If it is not urgent, then there are other provisions and rules under which you can bring that same matter. You can raise a motion like hon. Nambooze did yesterday. You can bring a Parliamentary oral question to which ministers would respond directly.

For a matter to qualify to be of urgent public importance, it must be urgent and it could not have been handled in any other way. If it happened yesterday, and there was no way of dealing with it, then you bring it to the notice of the House. So, we are going to become a bit more stringent when we are dealing with these matters and accepting them.

Hon. Members, first assess before you come to the Speaker to see whether the matter you are coming to raise is actually urgent. If it is not urgent, then find other ways of bringing it.
They are becoming many and yet most of them do not actually qualify to be urgent matters.

Committees are sitting. There is a lot of work that has been to committees.  A motion was brought to this House and many Bills have been sent to committees. We do not know what has happened to the committees. I think we should get periodic reports from chairpersons of committees on the progress they are making on the respective Bills through the Bill tracking mechanism we are trying to devise. We need the House to be informed all the time so that we know what is happening in the committees and we see how to plan the business of the House when we begin to receive reports, second readings of Bills and many other things that happen to Bills.

Hon. Members, thank you very much. I wish you a good debate this afternoon.

2.47 
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Regarding the matter of national importance, I am yet to really grasp what exactly you are trying to say. I do not know how we shall determine the importance because we have got floods, for instance, in Kawempe. Hon. Lukyamuzi brought up that issue and there was money also, which was passed by Parliament to that effect. People are suffering, businesses are being run down and it is becoming terrible.

I feel very emotional and may not want to take it to another level which is comprehensive, yet, it is a matter of national importance and I want a reaction from the minister, say of transport or any other relevant minister.

I do not know that urgency that you are talking about. Maybe you can clarify to me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, honourable member, it is within the discretion of the Speaker. The Speaker will examine the matter and we will agree after discussion. We will discuss it and say, is this really urgent? Are there no other ways of dealing with this? It is not like you will be stopped from coming to the Speaker to discuss it. 

You will come and we discuss it. It will be up to the Speaker to say, “This is urgent, bring it up on the Floor of Parliament.”

It is also important that you come early so that we can alert the Leader of Government Business and the Chief Whip to alert the ministers. Otherwise, you will come and raise it here, it sits here, and it stops being urgent because raising it here does not immediately provoke an emergency response to it. 

It needs to be coordinated. For example, I am sitting in the Chair here and then I get a note from a Member that there is an urgent matter they would like to raise now. How do we handle that? It is a process; we consult and we agree that 	it is urgent and find a way of handling it. However, there are other avenues in the rules. If the matter is comprehensive, complicated or big, it might require a motion.
 
2.52
MRS BETTY BAKIREKE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): The guidance I am seeking Mr Speaker is how we are supposed to deal with the petitions we present here. It is as if we have to chase after them from the Office of the Clerk to the committee, then to the chairperson and at times, this way of working is not easy; it makes work very difficult.
 
It is a month now since I presented a petition here from the leaders of Mukono, Wakiso and Mpigi districts about the bus transport services which are due early next year, but I have not received any communication from the committee. I do not know what I should do in order to cause the committee to deliberate on this matter.

I agree that we are quite a big number. Each one will rise up from the constituency and there will be urgent business, definitely, on a daily basis, and there is no way Parliament can accommodate all these.

I do not know whether it would not be reasonable if we decided as Parliament that we get a particular day where we have the ministers and have our questions and concerns raised and answered there and then, because in the last Parliament, I saw that questions which had been asked as far back as 2007/2008 were answered in 2010.
 
It makes the whole issue of raising questions even useless. The guidance I am seeking, therefore, is whether it would not be proper through you, Mr Speaker, to move that we have a particular day when the ministers are here and we can raise these concerns and we have the answers there and then.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, questions are normally called questions for oral answer; they are actually written answers. In other words, you need to give the minister the question in advance so that they come and give you a comprehensive response.
 
Even the Prime Minister’s question time in the House of Commons which people refer to very much, the questions are sent in advance. That is why he comes with a list of the things he has to respond to. You do not just shoot the question from there and they answer.

You cannot get a comprehensive answer on the spot. I do not think anybody would be ready to give a very comprehensive response.

Even questions for oral answers are given and then the ministers are given time to come and respond to them. If there is laxity in enforcing the periods within which the minister should make this response, then we should take it up.

Honourable ministers, you are now on notice that these matters are going to have answers quickly so that Members lose confidence in the rules that help them in their representative role. I accordingly sound this up and I have seen a list of questions for oral answer that are coming on the business to follow and they are mainly from hon. Alice Alaso. I have not seen any other. 

I have seen about seven questions from Hon. Alaso on different matters, they are already on the Order Paper under business to follow.

On the issue of petitions, any matter that is sent to a committee must be there for a definite period of time only. It cannot be there forever and not for a year certainly. Even Bills, the sixty days’ rule applies. Bills cannot stay in the committee for more than 60 days and that is why you heard me earlier saying that we are now going to require chairpersons of committees to be giving us periodic updates, possibly weekly updates, on what they have done with the business before them so that the House knows what is happening in the committees. Members have brought in petitions, Members have brought in motions, they have raised issues that have gone to committees and they need to know their progress.

I think it is only good practice for us to begin enforcing some of these things.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, pursuant to Rule 35(1), I raised a matter of public concern about the current floods that have invaded the capital city of Uganda.

The minister in charge assured the House that she would be responding to my concerns today. I have not seen any sign of her here and I take it that this government does not seem to know that Government must be effective in a multiparty dispensation. Otherwise, the Opposition could grab power there and then.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, early in the morning, the first Order Paper that we issued had the honourable Minister for the Presidency among the people to give presentations today. In the middle of the morning, I received the write-up from the minister, but then she was told that a comprehensive document like that should go through Cabinet.

She came to me now just before I came in and said that she could not do it now because it has to first go to Cabinet. When it is given a comprehensive treatment, then it comes back.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I am happy that you are trying to bring order to the House because some of us had failed to perform our duties because we have been getting directives from here. Sometimes, we assure the House when we do not have researched information and that had become a very big problem for us.

You say that I am going to do this, then it is captured in the Hansard and automatically, it will be followed by the assurances committee. But with written questions, they add value even to our debate because I get it and I will make sure that I get researched information which will also be backed with money, knowing that money is there or not.

Like the issue of floods, I would like to call upon my colleagues, you do not need to wait to come to Parliament to ask or raise your issue. By the time you come to Parliament, maybe two or three people have already died.

I think the best way would be to work together because I know that Parliament is not an independent body from Government. It acts independently, but it is part of Government and, therefore, I call upon my colleagues, if you have any urgent matter, our doors are open. You can consult us on phones or you can walk there. All the ministries are in Kampala and with that, you will get a rapid response, but to wait and come to Parliament, then you ambush the minister on the Floor and you expect to get a comprehensive answer, makes it more complicated.

3.02
MR MAWANDA MARANGA (NRM, Igara East Constituency, Bushenyi): I rise on an issue of national importance. This is the point of establishing a national data bank and identification solution, commonly referred to as the ID project. This matter has been appearing in the media of late and to me I feel that it is something we have to look at as Parliament. 

By way of flashback, the Government had attempted to set up a national data and identification solution in 2005. The process went on very well, but midway or towards the end of the project, the IGG stopped the project citing corruption on the part of Government officials.

Then the Director of PPDA advertised that the project be done again. 

The idea of this project was to establish a data bank that would have all the necessary information about our population and to enable Ugandan citizens have identity cards. Those who cannot get identity cards will get pin numbers and non-residents will get non-resident permits or cards.

This would have helped various Government agencies to interface and access information easily. For example, Uganda Revenue Authority has a problem of getting to know the tax payers, but if this data bank had been put in place, it would have been easy for URA to be able to establish the number of tax payers available in this country.

Secondly, the issue of illegal immigrants in this country; the project intended to put super gates at all entry border points of Uganda to be able to establish people who have entered into the country. When they are going back, if someone fails to go back then he can be traced. Recently, the Minister of Internal Affairs was in the papers saying that they have not processed work permits for foreigners because they have failed to establish the number of illegal immigrants and the number of people who exactly want the work permits.

Later, after the whole exercise had been abandoned, some people smuggled some suppliers to the President and the project was awarded to them. From that point, the project became suspect.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to explain the word “smuggled”?

MR MAWANDA: Yes, they disregarded the PPDA regulations. The directors of PPDA had advised that Government re-establishes the system of outsourcing the service providers. The process was not followed, but people were taken to the President without following the procedures and the contract was awarded. In the earlier arrangement, which was to Build, Operate and Transfer, Government was going to spend, not upfront, Shs 200 billion to be able to establish a national data bank that would have all the relevant information about this country. 

They would also produce identity cards for citizens and non-citizens. But somebody was brought in to only produce identity cards and avail technology at a cost of Shs 186 billion without building any infrastructure. We lost a project that was going to set up a very good infrastructure platform to build on for the furtherance of Government operations at Shs 200 billion. Now you can see that the person who was given the Shs 186 billion is now producing one identity card in a year. So, how long will it take Ugandans to get identity cards? The contract was signed two years ago, but from what I read in the newspapers, they have produced only 400 identity cards, which is not true. I am saying this because the only identity cards we can talk about are four, which have been issued to known people.

Mr Speaker, -(Interruption)

MR BAKABULINDI: Mr Speaker, I have listened to my colleague and I know that he has raised a very important issue to the extent of saying that some people smuggled other people, not identified, to the President, for him to allow the signing of the contract. But is it in order for the honourable member holding the Floor to simply mention that some people are good smugglers without saying their names? Is he also in order to say that the President can be used by smugglers to give people a go ahead to do contracts? Is he in order to proceed without mentioning the names of those people?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you just seek clarification from the Member holding the Floor? Just ask for clarification because I do not see any point of order?

MR BAKABULINDI: Okay, with your advice, can he clarify and substantiate to us who those people are? (Laughter)

MR MAWANDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. But I think I already answered his question. If you do not follow the PPDA Regulations for outsourcing the service providers as it is the norm in this country, what does he want us to call them? They were actually smuggled. If they were not smuggled, why were not they allowed to follow the procedures of procuring service providers in this country? (Ms Kabakumba rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what point do you rise?

MR MAWANDA: I seek your protection, Mr Speaker.

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Mr Speaker, you clearly guided that the honourable minister should seek clarification. When we make statements in this House, we are expected to substantiate them with evidence. I am saying this because when someone just says that people were smuggled, by who? And who were those smuggled? The Member holding the Floor is not even sure of the people who were smuggled and those who smuggled them. That is one. 

The second point is that he is not informed about the identity card project. Yes, officially, about four people have received their cards, but there are other cards that are ready. This project – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, what is the point of order?

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Is he in order to make sweeping statements without providing concrete evidence to substantiate them?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My understanding of what the honourable member has said is that some people were taken to State House in disregard of the PPDA procedure and to him that is smuggling. Hon. Member, please wind up.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker –(Laughter)– to proceed on the issue I was raising on the Floor of Parliament, I would like to inform Members that this earlier project that Government had started on would have cost us Shs 200 billion. However, as we talk, the government is likely to spend more than Shs 500 billion on production of the identity cards. I am wondering whether the Leader of Government Business is aware that very soon four similar projects will be running in the country on the same subject. 

This national data bank was supposed, as I said, to cover all the information about the population, but the Uganda Bureau of Statistics is going to carry out a census about people’s names, religion and related information – they are looking for Shs 150 billion, which is part of the work that this project is supposed to be doing.

National Planning Authority, under the East African Community, is going to carry out a human resource survey and it is also asking for more than Shs 80 billion, but looking for the same information from people – name, religion, age and other details.

Bank of Uganda, through its Credit Reference Bureau, is doing the same thing. So, like I said, very soon, we shall have staff from four projects meeting in one home, but asking for the same information at the expense of the taxpayer. 

If Government had interests in this project, it would have followed the procedures; it would have implemented the first project and would have saved Shs 300 billion. I am even told that this supplier signed an agreement with Government and he is now hiding behind that agreement claiming that Government has breached it and is asking for compensation. But remember, after picking that compensation, they will carry their bags and go.
 
So, this is a very serious matter on the part of Government and to us, as Members of Parliament. In that regard, Mr Speaker, allow me ask for the following information: One, is how many years will Ugandans, most especially my people from Bushenyi, take to get their identity cards.

Secondly, how integrated is the present project that the present company is trying to implement? Will it allow the various Government agencies and ministries to interface with it in order to access relevant information? 

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, we would like to get value for money. Is this project worth the cost these people are quoting? I would like to get clarification on those issues from the minister. You know during the budget process I raised the same issues, but they were ignored. Hon. Byabagambi said that when we raise issues –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you can now resume your seat.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you can now see what I was talking about. This matter should have been substantially raised either through a question or a proper motion for it to receive proper treatment. This matter is supposed to take us 15 minutes under the rules and I am going to observe that rule. I am here to enforce those rules.
  
The pre-current contributor took more than ten minutes and so we have less than four minutes to accommodate the minister to make a response and to allow other Members contribute, which is not fair to this process. However, I hope you heed to my call. Substantial matters of this nature must be given fair treatment through other procedures of our rules that give them more time and latitude. 

In the circumstances, I will now apply my prerogative to extend debate on this matter by ten minutes and will give two minutes to each Member who wishes to speak to it before I give the minister time to respond. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, procedure. As you earlier on stated, this is a very serious matter and how he has raised it also has raised even more concern. I do not know whether it is procedurally right. I know we have the Leader of Government Business here, but is it procedurally right to debate this matter when there is no substantive Minister of Internal Affairs under which that falls? (Interjections) It is a procedural matter. Let the Speaker guide me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I see the Vice-President here, the Leader of Government Business; I see the IT minister, I see an array of ministers. This House is properly constituted to handle any business. My caution is that the matter is quite big and it should have been handled in a comprehensive way. 

I will allow debate in a limited way. You should take two minutes each. 

3.13
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to address part of the concern of the honourable member over the issue of what is now known as the National Information Security System. This issue has dragged on for a long time, but I think the call from the Member is legitimate and my word would be that you ask the Leader of Government Business to prepare a comprehensive statement on the status of this project. Because part of the machinery was brought; part of the machinery remained in Germany; part of the money was paid; part of the money was not paid, so it is not going to be possible for any other person except the minister to come here and give the status of the project. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 	
	
3.14
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): This afternoon, I happened to have got my ID, but when I look at the ID, it has a lot of anomalies. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What does it look like?

MR OCHOLA: Mr Speaker, this is the ID. [Hon. Member: “Lay it on Table.”] Why do you want me to lay my ID on the Table? This is our national ID and I expect it to have the address from where I am born. These officers asked for both our residential addresses and where we are born. So, I had expected it to have details of where I am born - my village. I provided that information, but in the ID it is not appearing. (Interjection) No, I did. It is me who was there. You were not there. Maybe you will check with yours. 

Mr Speaker, this is what is happening; and apart from being slow, if we are now also going to have these mistakes, when shall Ugandans down there in the village get these IDs? Thank you very much.

3.16
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The matter raised by my colleague is very important. I happen to sit on the Committee of ICT. This matter was raised yesterday in our committee and I think the committee is handling it very well. Yesterday, we had several ministers appearing before the committee. The Minister of Information, Hon. Karooro Okurut; the Minister for ICT also appeared before our committee. We had the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Internal Affairs, who was also appearing to answer some of the issues we were raising as a committee. 

In our interaction with them, we found out that they are supposed to work hand–in-hand. Initially, the Ministry of Internal Affairs was supposed to handle the activity, but because of the heavy schedules therein, the President gave a directive that NITA-Uganda handles part of the registration and the exercise of data collection. (Interjections) NITA-Uganda stands for National Information Technology Authority Uganda, which is supposed to collect all the information concerning all the citizens of the Republic of Uganda who are going to get the IDs. The exercise was supposed to be worked upon together with the Electoral Commission, considering the registers and the registration which was used in the last election.

Mr Speaker, we found out that a contract between Government of Uganda and Mühlbauer was signed totalling to 64 million Euros, which is the total cost of the full activity. According to the activities so far done, a total of 47 million Euros has so far been spent. And –(Member timed out.)

3.19
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This issue is very important to the country. I agree with hon. Kyanjo that it is important for the ministers concerned to bring a detailed paper here to the House so that we take more time in debating it because it is a very important issue. 

However, let me just point out a few things. The presenter of this issue said that there are two projects; the national ID and the databank. The project in question is only concerning the national ID. However, the data bank is in a way related to the issue of the national ID. For that matter, NITA-Uganda, which is the body set up under the Ministry of ICT, is working to see that the national ID project and data bank are properly integrated. NITA-Uganda is also working to ensure that this project, when properly handled, will serve not only the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Directorate of Immigration, but will also serve other departments within Government including the department of registration of births and deaths. It will also serve Police and other bodies. 

This project is actually a multi-sectoral project where several ministries are concerned and not just the Ministry of Internal Affairs, but the Ministry of ICT and several departments within Government are also concerned. And, of course, all of us are concerned and we would wish to see that this project is successfully implemented. 

As of now, the project is stuck at the implementation stage because of lack of funds to carry out the registration of people. The project provided for purchase of equipment, software and so on, but –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, very much. Hon. Members, the issue is with the committee; the issue is here. The Shadow Minister of Internal Affairs has made a statement. Let us hear from the Minister in charge of ICT and then we close this up.  
 		
3.21
THE MINISTER OF COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think this case, as you have rightly said, has been very well responded to by hon. Kyanjo, the Shadow Minister for Internal Affairs, and I must commend him for effectively representing the Minister of Internal Affairs. That degree of cooperation is indeed worth being emulated by other shadow ministers. 

We entirely agree with the Speaker on the very important nature of this project. It is true that Uganda has not performed very well in this matter. The project should have been done many years ago. However, the project is now gradually on course, but it has faced some delays. It is true that substantial equipment has already been imported in the country. It is also true that some of this equipment was used in the last elections by the Electoral Commission and it is also true that this project is going to cover a number of areas not only the ID cards for Ugandans, but also the national data base, to also handle issues of citizens being registered and many other issues. In fact, it is going to be the cornerstone for the e-government and for even many other things to do with electronic communication. So, Mr Speaker, it is right that the minister responsible on behalf of Government comes and makes a comprehensive statement. It is also true by the way that this project is really a governmental project and a number of ministries are actively –(Interruption) 

MRS BAKIREKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I am seeking from the minister is that now that we are aware that the national identity cards have not been issued to Ugandans, is it proper for the different organs of Government, especially the law enforcement organs, to continue demanding identity cards from Ugandans as a way of identification especially now that we are entering into the festive season where law enforcement organs will be very vigilant? The clarification I am seeking is that is it proper that Ugandans should be requested to identify themselves by way of providing identity cards? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, since we do not have the perfect identity card for all Ugandans, some alternative means of identifying Ugandans has to be used. Some of these may be cards and some of these may be other means of identification. So, I do not have to give too many examples because you may find that for a headmaster to identify parents, he may want letters from the LCs. You may find that a church leader may use other means. A catechist may say I want a letter of baptism. Therefore, this requires ingenuity to fill the gap before we get –(Interruption) 
 
MR NGANDA: Mr Speaker, this is a very serious matter. I am walking in the evening, Police stops me and they tell me that to allow me go ahead, I must identify myself. A Government minister is telling Parliament that every individual can concoct his own identification, whether it is a letter of catechism and others and he is providing no solution. Is he, therefore, in order to tell Ugandans to begin concocting identifications when it is the responsibility of Government to have a uniform identity card for the citizens? 

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. my good friend would not create words that I have not used and attribute them to me, but really, this is a very serious matter and the sooner we get ID cards, the better, and the government is determined to ensure that this programme is accelerated so that we can get the ID cards as soon as possible. Government departments are working together, ministries are working together and as you have heard, the ICT committee yesterday had a long discussion on this matter and the ICT committee is going to meet the officials and ministers responsible within two weeks to further discuss this subject, but meanwhile, the minister responsible will come to this House and give a comprehensive statement –(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, this is a very important matter, especially in view of the fact that we all know that the NRM Government has been in power for over 25 years - over a quarter of a century. The lamentations being framed by the honourable minister cannot be accepted by the Opposition. First of all, as we speak, the graduated tax ticket that would have created an alternative is no longer functional. Not everyone is a driver so as to have a driving permit. As we speak, the LC that would have provided an alternative is constitutionally outlawed because court ruled that those that occupy the offices right now are occupying them unconstitutionally. So, where do we stand? Are you telling this honourable House that even after spending 25 years in power, you have no mechanism of getting your people identified? What are you talking about? (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, my good friend, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi knows that although there are no formal – I am told that he is now the acting Leader of the Opposition; congratulations – and he knows that although, we do not have formal identity cards, it is the efficient machinery of the NRM Government that has been able to have law and order very well kept and indentify people using the various means available to Government. Therefore, Government is able to fill the gap for identification of people pending the formal issuance of the national identity cards. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think the process should be quicker so that people can be saved from this situation. 

3.30
DR JEREMIAH TWA-TWA (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Mr Speaker, I rise under Rule 35 of our Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, on an issue which is affecting the people of Budaka and the people of Mbale, and it is the wetland of Namatala, which actually constitutes literally the border or the demarcation between Mbale District and Budaka District. It is sad to report to you and the country at large that on the early morning of Friday 18th at around 8.30, four people were brutally butchered in the Namatala wetland. I will not say that they were killed, but they were literally butchered. They had gone to tender their gardens because both sides are using that area to grow rice and yams. Now, these few people from my constituency, from the sub-county of Mugiti, had gone early morning to harvest their rice, but they were attacked and brutally hacked by people from the Mbale side.

The three people were really brutally cut. They cut off their heads; they opened them up and removed the intestines. They cut off their hands and after doing all that within that spell of time, to show that actually, they did not care and they were aware - I think they thought there was no Government, which I object. I know we have a government. As they moved they went - according to the report that I received - and set fire to burn the head which they had cut off -(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, allow the honourable member to finish.

DR TWA-TWA: They went ahead to wave the intestines in the air like this. That was the scenario of the day. What is sad to note and to report to you is that to date, those people have not been brought to book, but the relevant authorities have been informed. The people of Budaka are waiting to receive a response and to see to it that the law takes its course. I know this is mandatory. We thought that Kony was defeated, but if we are not careful Kony might be moving close to us in Mbale because these acts of hooliganism are synonymous with Kony. 

So, I am bringing this matter to the Floor of the House for two or three reasons -(Hon. Oromait rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member is raising an issue of urgent importance. He has the information. Let him raise it and then you can debate.

DR TWA-TWA:  As I was saying, I am bringing this issue on the Floor of the House for two or three reasons. First, I would like the government to ensure that thorough investigation is done to establish the motive of these murders and to bring the culprits to book. 

The second thing is that I know that some of these people are hiding behind the issue of the border of the district between Budaka and or Bukedi and Bugisu. If that is the case, Mr Speaker, I am preparing a motion to bring to the Floor of the House so that you can wisely advise on how this issue of the border or the boundary between Bukedi and Bugisu, or for that matter between Mbale and Budaka, is settled once and for all so that people do not hide behind it. I am really moved by this –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, are you formally giving this House notice of your motion under the rules?

DR TWA-TWA: I think – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, that amounts to giving - I just want you to clarify that you are now giving the House notice that you intend to bring a motion on this subject. 

DR TWA-TWA: Yes, I am giving this House notice that I intend to bring a motion to this House so that it can be given the justice it deserves.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the motion is in relation to the border issue between Mbale and Budaka. Is that what you are saying?

DR TWA-TWA: Yes, Mr Speaker. I beg to rest my case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the 15 minutes rule applies. So, I will ask the hon. Isiko, hon. Mutyabule, the hon. Member from Mbale and finally, my friend from Usuk. 

3.37
MR ASUPASA ISIKO MPONGO (NRM, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issues that have been raised by hon. Dr Twa-Twa are very pertinent and serious to us. As far as boundaries between districts are concerned, we have a very serious issue in Namutumba District between Namutumba and Kibuku District. Namutumba District raised a poster to show where we stop along the Tirinyi swamp. Our friends from the Kibuku side came and slashed all the sign posts and claimed that the whole swamp belongs to Kibuku. The leaders came and sat, but because it was around campaign time, they requested that the matter be put to rest until the campaigns were over because maybe they would affect the campaign trend. 

Mr Speaker, this issue of districts is a very big issue. As we create new districts, specific demarcations are not put in place and it causes a lot of wars among the people. I would request the ministries concerned with demarcation of districts to go around the country and demarcate these districts so that once and for all we know where each district stops. Otherwise, there will be a lot of internal wrangles and internal wars. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.38
MRS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. This issue of Bagwere and Bagisu is a serious one. The Namatala boundary is a serious issue because after that incident had happened, I watched on the TV with my two eyes and heard with my two ears, a Mugwere lamenting and even crying saying that three people had been killed and chopped into pieces and the assailants even went away with the meat -(Interjections)- I am reporting what he said. Mr Speaker, I almost cried because the Bagwere speak almost the same language like the Basiki of Namutumba and we take them as brothers and sisters. 

The peasant was saying that the matter has been reported to RDCs and to Police officers but nothing has been done since the 1990s. So, if this issue has been on for all that time and it has not been attended to adequately, it is time now for the Ministry of Internal Affairs to handle this as a matter of urgency and take it seriously. Otherwise, people are going to kill each other and keep on eating each other - because if one chops people and takes away the flesh what is it for? (Member timed out.) 

3.41
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. What my colleague, hon. Twa-Twa has said is quite pertinent at the moment. It is very unfortunate that Budaka lost three people at the hands of my people - as he says, but it is yet to be known. What I have to tell you, Mr Speaker, is that this issue is very urgent. Just as my brother from Busiki has said, in 1962, the boundaries were laid, but when they were constructing the Mbale-Tirinyi Road, unfortunately, the river was diverted towards Mbale, leaving the boundary in Budaka, and that is where the conflict is. In 2007, one Minister of Lands went to relay the boundary to its original area. However, the people of Budaka went and removed the boundaries thereafter.

Again in 2008, when the Ministry of Lands went there to plant the boundaries following the old boundary, it was again removed. And that is the major centre of conflict between the people of Mbale and Budaka. If the ministry can come in very fast and put back these boundaries, it will put a permanent solution to this problem. Otherwise, people in Mbale and Budaka are dying just because of the conflict of where the border passes. We already have the old boundary of 1962, but it was diverted by engineers who were building the Mbale-Tirinyi Road.

So, I am appealing to the Ministry of Lands to act very urgently. He says he is going to lay a motion, but we should not wait for that because we do not know when he will bring the motion -(Member timed out.)

3.43
MR MICHAEL OROMAIT (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have the same issue of the border between Karamoja and Apac. Two months ago, I brought a petition here from my people of Katakwi, Usuk County who were displaced during the insurgency where the Karimojong occupied their land.

To date, no response has been made by the minister in charge. A week ago, I had mobilised my people to plant trees in those areas where they were displaced as they prepared to go back. The Karimojong chased them with pangas and sticks. 

I would like to inform you, Mr Speaker, that these Karimojong, who have occupied a place in my constituency, are armed. I do not know why they are not disarming them. Karimojong have built two schools in my constituency using force. They took the animals and now they even want to take the land. In 2008, this border was given for re-surveying, but nothing was done. We gave a petition to the minister in charge of the Presidency on this issue of the border. Can we have it and be sorted out, otherwise these people want to go back to their land -(Interruption)

MS NAMOE: Is it in order for the honourable member to say that the Karimojong who are there are armed when they have just concluded disarmament? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Those are factual matters that are difficult for the Chair to ascertain and rule on. Hon. Member, you have finished. Let us draw this to a close. I had given it a limited time; the rules gave me 15 minutes and I will strictly observe the rule. I will ask the Minister of Lands to respond on the issue of the border and on the very bad situation that has been raised by hon. Twa-Twa of killings and so forth.

3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS (Ms Sarah Achieng Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My sympathies go to the people of Budaka. I watched what transpired in that area on Step Television and it was very unfortunate! When I returned to the ministry, we had a meeting wherein we were given a brief of what had happened some years back, the last being 2010 when an inter-ministerial committee was set up headed by the then Minister without Portfolio, hon. Dorothy Hyuha.

I would like to inform this House that indeed the committee tried to do something and when they went to the areas of Mbale and Budaka with the surveyors, both communities agreed that the surveyors do their work. When the surveyors started doing their work, they actually put the mark stones. A team came from Budaka, and this is the information we have, and chased the surveyors from that area. So, the surveyors had to come back. 

It took the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the DPC and others to quell down the residents and assure them that it is better for the work to be done instead of them stopping the surveyors from doing their work. When they went back to the field, this time they came with pangas and of course the surveyors took off. This was July last year and they abandoned the site completely.

So, this matter came back again and we held a meeting with my colleagues from Ministry of Local Government and Ministry of Internal Affairs, and the team is supposed to be moving to Mbale tomorrow. So, I would like to request that we be given time. We are moving tomorrow to meet the communities there and agree on the way forward –(Ms Nambooze rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, a point of information and point of clarification are within your prerogative to accept or not. So, you can accept.

MS OPENDI: Okay, I will accept.

MRS BAKIREKE: Mr Speaker, these are our ministers and they are not supposed to leave us in any doubt about an important matter like this one. The clarification I am seeking is, it seems we have this country called Uganda and we do not have people who are called Ugandans. Otherwise, I want to know the surveying, which is being done. 

What is it supposed to give us because I did not hear the honourable member complaining that this was a conflict between the administrations of one district and another about the boundary of the district and taxes for that matter. Our Constitution provides that Ugandans can settle anywhere. So, the clarification I am seeking -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Wait. The honourable who moved said there is border tension because the border has not been properly determined and he is bringing a motion. So, that is what we are talking about.

MRS BAKIREKE: The clarification I am seeking is whether we have borders inside this country where Ugandans have to obtain visas to move from one area to another.

MS OPENDI: My honourable colleague has asked what I thought was obvious, that this was a dispute between the people of Budaka and Mbale, and where does Budaka stop and where does Mbale stop? So, it is a border dispute. I think that is clear.

On the matter of Usuk, similarly, there was a team from the Ministry of Lands that was sent to actually come up with a border between Usuk, Katakwi and Napak. Unfortunately, this same team was chased away with pangas by the Karimojong. This is the information we have. We are working with the Minister for Karamoja to meet both communities because we have to sensitise them first before we can have the surveyors resume the survey work there. That is the information I have.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, information from hon. Achia.

MR ACHIA NACO: I would wish to give the minister information about that point. The issue of Usuk and Karamoja border has been on for quite long and the Minister of Lands, by then Omara Atubo, went with a team to Karamoja. They did their work well and they have a report, which has not yet appeared to Parliament. We expect that report to come here. That should have been able to help us other than us talking about spears and arrows. All those speeches are irrelevant here. We need that report of the minister. Thank you.

MS OPENDI: Thank you. I think I should conclude this. I would request that Members give us time to get down to these areas, meet the communities, resume our work and we shall give a report at an appropriate time. Thank you.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION OF UGANDANS LIVING AND WORKING IN THE UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (UAE) IN MATTERS PERTAINING TO THE OPERATIONS OF THE UGANDA EMBASSY IN UAE RELATING TO THEIR WELFARE AND ISSUES INCIDENTAL THERETO

3.52
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to present a petition by Ugandans living and working in the United Arab Emirates seeking the intervention of Parliament in matters pertaining to the operations of the Ugandan Embassy in the United Arab Emirates in relation to their welfare and issues incidental thereto.

Mr Speaker, your humble petitioners are Ugandans living and working in the United Arab Emirates presenting their petition through me and hon. Betty Nambooze, Member of Parliament for Mukono Municipality.

Your humble petitioners are seeking the intervention of Parliament in matters pertaining to the operation of the Ugandan Embassy in the United Arab Emirates in relation to their welfare and issues incidental thereto and wish to address you as hereunder.

That we are about 1,000 Ugandans living and working in different sectors in the seven Emirates of the United Arab Emirates, having come here under different engagements, and do contribute to the national economy of Uganda as can be evidenced in every year’s budget.

That for several years, the United Arab Emirates was under the Embassy of Uganda in Saudi Arabia and that in 2009, the United Arab Emirates was elevated to the status of hosting a fully-fledged embassy much to the appreciation of Ugandans living in the UAE -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the rule with petitions is that you state the background and just state the prayer because it is going to a committee. So, it is incumbent that the full text not be presented to the - you just lay it on the Table, summarise and state the prayers. You can read the whole prayers.

MR KYANJO: Thank you for your guidance, Mr Speaker. In that regard, let me first give a background.

When we met with these Ugandans, they told us their plight. They are a sizeable number living in different Emirates; seven of them. But when we travelled with hon. Nambooze, we were able to meet around 600 of them who were living in the commercial capital, Dubai.

They had many problems ranging from immigration to those at the work place, to an extent that some of them normally get cases and they have no proper representation like other colleagues from other countries.

So, they prayed that it would be necessary to have a connection between them and their embassy. They attempted to go to their embassy so that they can get in contact with it. The embassy was not forthcoming and what they heard from there was that either the ambassador had resigned or that he or she had serious intentions to resign, and they did not know what was supposed to happen next.

So, we advised them that this is a foreign country, it is not possible to go on the streets and demonstrate, but we can take the matter back home and I think it will be addressed by the relevant committee of the House.

Your humble petitioners, therefore, pray as follows: 

1.	“That Parliament establishes the actual status of the Ugandan Ambassador to the United Arab Emirates.

2.	That the Parliament causes the embassy to establish contact with the Ugandan Community in the UAE, especially in the commercial city of Dubai with a view to listening and attending to their issues.

3.	That labour export agencies to the UAE be investigated and vetted by Parliament to establish – 

(i) the terms in agreement they signed on  behalf of the employees they export with their employers in the UAE;

(ii) the proprietors of these agencies and   	 the fees they charge from job applicants.

(iii) the number of labourers they have so     	  far exported, the location of their work stations and the nature of employment secured.

4.	That the immigration department explains the circumstances under which non-Ugandans access Ugandan passports and subsequently misuse them.” 

We were informed that in a number of cases, Ugandans are rounded up and they are told, one of your colleagues committed a crime. When they reach there, the person is a Nigerian and not Ugandan but he has a Ugandan passport. Their names and that of Uganda was being tarnished and they were wondering what was going on.

5.	“That Parliament prevails upon Government to present a clear and well streamlined labour export policy.

6.	That Parliament constitutes a team to go to the United Arab Emirates on a fact-finding mission with a view to finding a lasting solution to this prevailing situation.

Mr Speaker, your humble petitioners so pray.” 

I beg to lay this petition for the consideration of this House through your guidance, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. That is a petition from hon. Hussein Kyanjo and hon. Nambooze. As is the rule, it is hereby referred to the appropriate committee, which should be the Committee on Foreign Affairs to look at this in better detail and come back to this House and see what decisions this House can take to help our citizens who are in the United Arab Emirates. Thank you very much.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

PROPOSAL TO BORROW US$ 150.0 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM (SMIDP) IN 14 SELECTED MUNICIPALITIES

4.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a proposal to borrow US$ 150.0 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group for financing the Municipal Infrastructure Development Program (SMIDP) in 14 selected municipalities in Uganda. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture it as such.

THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS GUIDELINES

4.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to inform the House that we are unable to lay this today. We are still making some consultations. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

KASESE DISTRICT POVERTY REDUCTION PROGRAM (KDPRP) FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31ST DECEMBER 2010

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee?

CAPACITY BUILDING FOR ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT IN UGANDA (EMCAB UGANDA) UGA/085 PROJECT, FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE 48 MONTH PERIOD ENDED 31ST DECEMBER 2009

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: May we have the Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee. He is not here? Next item, please. 

INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT REPORT TO PARLIAMENT FOR THE PERIOD JANUARY–JUNE 2011

4.03
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Permit me to lay on Table the report from the Inspectorate of Government to this Parliament for the period January to June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you; let the records capture it as such.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO ESTABLISH A NATIONAL SALARIES AND REMUNERATION COMMISSION

4.04
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This motion seeks to achieve a resolution of Parliament urging Government to establish a national salaries and remuneration commission, and is moved under rule 43 of our rules. It reads:

“WHEREAS the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda in its National Objectives and Directive Principles of the State Policy Objective number XI provides that the state shall give highest priority to the enactment of a legislation establishing measures that protect and enhance the right of the people to equal opportunities in development;

AND WHEREAS the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda in the National Objectives and Directive Principles of the State Policy, Objective number XIV provides that the state shall endeavour to fulfil the fundamental rights of all Ugandans to social justice and economic development and shall in particular ensure that all development efforts are directed at ensuring the maximum social and cultural well-being of the people and that all Ugandans enjoy rights and opportunities and access education, health services, clean and safe water, decent shelter, adequate clothing, food and security and pension and retirement benefits;

AND WHEREAS Article 172 of the Constitution provides that subject to provisions of the Constitution, the President may, acting in accordance with the advice of the Public Service Commission, Education Service Commission, the Health Service Commission as the case may be, appoint persons to hold or act in any office in the Public Service of Uganda of the rank of head of department or above and the Public Service Commission, the Education Service Commission, or the Health Service Commission, as the case may be may appoint persons to hold or act in any office in the Public Service of Uganda;

AWARE that despite Government, through the Ministry of Public Service, having a policy of remunerating public officers basing on their academic qualifications, experience, duties, work environment, responsibility for official assets and physical effort, huge salary disparity in Ugandan Public Service exists between wages of top civil servants in Government ministries, departments, local governments and on the other hand, Government agencies;

FURTHER AWARE that officials of the same job description and qualifications working in the Public Service are paid far less salaries compared to their counterparts in other departments and statutory bodies yet their salaries are drawn from the same source – which is the national treasury – and they are all employed by the same Government and the discrepancy manifests at all job ranks across these Government agencies;

NOTING that statutory agencies like Uganda Revenue Authority, National Social Security Fund and National Water and Sewerage Corporation, the Inspectorate of Government and others who structure their own remuneration, the board members that determine the salaries of the officers are prone to influence peddling and in some instances ministers will be required to approve salaries which are much more above than even what the ministers are earning and other public officers paid regularly by Government through Public Service;

COGNIZANT of the fact that the majority of Government ministries, departments, agencies and local governments pay top-up allowances to the employees, which at times are higher than  the basic salary earned, which shows that Government is aware that the basic salary is very low and that Government has resources to increase and harmonise the salary of Government employees;

RECOGNIZING that all the civil servants have children who go to the same schools, buy food from the same markets, go to similar hospitals and, therefore, no reason for unfairness where people have the same qualifications and maybe doing the same kind of work;

RECOGNIZING FURTHER that the wage or salary disparity and distortions in Uganda have made the best brains disillusioned with the Public Service sector leading to brain-drain, whereby countries neighbouring Uganda enjoy more of the best of Uganda’s professionals, especially in the medical and education fields, which affects the economy negatively;

CONSIDERING that the people employed by Government are highly affected by the escalating cost of living brought about by the recent hike in prices of goods and services, and that the poor pay and lack of streamlined salary and wage structure in the country can lead to low motivation and corrupt tendencies among civil servants and as a result in poor service delivery;

CONSIDERING FURTHER that there is need for equal treatment under the law, transparency, accountability and the need to create a Public Service human resource that ensures efficiency within the Public Service system and service delivery;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:

1.	That it collectively urges Government to table a bill establishing a national salaries and remuneration commission that shall be responsible for harmonisation and determination of all salaries of all employees of Government in ministries, departments, agencies and local governments.

2.	That Parliament urges Government to table a national salaries and remuneration commission bill within three months.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Are you seconding the motion? Hon. Yaguma has seconded the motion. Hon. Amongin, are you seconding the motion?

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the spirit of this motion and I think it has been brought in good faith given the plight of many public servants and the differences in remuneration. However, I have a problem in establishing whether this motion does not contradict Article 93 of the Constitution.

For colleagues who do not have the Constitution on them, I may read it. It says, “Parliament shall not, unless the Bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of the government, 
(a)proceed upon a Bill, including an amendment Bill, that makes provision for any of the following...” then it goes ahead in (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv), the essence of which if the motion is passed, then it could have a charge on the Consolidated Fund or public funds.

When you look at what the movers of the motion are seeking, Mr Speaker, they are seeking to establish a commission, which commission will have commissioners, it will have civil servants and so on, and remuneration and so on. Do we have a budget line for it? 

Two, it goes ahead to urge Government to table the Bill within three months. Okay, if the Bill is tabled within three months, if it has not been provided for in the budget - and that is the mischief Article 93 sought to cure. I am seeking clarification from the chair and actually from the government. First of all, has Government conceded to this motion, and if it has not, then can the chair maybe guide us. I do not want to say it is unconstitutional, but we may need some guidance.

MR BAKKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am also seeking your guidance. Wouldn’t it also be procedurally right, in view of this very important motion, for the Member to undertake a thorough research on the variables relating to his research? For that matter, wouldn’t it be okay for him to seek leave of the House to go and present this motion at an appropriate time when he is well equipped with the necessary information to enable us take an informed decision? In other words, wouldn’t he be in a better position to seek the leave of the House to go and do a thorough research because as you realise, his presentation is thin and yet we will be urging Parliament to take a very important decision. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When you read the motion it says, “To establish a National Salaries and Remuneration Commission which is national.” I do believe there are some laws, for instance, the Administrative Act which has a commission; we have Public Service Commission; we have other commissions and self-accounting bodies. What will happen to them if the Bill or another law - will it override the other commissions?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, thank you very much. I am looking at particularly provision (b) of the Article cited by the Shadow Attorney-General, “Proceeding upon a motion, including an amendment to the motion, the effect of which would be to make provision for any of the purposes specified in paragraph (a) of this Article”. 

The key rider to this constitutional provision is that unless that motion is introduced on behalf of the government. That is the key rider to this. The restriction is not there if it is introduced by Government or agreed to by Government. So, maybe at this stage, we should seek the response from the respective ministers whether they have agreed to it.

4.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the mover of this motion, but also inform Parliament that in 2005, Government presented to this Parliament a need to create a salaries commission. And it is this Parliament that did not accept the creation of the salaries commission. In the committee of Parliament recently, the one of Public Service and Local Government, it recommended the same salaries commission and in this, we thought that we were also including the Members of Parliament. 

While we appreciate, since Government needed a salaries review to harmonise salaries, we need more time to make further consultations as a sector ministry and as Government; have Cabinet take a decision because this has far-reaching implications financially and how it relates to other commissions that determine terms and conditions of service of civil servants, which is already constitutional. I request that we be allowed more time to look at this subject matter and we shall report back. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that was not the question I posed, honourable minister. The question was, do you have any objection to it?  Are you accepting it or not?

MRS SEZI: Mr Speaker, the Member of Parliament is moving singular. I think as Government, we are not moving with him. We would like to make more studies, there are so many issues and factors that go into issues of pay and we will come with a more informed position. (Applause)

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I appreciate the concerns of honourable members, but I would wish to clarify on some of these. One, the Minister of Public Service says they need more time. Since 2005, which more time do they need? Since 2005, they came here to present -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the issue is, it is only Government who can bring this or if the government is not bringing it and the private Member is bringing it, it needs Government concurrence and then he can bring it or she can bring it. Did you get the concurrence of the government to bring the motion? Are they agreeable to it? Did they agree with you and are they now back-tracking here so that we can see what to do with them? (Laughter)

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, I made all relevant consultations with even the Minister of Public Service; they are now back-tracking. (Laughter) I even took this subject to the caucus of NRM and all of them accepted. So, I do not know why they are now back-tracking. Nobody should bring in the issue of Members of Parliament. I am talking about Article 172 and if you go to the interpretation of the Constitution, it is very clear. They should not intimidate you. In the interpretation Article 257, Members of Parliament are not public officers. So, I do not know why they are saying that if it is created, it will now affect Members of Parliament. Article 257 is very clear -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no.

MR KWIZERA: I did enough consultations and I am ready to proceed. If they are back-tracking now, I will seek leave of this Parliament to amend the relevant provision of the Constitution. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think the issue is fairly clear and as the honourable member puts it, he had consent of the concurrence of the government initially, but it looks like there is some change of heart from the Government and that consent does not hold any more. Now, in the absence of that consent, the provisions of Article 93(b) become mandatory and, therefore, this motion cannot stand as it is -[Mr Wadri: “Guidance”]- guidance on my ruling? 

MR WADRI: (Laughter) Not on that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, can I finish with -

MR WADRI: Rt. Hon. Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, the motion, therefore, cannot stand before the House. In the spirit of putting the Hansard correctly, I would ask you to withdraw the motion formally so that we look for another day to bring it back. That is a good way of concluding it.

MR WADRI: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When I stood up on a point of guidance, you remarked and it has gone on our record. The point that I want to make and that I want to see to it that the records of Parliament are straight is that, my point of guidance does not relate to your ruling at all. 

The honourable member has to the best of my knowledge come up with a very big allegation that he did carry out extensive consultation with the Executive and in the course of his extensive consultation, he received green light, hence the reason as to why he brought this motion. 

He goes further to say that the people on the Executive have now back-tracked and the ministers are here, and this has gone on our record and will have a bearing to future actions by Members of Parliament if they decide to consult the members of the Executive – that means they could just come, accept and then when it comes to the Floor of the House, they back-track. I think we need to put right the record. Can the minister, my former and still my fellow bureaucrat, as I always refer to her, come here and tell us whether this big statement that has been made by hon. Kwizera, that he carried out extensive consultations and you agreed and you have only ditched him by back-tracking is true? Is it true so that in future we are able to know whether that is the practice that you people do in the Executive? It will then help us so that in future we are conscious and we may even ask them to document and append their signatures in the process of consultation so that when they back-track, we can say, “Here is the evidence,” because right now hon. Kwizera seems to have no evidence. Is it true?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister.

MRS SEZI: Mr Speaker, I want to thank my fellow bureaucrat for his input. I want to categorically state that hon. Kwizera did not consult my ministry and when I am talking about my ministry, I am talking about the 2nd Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Public Service, and the Minister of State for Public Service. 

I have met hon. Kwizera in the corridors of Parliament and while in the corridors, he did not even consult me, but I only found out that people were talking about setting up a salary commission. At one time I said that, “I am hearing this. Why don’t you come to Public Service and we discuss this matter that you are bringing up?” So, I want to state, Mr Speaker, that hon. Kwizera did not consult the Minister of Public Service and we are not back-tracking. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The next item – Okay, let the honourable member conclude. 

MR KWIZERA: With due respect, I want to just make two comments. I want to categorically state here that I consulted even the Minister of Public Service and the honourable minister who has been on the Floor of the House told me that the Ministry of Public Service had obtained a certificate of financial implications –(Interjections)- she is the one who told me on the Bill because they said the Bill was there. 

Secondly, I did consult my party as I told you –(Interjections)- the Chief Whip would be testifying about it and would confirm. If it is saying that we cannot pass this harmonised –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you sought my leave to make two statements and withdraw your motion. You are extending a debate that I was concluding.

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, I am betrayed by those I consulted and I think this is a betrayal, but I will not keep quiet. I thank you very much and I withdraw to present it next time. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You need to prepare – that means you need more homework and then you come back. The House will always be ready to receive and deliver on this issue. The next item.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION AND CONSIDERATION OF THE REPORT ON THE 5TH ORDINARY SESSION OF THE 2ND PARLIAMENT OF THE PAN-AFRICAN PARLIAMENT

4.29
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): I thank you, Mr Speaker. This report is moved under rule 31 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

First of all, I would like to thank the Speaker of Parliament and you the Deputy Speaker and Members of the august House, who endorsed five Members of Parliament to be designated Members of the Pan African Parliament, and those Members that you endorsed on 18th August this year are: Hon. Sarah Kataike Ndobooli, hon. Barumba Beatrice Rusaniya, hon. Onyango Kakooba, hon. Sam Otada Amooti Owor and myself, the reader of the report, Cecilia Atim Ogwal Barbara -[Hon. Member: “Barbara!!”]- (Laughter)– Imat.

Following our endorsement, the five Members met and endorsed the reader of the report to be the leader of the Uganda delegation and I gladly accepted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations!  (Applause)

MRS OGWAL: I thank you very much. In preparation for our departure to South Africa, we searched for relevant information from the Parliament of Uganda and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Unfortunately, I wish to report that we were not able to get adequate information to equip us to travel to South Africa and represent the country effectively. 

This report, therefore, is a bit extended because we wanted to provide background information so that we fully understand the role of the Pan African Parliament; and so, the report is made out of three parts: One is the background information; two we have given you what actually took place in the Fifth Session of the Second Parliament, and finally, we have given you our observations and recommendations, and conclusion.

The scope of the report, therefore, focuses on the functional role of the Pan African Parliament and gives a brief background to the establishment of AU and its operational branches, one of which is the Pan African Parliament. 

The report highlights the activities carried out during the Fifth Session of the Second Parliament, which took place in Midland South Africa from 29 September 2011 to 14 October 2011. I beg your indulgence, Mr Speaker, in paragraph 2.0 under the synopsis, let that date of 28 October be changed to 28 September. Thank you.

Mr Speaker, allow me now to give a brief background to the establishment of African Unity and the Pan African Parliament –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we are hoping that you will make a summary. I will give you 20 minutes to do that and then I will allow Members to interact and we will have a copy laid on the Table of Parliament. 

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I thought it would be good for me first to read very quickly the background and then summarise the body of the report and then give you the conclusion. I think it is important that I read the first part so that I do it faster. 

The precursor of AU was founded in 1963 when only 29 African countries had attained full sovereign statehood. These were Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo, Cote d’ivoire, Egypt, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Léone, Somalia, Sudan, Togo, Tunisia and Uganda out of the current 54 countries. 

The main declared objective of OAU at that time was to eliminate all forms of colonialism from Africa. The organisation directed its diplomatic manpower and economic resources to total emancipation of African territories still under colonial power. OAU is accredited for having succeeded in liberating the continent from the dehumanising and exploitative colonial administrations. 

As the continent entered the 21st Century, the multifaceted challenges faced by Africa as a continent rendered its capacity ineffective and OAU needed drastic transformation to create structures that would handle the new socio-political and security threats posed by the globalisation processes and internal dynamics. One of the initiatives intended to address some of the above challenges was the Lagos Plan of Action of 1980, which gave birth to the African Economic Community (AEC) in 1994, following the signing of the Abuja Treaty in 1991. 

The birth of AU, therefore, can be traced back to the year 2000 on 11th July when the Constitutive Act was signed by 53 heads of state and governments of member states. A list of members is attached and you will note that all the five East African Community countries had already attained independence at that time. It is under appendix one. 

To supplement the list of the members which I have attached, I would like to highlight some of the issues that were brought out in Article 5 of the Constitutive Act of the Protocol: 

•	The assembly of the union composed of heads of state and Government; the assembly is one branch.
•	The Executive Council, which is composed of ministers of foreign affairs or any other designated by member states;
•	The Pan African Parliament, which we are talking about now;
•	The AU Commission;
•	The permanent representative committee which is the secretariat of the executive council;
•	The specialised technical committee;
•	The economic social and cultural council 
•	The financial institutions. 

Mr Speaker, these are the branches of the organisation. 

Now, briefly allow me to give the vision, mission and role of the Pan African Parliament. It has been noted that the Pan African Parliament is an African home-grown legislative idea. Its unique character is that it is inclusive, allowing an equal number of representatives and gender sensitivity. It is distinguished internationally for accepting an equal number of representatives from member states regardless of their population size. 

The Constitutive Act stipulates that a member of the Pan African Parliament represents the people of Africa. So, while there, we do not identify ourselves as representing Uganda, but as representing Africa. The Pan African Parliament motto is, “One Africa, One Voice”.

The Act further requires that at least one woman is represented in the national delegation of the Pan African Parliament. The strategic aim of this unique character and motto is to promote a sense of one family, one destiny.

Mr Speaker, the objectives are laid out there in the document. I would not like to read them. But what I would like to say is that, the first Pan African Parliament was inaugurated on 18 March 2004 in Addis Ababa. Parliament has a lifespan of five years and that first Parliament, therefore, elapsed in 2009 and the second Parliament, which we are in now, was elected and is going to continue until next year. 

The first sitting was presided over by the chairperson of AU, His Excellency, President Joachim Alberto Chissano of the Republic of Mozambique, in accordance with Article 14(1) of the AEC Protocol. So far, there are 46 member states out of 54 members because only 46 so far have ratified the protocol and Uganda is among the 46. Therefore, we can boldly say that there are 230 members of the Pan African Parliament. 

I am proud to say that the first president of the Pan African Parliament came from East Africa and the presidency is held in rotation; that was Ambassador Gertrude Ibengwe Mongella, Member of Parliament of Tanzania. I think we need to congratulate ourselves on that.

The second president has come from Central Africa and he is the current president; Dr Moussa Idrisa Ndele, from Chad, representing the Central Africa Region. We have the vice-presidents drawn from the different regions and the lady that replaced Mary Mugyenyi is Labella Francoise from Mauritius. She is the lady who replaced our Member, Mary Mugyenyi.

The opening session was on the 3rd of October. Prior to that, we had to undergo an orientation course for one day. In that orientation course, we were given all the details and all the programmes for the entire session. That is one of the things that really impressed us. Before you start a session, you are given the full programme for the entire session. And each one of us was shown a very prestigious modern office, well-equipped with computers and everything. 

Business which was transacted during the Fifth Session of the Second Parliament is contained under paragraph 7 on page 7. I would not like to go into details.
 
Meetings of caucuses. Probably, I need to emphasise that caucuses are very important because they determine the committees to which the Members belong to. There are 10 committees contained in the report. Unfortunately, we are only five. So, we could only be Members in five committees. I would like to identify that the reader of this report, myself, I am a Member of the Committee on Cooperation, International Relations and Conflict Resolution. Hon. Onyango Kakoba - who has not revealed to us his Christian name, he says only his wife knows his Christian name – belongs to the Committee on Justice and Human Rights. Hon. Sam Otada Amooti belongs to the Committee on Transport, Industry, Communications, Energy, Science and Technology. Hon. Beatrice Barumba Rusaniya belongs to the Committee on Monetary and Financial Affairs. Hon. Sarah Kataike Ndoboli belongs to the Committee on Rural Economy, Agriculture, Natural Resources and Environment. 

During this time, we elected a new chairperson of the East African Caucus and that chairperson is Gideon Mung’aro from Kenya. He was able to host us to a very lavish dinner after his election. It was not a bribe because it was after the election. 

There were many issues which were discussed at the committee level and brought to the plenary. But allow me to highlight a few of them because they are of great importance. I want this Parliament to take note of those items I am going to highlight from the various committees. 

The first is from the Committee on Conflict Resolution -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which page so that we can follow?

MRS OGWAL: Paragraph 7.3 page 12. Sorry for rushing, Mr Speaker. I thought these items are very important. One of them concerns the security of the continent. Some of the recommendations from the Committee on Cooperation, International Relations and Conflict Resolution – I thought we needed to highlight in the body of the report, but I have attached the full content of the resolutions because they are very important. 

One of them is a report on Cote d’Ivoire. It is recommended that: 

1.	The Government of the Republic of Cote d’Ivoire should appoint, at the various levels of the hierarchy of the security agencies within the context of the geographic and ethnic balance, to ensure that all sectors of the country are represented in the command structure of the said security agencies;
 
2.	The Republic of Cote d’Ivoire should ratify the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance and implement the same accordingly;

3.	Cote d’Ivoire should take its right place in international organisations such as PAP and ECOWAS;

4.	The schedule for parliamentary elections by December 2011 should be maintained subject to the creation, by Government, of a conducive environment, for free and fair elections.

5.	 Cote d’Ivoire should pursue a sustainable development programme within the context of the United Nations Millennium Development Goals as a first step towards recapturing its exemplary economic status;

6.	The international community should support Cote d’Ivoire to restore its devastated economy to its former status as an economic model of Africa; and finally, 

7.	The African Union should assist by making good the above mentioned recommendations.

The second report I would like to bring to the attention of this august House is a situation in Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic. The situation there is so bad that 50 percent of the population of this democratic republic are living in exile across the border in Algeria. The situation in the camps is bad! The situation in the country is equally bad. I think since you follow these things through the media, I would like to highlight just three points which are important for us to note.

1. 	The African Union through its Peace and Security Council should urge its member states to impose sanctions or other appropriate leverage to force the Moroccan regime to abide by the UN mandates that it has up to now disregarded.

2. 	The African Union should speak out in condemnation of the ongoing human rights violations and abuses on the people of Sahrawi by the Moroccan authorities in the occupied territories including cleaning up of landmines.

3. 	The international community should urgently address the humanitarian condition of displaced people and refugees through action that will end their suffering.

The issue of Libya continues to be a controversy. In fact, during the debate, when the matter was being tabled, Uganda as a country was not satisfied with the manner in which the resolution was brought to the Floor of Parliament because it was brought as if the report was unanimous; as if all the member states had agreed. Therefore, for PAP to stand up and support the new regime, it was contradictory to the report that was tabled in the House. We, Ugandans, had to put a question on the Floor of Parliament. By the time we left, it had not yet been answered. It was, “Who agreed that the new regime be unanimously endorsed?” We have not yet got the reply. 

These are the three points that were raised: 

1.	There must be an immediate cessation of war in conformity with the AU roadmap.

2.	An urgent need for national reconciliation through a mechanism which incorporates the interests of all Libyans in order to reinforce national unity. 

3.	The Libyans should decide their future democratically. 

4. 	The African Union should work with relevant organisations to ensure that rules and regulations relating to protection of migrant workers are adhered to. In this particular case, we identified the interests of Ugandans because there were very many of them who went there in search of employment.

Mr Speaker, when some of the distinguished visitors were addressing the Floor of Parliament, they expressed their dissatisfaction at the manner in which Africa, as a continent, failed to be united on the issue of Libya. In fact, the guest speaker on that day ended her statement by asking, “Who is next?” So, if the Libya issue is gone, who is next? In other words, she was saying that unless we are unanimous and know what we are doing, we must be aware that whoever is next will face the same fate. That is the question that was left to us.

The issue of Tunisia is equally bad. I do not know whether I should read it –(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please proceed.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am just relaying the statement that was made on the Floor of the Pan African Parliament. Like I was saying, the situation in Tunisia is equally very depressing. 

There are highlights on a few points for us to note. On page 14, we have highlighted topical issues that are of great importance to Ugandans. One of them is climate change. The issue of climate change is a matter of great concern to the continent. These two points have been picked up, which I hope will be of great concern to us as Ugandans: One, that a continental campaign, in partnership with regional parliaments and civil society, for the second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol and the sensitization of African populations on the impact and challenges of climate change, be done as a matter of urgency. 

Two, an observer role for the Pan African Parliament at the African Group of Negotiation under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the African Ministerial Conference on Environment and the Conference of African Heads of State and Government on climate change, be endorsed. The resolution is also attached for you to read the details.

We discovered that the issue of land grabbing on the African continent is a common phenomenon. We, therefore, thought that we should also bring to the attention of the august House some of the few points that were adopted during the debate on land grabbing. One of them is that PAP should play a watchdog role in ensuring social inclusion and transparency of investment programmes. The Pan African Parliament should pressure governments to provide access to information, respond and suggest alternative language in contracts and insert provisions to protect our continent. This was reached at because there are many investors that are sneaking into the continent and using all sorts of tricks, but ultimately, they are here to grab land.

We also talked about education. That is the only one I have captured, but we have attached detailed resolutions. On education, culture and tourism, we picked a recommendation that member states should implement synergy of action between all the players – UNESCO’s BREDA, ADEA, Education Division of the African Union Commission - in order to positively influence those countries in conflict or post-conflict situations on matters relating to education policy. This is an issue of great concern.

The Committee on Justice and Human Rights also gave some recommendations. I have been able to pick two of them for us to read. Prior to the commencement of the session, there was a women’s conference for the women’s caucus and some of the donor partners. It was a very big conference and a resolution was passed, which I think Members need to read, not only the female members, but I think all of us need to read. All I can say is that PAP is extremely sensitive on matters of gender. I think you already know – it is on record - that AU has adopted the 50 percent representation of women at all levels. That is the gauge, and we must all increasingly move towards that.

Mr Speaker, Uganda was fortunate to meet the President and we put on record a matter that we thought is of great concern to Uganda, and that is the issue of the involvement of our Army in Somalia. We were asking the question, why is it that other African countries are not enthusiastic about engagement in Somalia? As if the gods were listening, Al Shabaab attacked Kenya and Kenya now spontaneously and unplanned has to pursue Al Shabaab. That is what we thought could have been avoided if we worked cohesively in dealing with Al Shabaab as a menace on the continent. That is one of the concerns we put to the President and the matter will continue to be debated.

Mr Speaker, allow me to read something on the challenges facing the Pan African Parliament. The Pan African Parliament is expected to pass resolutions to reverse the negative economic, political and social trends on the continent, and its decisions are supposed to be implemented by all member states. However, PAP does not have in place mechanisms of monitoring the implementation of its decisions or resolutions. It also does not have oversight powers. 

The following are the common problems facing all the member states: One, Africa has not yet experienced structural transformation. Two, virtually all the member states derive their economic well-being from agriculture. See page 18. Of course, we all suffer the poverty shocks, prices, political and ethnic shocks. 

Africa is still faced with youth unemployment. The land grabbing syndrome is a common phenomenon. Child and maternal mortality is still high. Africa has failed to contain corruption, which is corrosive to its economies. Africa still exports primary products instead of secondary or processed products. Africa has not evolved to the level of political maturity; in other words, we are experiencing what we are experiencing now - lack of coercion - because we have not fully matured to appreciate the sufferings in other countries. So, we tend to fall back to oppression by the super powers.

Where it can adopt a common position on political, economic and security matters, for example, the recent Libyan crisis, we expected Africa to stand together and agree on one common position. According to the Constitutive Act of the Pan African Parliament, the role of PAP is limited to only advisory and consultative with no effective mechanism to enforce compliance by member states. The funding of PAP activities will require budgetary shifts from the national parliaments to direct funding by PAP.

I will go now to our observations, on page 18. Please allow me to read them; I will be fast. We observed that very little is known about PAP activities in the member states, including Uganda, hence lack of ownership. 

The Pan African Parliament is distinguished for the preparation of a programme for the entire session before sessions begin, to give members opportunity to prepare and debate effectively. Mr Speaker, if only this Parliament could adopt this method, it would be very effective. Programmes are worked out and documents are given out to Members so that you know when you can speak and even when we come to the House. You write down your name on the topic you want to contribute on because the topic for the day is already given. This has made work effective and efficient. You are given a fixed time; if it is three minutes, it is three minutes and that is it. So, you find that very many people will have contributed within a very short time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I expected applause on that one. (Applause)

MRS OGWAL: Some of the challenges, which we would like to highlight, are: PAP passes resolutions on matters of great importance to the democratisation processes in the continent for socioeconomic development and transformation, but there are no mechanisms for monitoring and implementation. 

Neither Parliament nor the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and this concerns Uganda, has any orderly record or information on PAP. So, if any Member of Parliament wants to study more about PAP, there is no record anywhere in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs or in the Parliament of Uganda where you can sit down and study anything concerning the Pan African Parliament. I think we need to start from somewhere.

Other challenges are that there appears to be lack of interest in PAP by the Uganda High Commission in South Africa. We were very upset - I wish the Minister of Foreign Affairs was here, but since the Leader of Government Business is here, it is important to note that while other embassies attended this high profile opening session of the fifth session of the second parliament, our embassy was missing. 

Throughout the two weeks we were there, we tried to make contact. We even tried to urge them so that we could attend Uganda’s Independence Day, which caught up with us there, but we were told there was no transport to take us there. We had been warned that in South Africa you should not just enter any taxi. We were all new so we feared to board any taxi lest we end up creating a disaster there. The High Commission could not send us any vehicle. We, therefore, missed celebrating Independence with fellow Ugandans. So, there is something lacking in the High Commission which needs to be looked into.

These are the main challenges affecting PAP. The recommendations we want to give – Mr Speaker, once again if you could allow me to read this - There is need to transform PAP into a fully-fledged legislative body with oversight powers, and this would require the following:

Amendment of the Protocol; a draft amendment is already in place and there are relevant committees working on that. 

Autonomous status requiring that members of PAP will not be drawn from the national parliaments; any Member of Parliament designated to PAP must either resign his or her constituency seat or decide to become a Member of PAP. In other words, they are saying you cannot have two positions. (Interjection) It is a proposal. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You want me to put a question on that?

MRS OGWAL: The delegation strongly advises the Parliamentary Commission to include the activities of PAP in its annual strategic plan and budget. 

Parliament takes the lead in sensitising the population about AU and PAP activities and their benefit to the people of Uganda, hence creating a sense of ownership by the people. We cannot spend so much money on PAP activities and our people whom we represent do not own it. 

Parliament is requested to always send an Information Officer from Parliament who will be in charge of sending information back home about the activities happening in PAP during the session so that people at home can know what their members are doing and what the country is benefiting from PAP. 

The delegation also urges the government to put in place mechanisms to follow up AU protocols and implementation of PAP resolutions, that is, domestication of some of the protocols that have already been passed.

Finally, the delegation requests the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to follow up on the behaviour of the High Commission in South Africa.

Mr Speaker, I end by saying the delegation wishes to thank the Rt Hon. Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, the Clerk to Parliament, the entire staff and all Members of Parliament who supported our endorsement to this distinguished Parliament of the continent. We really want to thank you. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We were trying to see in the proposals that are coming from the rules committee whether a proper mechanism can be inbuilt in our rules for these reports to be properly presented to Parliament. This is just an innovation, and that is why we have allowed the honourable leader of the delegation to the Pan African Parliament to present this report. There is no legal basis in our rules to do it this way; we have just acted innovatively, and we are now seeing that this should be accommodated in the rules so that it is properly received and channelled. 

Honourable members, you want to say something? I think with the guidance from hon. Cecilia Ogwal, the three minute rule, is very applicable, except the modification is that I wanted to adjust it to two minutes because the matters are fairly clear. Just make your contributions in two minutes. We will give it 20 contributors and that will make it 40 minutes. Let’s start with hon. Kassiano Wadri and I will see how to proceed.
 
5.10
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal Atim Barbara, the leader of our delegation to the Pan African Parliament, for this innovative report she has made. 

For those of us who have been here, we will appreciate that this is the third successive Pan African Parliament that has been elected by this Parliament and I am very grateful, in the sense that it is the first time that PAP is able to send us a timely report. (Applause) This must go on record. In front of us here we have hon. Fred Jacan Omach and hon. Abdu Katuntu who were our first MPs, but I think what I have said should not annoy them because even during their time, it took them longer to report to us who voted them than what the team led by hon. Cecilia Ogwal has done. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, there is one thing which I want to put on record, which to a very great extent may be very negative in the way you will receive it. We on the Continent of Africa seem to be doing a lot of window dressing. We have a lot of institutions that we have created, right from the Organisation of African Unity to AU, but these are structures that I would call toothless dogs - institutions that cannot give guidance to member states. 

Look at the issues of democracy, look at the issues of the rule of law; those of you who have been following the elections next door and those of you who have been watching how elections were conducted in the DRC, will appreciate that we actually do not live up to the commitments that we make as a continent. Here is a situation where you see a member country blatantly flouting the reasons for which it exists as a body and you cannot do anything. (Member timed out.)

5.12
MS JOY ATIM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to appreciate hon. Cecilia Ogwal of the PAP for really bringing this great report to this Parliament. It is on record that when most people are sent, it is on rare occasions that they report to the people who sent them. I thank you so much and congratulations to the Pan African Parliament for the report that you have brought to us. It will give us ample time to give the people we represent what it entails and the monies that they spend on PAP.

They have given us the challenges that they face as the Pan African Parliament. They have given us challenges like child and maternal mortality, which is still at a very high rate in Africa. This was discussed here yesterday; we thought we had the challenge as Ugandans, but we are realising that it is all over on the African continent. 

They also said that Africa has failed to contain corruption and they realised it is corrosive. Another challenge that they talk about is that Africa has not evolved to the level of political maturity. They have said that they are just there to talk, but they do not have the powers and they are asking if they could be given powers and they are still working on it. 

What can Africans do? Do we still have to borrow from the foreigners to come and re-colonise us? Africans are bright and they know what to do; they know corruption is bad and as a union, what are they doing about it? This is a report that you have to send back and say that Ugandans are saying that now that we are a union, what are you doing about corruption? –(Member timed out.)

5.15
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the presenter, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, for the nice report. I also thank the entire team for a job well done. Actually, I want to re-emphasise the point made on page 16 where you met the PAP President over the issue of AMISOM or peace in Somalia. As the saying goes, “One Africa, One voice”. Things are easier said than done; they should manifest through actions. What sense does it make to have Ugandans and Burundians participating in an issue which is of continental dimension when the rest of the countries have sat back? 

It is important that as you go back, re-emphasise and tell them that the Members of the Parliament of Uganda have said that we need to mean what we speak. They should really support us to contain peace in Somalia because if all these countries had contributed troops to Somalia, that problem would be history. They should not wait until they feel the pinch in order to react. 

We are so worried that if Africa continues along that trend, given the fact that they did not respond to save Libya of the problems and what has been happening, and if they are going to take situations in places like Somalia for granted, then we shall doubt the oneness that we have as Africa. Thank you very much. 

5.17
MR SIMON MULONGO (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I have to congratulate hon. Cecilia Ogwal and her team for a well articulated report. It was very informative and indeed we have a lot of things to pick from it, and we are happy that you have really hit the ground running and depicted Uganda as still a star to reckon with at that level. 

The question of Libya is an issue of concern. I would rather that the Minister of Foreign Affairs comes here to explain to this House the position of Uganda on the matter of Libya and the stance Uganda should take on such matters of threat to the security and stability of Africa. 

On the question of effectiveness of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, we have raised concerns here; first and foremost, there is no regional policy on foreign affairs; on how Uganda should posture itself out there, including the working mechanisms and the challenges that some of our missions are facing abroad. This is a matter of concern and we have said it before, even during the budget process, and I think it is necessary that it is properly handled by the government side. 

Finally, I want to touch on AMISOM. To me, the question of AMISOM is a much wider challenge. The recent developments in Somalia regarding the entry to the theatre by Kenya and also followed by Ethiopia; and we hear in Djibouti as well, without total regard to the AU/UN framework for peace support operations; I think it is important that we know from the Ministry of Defence what this means to the mission in Somalia. Are these attempts to externalise the problem of Somalia to the regional partner, state interests or what does it mean? So, I think it is important that the minister of state updates this House on AMISOM matters, since we have the force commander and the biggest contingent on the ground. Thank you.

5.19
MR KASIRIVU ATWOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I also want to thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal for her good report and her team. How do we help our delegation to make sure that they articulate issues very well in that Parliament, but also impress upon their colleagues that whatever they discuss and pass is really respected by the member states, so that we do not make PAP a talking shop? They go and talk and come back and things end there. Protocols are signed, resolutions are passed and heads of state sign, but things end there and commitments to implement them are almost not there. 

Hon. Cecilia Ogwal made reference to the Lagos Plan of Action of 1980. If you read that document, if each member state were to implement, to the letter what is contained in that document, I think Africa would be very far. But they signed and left and that was the end. 

We now have the Maputo Protocol where they signed and said every member state should have 10 percent funding to the agriculture sector because Africa solely depends on agriculture. Here we have just said we shall get to seven percent. We are waiting to see the next budget actually get to seven percent and that will be something. How do we make sure we really stick to what we have agreed on? 

Mr Speaker, is the behaviour of the High Commission in South Africa a reflection of the morale of our Foreign Service officers? It may not be only in South Africa. Colleagues who have moved elsewhere know that our embassies are always in a sorry state. What do we do to ensure that even the environment in which they operate is good enough because when you operate in a bad environment, your morale also goes down –(Member timed out.)

5.23
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Barbara Cecilia Ogwal together with her colleagues for this report. If you read this report, especially the challenges and observations being made by this team, you would think it was actually made in 2004 when we joined that Parliament. This Parliament has not moved. The biggest problem we faced when we were in that House actually, is the biggest problem they are facing. They are a talk shop. They go, debate - like we used to debate – and fly back to our capitals and nothing moves. Unless this parliament is transformed into a parliament - how do you talk of a parliament without legislative powers? You come and debate and go back home. That is what we used to do. The team that succeeded us did the same and this team is actually doing the same.

So, we are talking to Government, like I am sure the previous teams did, to make sure that we talk to our presidents that there is an immediate need to amend the Constitutive Act and protocol to provide some power - some effective function - to this august House. There are issues like communication, protection of the environment, gender, democracy. Whether you are an Arab, whether you are a South African and so on, these ones cut across and as a continent we can legislate. So, we can say, “Look here, how do we legislate for protecting our environment as a continent?” We can then have uniform laws which are enforceable. (Member timed out.)

5.23
MR STEPHEN BAKA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Mr Speaker, I wish to start from where hon. Katuntu has just stopped. African governments must agree and the people of Africa must press their governments to cede some power to this regional body. There are new challenges in Africa that cannot be handled by individual governments. Some governments in Africa are too weak to handle certain sectors, for example, telecommunication. There are new challenges of re-colonisation of Africa; for example, the multi-nationals that are coming to Africa to take away our resources through repatriation of resources to Europe. These are issues that cannot be handled by individual governments. 

We know how governments have failed to handle these issues. Therefore, as a way forward, as countries, we must impress it upon our governments to cede some powers to this regional body. Otherwise, our colleagues have done very well. I am very impressed and I think this is the way to go. I do not know what to do, but EALA should also be very active in the issues of reporting. I now know more about PAP than EALA. I think this is very good.

Mr Speaker, the other issue is about our embassies. Complaints have been all over. All delegations that go outside Uganda come back with one complaint or another. I think the issue raised by hon. Simon Mulongo, about a policy on how our foreign embassies conduct themselves, should be brought forward by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Otherwise, every country has an issue with the embassies there. Go to Europe, Africa here, they are not working. I do not know what the problem is. 

I have been out several times, but I have never been received by any embassy official and yet you communicate when you are going there. It was only recently in the UK when I had finished and I managed to talk to the High Commission there. Otherwise, in the other countries you do not even realise that the embassies are there and they are working. (Member timed out.)

5.25
MR MAJEGERE WAIRA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I should thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal and her team. They have demonstrated that they did not go for sausages and hamburgers but for real work. (Laughter)

Hon. Cecilia Ogwal has said that before they came back they left a question on the Floor, and that was about Libya. I want to request Cecilia Ogwal and her team that when you go back, please try to insist on this question. I want you to strongly condemn the activities of the National Transition Council of Libya -(Interjections)– yeah, the way they treated the President of Libya; the person of the President of Libya and the corpse. It was abused in a manner which is not human. So, I want you - I am just talking as your voter - when you go back please insist on that point. (Laughter)

Secondly, on a lighter note, on page 16, I feel maybe the report is somehow personalised because everywhere you see, “Mrs Ogwal”. I believe that you work as a team. As an NRM member who has a representative there, I might feel that maybe I am not ably represented. So, I would suggest that the report is presented as a team. I thank you. 

5.28
MR ROBERT SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank our delegation led by hon. Ogwal. Just as other Members have said, we commend your work and reporting on time. We know about the Pan African Parliament now more than any other body. I think the first thing to do is for us to have at least a section in the library dedicated to Pan African works before we get any other - we should have compared this report with the one of hon. Katuntu and seen the progress.

Secondly, maybe EALA should also help us present a report, now that they have been through so many activities and marking the 10th anniversary of the East African Community. 

I can only commend the Burundian ambassador from Uganda, Brig. Kyaligonza. At least, recently when we went there to play football - fortunately we won - he hosted us to a reception and even had trade delegations to explain to us the potentials of investment in Burundi by Ugandans. We condemn the South African Embassy and the way they treated our delegates. 

I will insist on the point of unity within the African countries in as far as the new scramble for Africa is concerned. We should be very careful about the new scramble for Africa, especially when the resources are becoming scarce. The metals are becoming scarce. This is the only continent which is not protected by any force that can resist and say, “Please do not enter Africa before consulting us.” I think the UN should have consulted the African Parliament and asked, “What is the way forward for Libya?” Much as we want dictators to get off the face of Africa, we should be consulted. (Member timed out.)

5.30
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM Representative, Youth): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the delegation that is representing us in the African Union. Mine is just a small commendation. I want to comment on the issue of the AMISOM presence in Somalia. Yesterday we were in Nairobi and we met a delegation of Somali Members of Parliament. We were discussing issues of disaster and the Members were so happy. We were actually like superstars in the presence of all the other countries that were present there. The Somali delegation was very appreciative. In fact, we took a lot of photos with them on behalf of the people that are in Somalia, on behalf of Uganda. 

So, I want to say before the other Members of Parliament that these issues are very important. On the regional issues and discussions, like hon. Baka said, there are issues that we cannot take on as a country, but when we join our effort as regional governments, we can be able to overcome.

So, the presence of Uganda in Somalia is something that is receiving a lot of acclaim and I want to commend the Army, the UPDF and the members that are there. They are doing a commendable job and the people of Somalia appreciate, as shown by the reception that we received in that conference.

The second issue that I want to raise is that regional work or work that PAP or EALA is doing is our future and, therefore, I am perturbed a little to hear that nothing much is being taken in terms of administration and the importance that we are according these institutions. As a country and the world generally, we cannot run away from the fact that we are moving into regional discussions, regional leadership and issues of importance like they are saying. I was also not happy with the way Libya was being bombarded by the Western powers. As a young leader, I would like to see Africa really taking charge. (Member timed out.) 

5.32
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank our Members of the Pan African Parliament for the report that they have presented to us. I would, in particular, like to thank them for the observations they came up with, more especially that to do with time management. The practice you have brought us from the Pan African Parliament is really a very good one. Mr Speaker, I was in this House during one of the sessions in early September and we were only nine Members remaining in here. It was not until hon. Bintu Jalia raised a point of procedure that the House was suspended for about 30 minutes and then resumed later. So, you can imagine the time that we wasted. So, that is a very good practice that is worth adopting. 

The other point is about the challenges that they raised, that there are so many challenges facing the whole of Africa like economic shocks and all that they have pointed out here. These are challenges that we are also faced with in Uganda. It is unfortunate that we are not helping our people to appreciate these challenges and accept that it is not only Uganda that is facing them; instead, we are misinforming and misguiding the people. I, therefore, call upon the Members to help our population to appreciate that it is not only Uganda facing these economic challenges, and give them hope where we all need to unite and push our economy forward. Thank you. 

5.35
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank you, Maama Barbara, for your presentation.  

The foundation of PAP lies in the adage that “unity is strength”, and I think Africa needs unity to face the challenges that are now facing the continent. One of the challenges facing the continent is an economic one, and PAP can play a fundamental role if, as hon. Katuntu has said, we can give it the powers to legislate on economic issues.  

We, as your voters, want you while in PAP to continue saying, “Africa you are sleeping; it is time you wake up, it is time you wake up.” We can do a lot to regulate the trend and make Africa a strong economic unit. Look at the conditions the Western countries put on our loans, for example; look at the conditions they put on our way of life. These are things that we can negotiate and reject as a block.

Mr Speaker, I would like to welcome your suggestion that we establish rules on how PAP and maybe EALA should report back regularly so that we are able to know what is happening in these parliaments.  I would also request that we need to establish a PAP Secretariat here in Parliament so that the Members of PAP can be well facilitated to develop a link between the secretariat in South Africa and the one here in Kampala. I thank the delegation very much.

5.37
MR FRED OMACH (NRM, Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker and colleagues.  For Africa to be one Africa and one voice, Parlamento Pan Africano must ensure that the following is done immediately: First and foremost, let Africa stop conflicts within itself. Two, Africa should connect itself to become one, through road connectivity, rail and air. Three, Africa should use its population as a dividend; right now, we have a population of 1.4 billion people. Let it be one people, one voice. Four, Africa should harness all the hydro-electric power and put it in one place and use it for development. Five, Africa should use water for production. Tap all the water and use it to increase production and productivity in agriculture. Six, with all this, Africa should be able to have value addition with the electricity we have, with the connectivity and speaking as one people. 

Mr Speaker and colleagues, I stand here to very much and very happily thank the hon. Imat Barbara for bringing this very elaborate report. I am speaking as the first chair of the Uganda Chapter of the Pan African Parliament, which was inaugurated on the 18 March 2004.  I was not only the chair of the Chapter, but also the rapporteur of the Committee on Monetary and Financial Affairs. The hon. Abdu Katuntu was our envoy to Darfur and he is actually an authority on the Darfur Conflict -(Applause)- Yes, he is, and he was also on the Committee on Justice and Human Rights. 

We also had the hon. Miria Matembe who was the chair for Rules, Privileges and Discipline Committee. We had the hon. Loy Bira Bwambale who was the chair of Gender, Family, Youth and People with Disabilities. We had the hon. Mike Ssebalu who was the rapporteur of the Committee on Cooperation, Inter-relationships and Conflict Resolution. So, all the five that were sent were very solid, vibrant and fireworks. We set a very good foundation that I am happy that Barbara is now enjoying. (Laughter) We also sponsored the first President of the Pan African Parliament in the names of Ambassador Gertrude Mongella from Tanzania.  

Also, the first draft of the Rules and Procedure of the Pan African Parliament was done here in this Parliament. I would like to thank Members of the Seventh Parliament, and in particular the hon. Ben Wacha, who was very instrumental. Almost 95 percent of the rules that you are now having in the Pan African Parliament were born here. So, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity to really relive our very good times in the Pan African Parliament.  

We were also the first to open its home in Midrand, South Africa. We need this Parliament to evolve itself into not just a consultative and advisory Parliament but, as the hon. Katuntu and the report has said, we need to move and make it a parliament that is legislative so that whatever they are going to pass is able to bind Africa and make it move in one direction. When we were on the Committee of Finance, we did make a five-year development plan in which we made it clear on how the Pan African Parliament could be able to realise money, which would make it effective for the good of the African continent. 

With these few remarks, I would like to thank the committee for bringing this motion and I would like to thank all of you for giving me this opportunity to make this presentation.  I thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, hon. Omach, for making a report 10 years later. You have given a very comprehensive report. (Laughter) Hon. Members, I think we should draw this to a close. I will allow the Leader of Government Business.  Hon. Otada, you are a member of PAP; this is a report on your behalf. I think let us give other Members the opportunity and then we can close after the Leader of Government Business. We have another report that we need to debate. 

5.42
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like, on behalf of the government, to thank the leader of the team that went to represent us in the Pan African Parliament for her very educative and eloquent report. 

I agree with most of what has been mentioned in the report, but what is lacking is the problem of Africa. Why should we have a Pan African Parliament which is not working?  So, I think Africa as a continent must first of all be realistic; they must cut their jacket according to the cloth and sincerely live within their means. They have formed so many organisations which are not doing what they are supposed to do. Not all African countries can even pay their membership. So, why have we formed it? 

Africans must also set their priorities right. What are we really up to in Africa? I am glad to say that there is some improvement now because there are fewer coups - people hardly overthrow governments. People now struggle through the ballot s, which is a step forward. If the Opposition feel they have been cheated, they go to court, which is a step forward. This shows that Africans have begun to put their priorities right and understand what really is required of them. Going to the bush is something else, but is also very expensive in many terms. I am glad that now this trend is going down. Even people with differences come and sit together and sort out their problems. This is very important and we should follow it throughout the country.

Africa must fight poverty because it is very poor. I am sure even South Africa is feeling it like elsewhere. There is illiteracy and insecurity, which are our number one enemies. We do not have a fund to do all what we want to do like sending troops to Somalia. Even the Pan African Parliament had no answer to your questions. So, it is a pity that these things happen. 

As far as Somalia is concerned, we must thank Uganda and Burundi for coming out and trying to bring harmony and security in that war torn country. This is something the whole continent is watching although Kenya has also come in conditionally. 

I would like to end by thanking Mama Cecilia for her good report and wish her a safe journey next time round, which I am sure they are prepared for, so as to bring us another good report like this one. We shall emulate what they learnt there. Thank you very much.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. By the time she returns, we shall have improved on our rules, particularly Rule 12 under Appendix C, so that it is given a more comprehensive treatment than just relating generally and it stops there. What we want this House to do is to be able to push that to another level so that it is processed and some action is taken on it. Because when you debate generally, that is where it ends. 

In fact, it is worse for the East African Legislative Assembly; at least for the Pan African Parliament, there is some provision, but for the East African Legislative Assembly, there is basically no framework for reporting and that is a big challenge. So, thank you very much. 

Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, I do not think you have any matter to respond to. Most of these things were acclamations and appreciations. I will give you two minutes to thank the Members for being very appreciative. 

MRS OGWAL: Rt Hon. Speaker, I would just like to appreciate the good comments and appreciation given to us. I think this is a new revelation to me, and I hope that, as you said, we want to stop the tradition of using the Pan African Parliament or the East African Legislative Council as a talk show. We should really actualise some of the good reports and implement them so that they can make an impact. But I think the aspect of familiarising the activities of PAP is important and it is the duty of Parliament to take it up as a matter of urgency so that we own it. 

I am really touched by the fact that all of you are concerned about the role Uganda is playing in Somalia. I must say that the name of Uganda is quite popular because of what we are doing in Somalia. I think that since things have erupted in Kenya right now, when we go back,
 there will be very many people recognising that Ugandans are actually back in the house. 

There is a bit of discipline with Uganda, if you may allow me to blow my own horn. As we came towards the end of the session, many of the countries had gone, but all the five of us from Uganda remained in the House up to the very last moment, which the President appreciated so much. (Applause) That is very important. We are also proud if you acknowledge that we are doing some good work for you, and I think when we go back, we shall work harder. I would like to thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker, and may God bless you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION AND CONSIDERATION OF THE REPORT ON THE STUDY VISIT TO GHANA BY THE MEMBERS OF THE BUDGET COMMITTEE

5.51
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Rt Hon. Speaker and colleagues, I will be very brief in the interest of time. Allow me present the report on the training in Ghana on parliaments and financial oversight, which is in accordance to rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, the training on “Parliament and Financial Oversight: Tools and Mechanisms for Optimum Budget Analysis” was organised and sponsored by the Australian Development Cooperation and implemented by the Parliamentary Centre. It was held between September 26 to 30 2011 – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you will excuse me and give me just a minute. Hon. Ogwal, you did not lay that report on the Table, did you? Please come back and finalise with that so that we have a copy for Parliament. I will also ask the honourable to use the same strategy – just summarise and lay the full report on the Table. Sorry about that.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the first report by the Pan African Parliament delegation covering the meetings on the Fifth Ordinary Session of the Second Parliament that took place from September 29 to October 14 2011. I beg to lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture it as such. Thank you.

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, this report includes the introduction; the objectives of the course; contents and course coverage; relevance of the training; lessons learnt and the recommendations and; the conclusion.

The countries that were involved include: Uganda, Kenya, Malawi, Botswana, Zimbabwe and Ghana. Uganda’s delegation included hon. Ekanya, who was the leader, hon. Margaret Komuhangi, myself and one clerk. On behalf of my colleagues, I want to extend our sincere gratitude to the sponsors of this conference.

Objectives of the course

The training programme aimed at strengthening the capacity of parliamentarians to perform their financial oversight function and to equip them with tools which help to analyse government budgets, especially in identifying pro-poor and gender equity programmes.

Contents

The programme specifically contained the following broad study topics: 

(a)	Understanding national budgets.
(b)	Role of parliamentarians in the budget process.
(c)	National budgets and Millennium Development Goals.
(d)	Analysing Government budget statements: How a pro-poor budget should be.
(e)	Analysing gender equity in budget statements.
(f)	Revenue mobilisation and national parliaments. 
(g)	HIV/AIDS and national parliaments.

These were the fundamentals topics which were covered. 

Relevance

The course was very relevant and, in fact, timely because of the need to have a strong parliament that advocates for pro-poor budgets as a basis for Government expenditure

Lessons learnt and recommendations

We learnt that Ghana has a school feeding programme and this is an initiative of the Comprehensive African Agriculture Development Programme, pillar three of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) of which Uganda is a signatory. Therefore, we recommend that Government explores the possibility of a school feeding programme to target the most deprived communities to address both the challenge of UPE completion and agricultural productivity. This will ultimately lead to poverty reduction. Alternatively, if the hot meal is expensive, Uganda could introduce a school milk programme like most African countries are doing.

From the above, we recommend that Government reports to the House within three months on the plan to introduce a school feeding programme for UPE since we are just beginning the budget process for the next financial year.

The other thing we learnt was concerning the Constituency Development Fund. Most of the countries we interacted with had a constituency development fund for Members of Parliament. Sharing experiences from Kenya and other countries, we learnt that the Constituency Development Fund is one of the most effective tools of ensuring service delivery to a majority of the people by using their elected representatives. This programme also enhances the independence of the Members of Parliament. We, therefore, recommend that this issue should be explored further to look into its merits and to ensure that Members of Parliament have a strong share of the budget that goes directly to the constituency development projects. And we are in the process of initiating a Private Member’s Bill to this effect. I wish to lay on Table the Constituency Development Fund Act of Kenya as a benchmark for this undertaking. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member.

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: The other lesson learnt was about the revenue side of the budget. Parliament should improve its scrutiny of the revenue side of the budget during the budget process. This is because we usually look at the expenditure side only. Our recommendation is that the revenue side should be given due consideration and scrutiny during the budget process. We further recommend that the Budget Act, 2001 be amended to create a mechanism for Parliament to analyse all sources of revenue between January and March before the National Budget Framework Paper is presented to Parliament for scrutiny.

The other lesson was on subsidiary legislation, to include Members of the Opposition. We established that in Ghana and other countries, subsidiary legislation includes Members of the Opposition – which is not the practice here in Uganda. Therefore, we recommend that the Rules of Procedure should be amended to create a committee on subsidiary legislation to effect this known practice in Commonwealth parliamentary democracy – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, do you mean the subsidiary legislation committee?

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Yes, Mr Speaker. The other lesson is health insurance. Parliament should interest itself in the implementation and enactment into law, the reforms relating to health insurance as this has been adopted with advantages in many African countries. We recommend that Government should expedite the Bill so that Parliament enacts the law relating to health insurance.

Another experience we shared was on petroleum revenue management. Ghana has just enacted into law the Petroleum Revenue Management Act, 2011 which clearly spells out the revenue sharing mechanism. We recommend a speedy introduction of the Bill to Parliament. I beg to lay a copy of Ghana Petroleum Act and Gas Revenue Management Act 2011 on Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the record so capture it.

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Approval of agreements: We also learnt and shared experiences with other colleagues from other parliaments that the other aspect we shared that could provide good lessons for Uganda, include the role of Parliament in ensuring that all international binding agreements between governments are approved by Parliament. We, therefore, recommend an inclusion in the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, a provision for Parliament to approve international agreements that have serious financial commitments and implications to the Government of Uganda.

Presidential Commission on Remunerations upon assumption of duty

It was also established that as a practice, to avoid acrimony between Parliament and the public over remuneration, the President on assumption of duty, established a Presidential Commission that determines the benefit of public officers including Parliament. We recommend for a similar arrangement in Uganda to avoid negative public sentiment about remuneration of MPs.

The role of Parliament’s Budget Office

During the training, it was established that Uganda and Kenya were the only countries in Sub-Saharan Africa with a functioning budget office. Uganda was praised for that.

In view of the above, we recommend that Parliamentary Budget Office staff should be strengthened further to continue providing the technical advice to Parliament so that it becomes a regional centre for best practice for other parliaments of the region.

Conclusion

This course was very relevant and enriching. It revealed to us the roles and challenges of Parliament in exercising the constitutional role of appropriation and oversight, which require adequate knowledge of budget analysis. For example, the integration of HIV/AIDS and issues of gender budgeting were equally spot on. 

The knowledge and experience shared among participants was very useful and will be instrumental in triggering reforms in various parliaments. We hope that our Parliament will take keen interest in our recommendations so that they can be fully integrated in the Parliamentary Commission agenda. We take this opportunity to thank the Speaker and the Clerk to Parliament for allowing us to participate in this training.

Finally, the Minister of Agriculture in Ghana worked here in Uganda for four years and I had a chance of meeting him in his office. He was and is interested in exporting food from Uganda to Ghana, but unfortunately, as we were talking earlier on, there is no road link, there is no rail link and there is no air link between Uganda and the West African countries.

I think it is really absurd as we were saying earlier on, to see that countries in the same block cannot trade together. I am very sure - you recall when the President proclaimed that Ghana and Nigeria wanted to get milk from Uganda, but up to now, nothing has ever happened.

I think among the things that we should concentrate on is to see that some of these statements we make here are followed up to the last dot so that they are implemented. I propose that we should work on the trade links between Uganda and West Africa because Uganda has the best food; it could be the food basket of Africa. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to report. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member, for a very comprehensive report on the study you undertook. Have you laid a copy of the report on the Table?

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a copy of the report on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture it as such. Thank you very much. Honourable members, we should be closing now, but the point raised in the conclusion; the integration of HIV/AIDS issues in gender budgeting and so on and so forth - we should remember that tomorrow is International AIDS Day and the minister, I have just been notified, has prepared a statement to capture the mood for tomorrow’s occasion. Honourable members with your indulgence, I am going to give the minister 10 minutes. I am going to use my prerogative under the rules to amend the Order Paper to allow the minister make a statement on the International Aids Day which is coming up tomorrow and I am told it is not a public holiday. Some people were saying it is a public holiday tomorrow, but it is not a public holiday.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

6.08
THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF THE PRESIDENCY (Ms Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a statement on the World AIDS Day. Uganda shall join the rest of the world to commemorate World AIDS Day tomorrow, 1 December 2011. The day brings together people from around the world to raise awareness about HIV/AIDS, demonstrate international solidarity in the face of the pandemic and show support for the people living with HIV.

The day is an opportunity for the public and private partners to spread awareness about the status of the pandemic and encourage progress in HIV/AIDS prevention, treatment and care in high prevalence countries and the world over. This year, the event shall be commemorated at Kololo ceremonial grounds and shall be presided over by H.E. the President. 

Every year, there is a global theme and this year’s theme is: “Re-engaging leadership for effective HIV prevention”. The theme for this year re-emphasises the leadership and commitment in the fight against HIV/AIDS. 

HIV/AIDS global and regional trends

It should be noted that despite a lot of progress being made against HIV/AIDS in the world, including Africa, the struggle against this pandemic remains enormous. The summary of the HIV/AIDS global trend is highlighted below:

•	The number of people living with HIV/AIDS in the world in 2010 was 33.3 million.
•	The number of new infections in 2010 was 2.6 million and the number of deaths in 2009 was 1.8 million.

The analysis of the HIV/AIDS trend, at the regional level as shown below, unfortunately reveals that Africa remains the epi-centre contributing about 70 percent of the cases and deaths.

•	Sixty seven percent of people living with HIV/AIDS in the world are from Africa.
•	Sixty eight percent of all new infections come from Africa.
•	Ninety one percent of all new infections in children come from Africa.
•	Seventy two percent of all AIDS related deaths come from Africa.
•	More than 70 percent of all women living with HIV/AIDS are in Africa. 

So, this is a wakeup call for all of us.

Why is the World Aids Day important for Uganda?

HIV trends at the global and regional level as indicated above when translated to what is happening in the country, makes it imperative for this country to act now and urgently. Analysis of what is happening in Uganda reveals that despite the past successes in the 90s, there is need to face this epidemic with even more determination and increased solidarity to overcome the changing face of the epidemic.

Impressive success was registered in the early phase of the HIV/AIDS epidemic; that is the prevalence rate - the percentage of people living with HIV at a particular time - had been reduced or was reduced from 15 percent with some cases as high as 30 percent in 1991 to about five percent in 2001 and  the incidence rate - that is the rate of new infections within a defined period - fell from 7.6 per a hundred in 1990 to 3.2 per a thousand in the year 1998, when the nation got together in solidarity to fight the epidemic.  

However, the current trend in Uganda shows that both the HIV prevalence rate and the rate of new infections contracted between the early 90s up to 2001 - the two indicators that measure success against the epidemic - have remained stable. The prevalence rate has stagnated at between 6.1 percent to 6.4 percent, and as at 31 December 2010, it was estimated that 6.4 percent of adults in Uganda were HIV positive. This is not a very good picture.

The rate of new infections, that is incidences, stands at 0.74 per a thousand.  In 1994, there were 84,000 new infections, while in 2009, the number of new infections was 124,000. It is clear to the specialists analysing this epidemic that the rapid population growth is making it difficult to keep pace with the epidemic. Coupled with the above, the rise in the number of infections is attributed to the following major factors:

1.   Men above 25 years are engaging in multiple sexual partnerships.

2.  MTCT – Mother–to-Child Transmission, which constitutes 25 percent of all new infections. Every year, about 20,000 children are born HIV positive.

3.   Only 40 percent of Ugandan adults know their HIV status. Mr Speaker, I do not how many of us know our HIV/AIDS status. 

Uganda has hence strived to cope with HIV against the above mentioned odds. Today, 1.2 million people are living with HIV and 150,000 of these are children below 15 years. Calculations show that 577,000 people need ARVs, but only about 290,000 are accessing them due to inadequate funds.

It is more tragic when we carefully look at the 150,000 children mentioned above, because 98,000 are in urgent need of ARVs, but only 24,000 are accessing them and 38,000 of the above drop off after the first visit. All this is happening when a bio-medical intervention known as “PMTCT” (Prevention of Mother to Child Transmission) is now known and available in this country, but unfortunately, not many mothers are taking advantage of this.

The other important realisation is that resources from Government and donors, provided to fund treatment in this country, will not be sustainable if new infections continue to outstrip the number that the Ministry of Health is putting on treatment annually, that is, in 2005, only 51,000 people were on ARVs, but today, the number has more than trippled. Furthermore, the writing is already on the wall that sooner than later, donor funding will dry up.

The World Aids Day

The Uganda AIDS Commission with development partners intends to make this year’s event historical with the hope of taking Uganda in a new direction in order to reverse the HIV epidemic. Therefore, there shall be and has been a number of activities and events for this week preceding the 1st and these activities are enumerated.

AMICAALL, which is the Association of Mayors and Municipal Leaders Initiative on AIDS Action at Local Level. They had an assembly between 27th and 28th of November. It brought together more than 400 mayors and other municipal leaders, most of whom were recently elected. They were oriented on their roles and responsibilities in the control of HIV/AIDS.

There was also a one-day forum for Parliament on the same, where MPs were informed about the ongoing interventions and recent advances in HIV/ AIDS  research.

Today, there was the HIV/AIDS Leadership Symposium at Imperial Royale Hotel and it brought together youth and adults to discuss leadership for the HIV response. This event was organised by the Uganda Youth Forum, an initiative of the First Lady, Hon. Janet K. Museveni. 

Tomorrow, there will be exhibitions by different stakeholders and key messages by leaders from a wide spectrum. His Excellency the President shall launch the National Strategic Plan, which covers the following strategic plans: 

The National HIV Prevention Strategy 2011 – 2015:

Mr Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to lay on Table the National HIV Prevention Strategy 2011–2015.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture it as such.

MS KABAKUMBA: This document outlines the strategies and key interventions that will be applied in order to halt and reverse the current trend of the epidemic in the country. It will also be the key guiding document for all HIV prevention activities in the country.

Tomorrow also, the Uganda Kings and Cultural Leaders Forum Strategic Plan on HIV/AIDS, Maternal Health and Gender-Based Violence for the period 2011–2015, will be launched. In this plan, it is intended to engage traditional and cultural leaders.  The plan was developed by the above forum after realising that there are both positive and negative cultural practices that impact on maternal health and HIV/AIDS. The plan promotes the positive cultural practices and discourages the negative ones.

Also, the Uganda Plan for Elimination of Paediatric HIV and Syphilis Infections and Keeping Mothers Alive, will also be launched. This is to address the problem of mother-to-child HIV transmission and other related maternal health problems.

The revised National HIV/AIDS Strategic Plan will also be launched. This plan outlines the strategies and interventions that shall be undertaken in the next five years in treatment, care and support. I would like to lay on Table the National HIV/AIDS Strategic Plan 2010/11–2014/15.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture it as such. 

MS KABAKUMBA: Today, there is urgent need for the leadership of this country to continue spearheading the effort in the fight against HIV/AIDS. Religious leaders should continue talking about HIV/AIDS in their sermons and urge prospective couples to establish their HIV status before they tie the knot. 

Political leaders, cultural leaders and school administrations should double their effort in creating awareness about the HIV pandemic. Leadership at all levels in the fight against HIV/AIDS critically need to re-engage for effective HIV response. 

Colleagues, in the early phase of the epidemic, the political commitment under the leadership of His Excellency the President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, was the major factor which encouraged communities to rise up to offer care, support and social protection to those in need. Individuals were concerned about HIV risks and adopted safe sex behaviours as a result. 

Let us re-energise our effort and commitment in this cause, enjoined by our development partners. However, we Ugandans must take the lead.

In conclusion, I would like to call upon colleagues to participate in the various activities which I have noted, and also to turn up in large numbers at Kololo for the national function. I would also like to appeal to my colleagues and leaders to re-energise our effort and recommit ourselves in the fight against HIV/AIDS in all its forms. Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for a very comprehensive statement that has set the mood of this House for tomorrow. 

Hon. Members, this ministerial statement attracts a debate and if Members want to make some comments, this would be the appropriate time. But I would limit it very much – let us have Dr “Bitek” from Mbarara Municipality; they spoilt his name and added other things; it is supposed to be Bitek.
 
6.24
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank the minister in charge of the Presidency for this wonderful presentation. Uganda was very lucky to have a President who could come up without fear to say that we have the epidemic in the country and he was very clear. But when I see the trend of events as far as HIV is concerned in this country, I feel some Ugandans are failing the efforts of our President. 

I am one of the few doctors in this country who have taken HIV drugs after having a needle prick while working on somebody who had puss in the chest; that was way back in 2009 in Mbarara Referral Hospital. 

It is very painful, to find that men above 25 years of age are engaging in multiple sexual partnerships; and we know this is the major mode of transmission in this country. I believe in leading by example. I have a conviction that Parliament should take up the initiative and instruct hon. Kassiano Wadri to go to Terego and shout on radio and say, “Please, do not die” because the facts have been given to you. Dr Bitekyerezo should also go to Mbarara Municipality and give the same message in good faith. I think by so doing, we can turn this country into a wonderful place.

Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Uganda AIDS Commission plus the donors who have given us the drugs to give to our patients. In the Social Services Committee and HIV Committee, we have asked: Is Uganda now prepared to give anti-retroviral drugs to the population that needs ARVs, bearing in mind that when you cease taking these drugs for 48 hours you develop resistance. What do I mean here? The disease you have will not respond to drugs and even the disease you transmit to another person whom you meet will be a resistant strain. 

It is not a simple issue; we have to be very serious and it is time now for Members of Parliament to know our sero status. Let us not talk for the sake of talking. We should be the ones to say that old men should stop invading university hostels looking for children of their daughters’ age. 

When I was teaching at Mbarara University, I would meet many cars at night, and these were not parents, but friends. Some claimed to be guardians but morally, the old must protect the young. And if we all talk, I am very sure our supporters will listen to us.

For the mothers who are producing these children, they need these drugs so that they do not produce sick children. And men must be involved in this because the mothers need support. 

Lastly, I would like to call upon Members of Parliament to support some of these organisations which spearhead combating HIV in urban centres because that is where HIV is now concentrated in Uganda. The villagers do not have too much HIV, but towns have it all and they need parliamentary support. I think we should have recurrent lessons on HIV transmission and prevention as Members of Parliament, on a regular basis, because if you are ill and you do not know, you will end up collapsing without knowing what has killed you. 

I want you to know that HIV untreated causes madness. Some of the mad people you see on our streets could be because of being sick – there are patients walking on the road and you think they are just being insubordinate. Tomorrow, when they say, “Walk to work”, you will see everyone there. You may not know whom to fight because some of them are not okay. We need treatment for our people and we must encourage giving money to Quality Chemicals to produce drugs for our country in case donors pull out. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

6.31
MR WADRI KASSIANO (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the honourable minister for the comprehensive report she has made. As a country, we registered a lot of pride as the first country to successfully wage war against HIV/AIDS. And everywhere one went on this globe, reference would always be made to Uganda. But over time, Ugandans have gone back into a state of complacency, in which case, therefore, the incidents of HIV/AIDS spread have increased. I think this is due to a number of factors, but I will address myself to policy issues.

When HIV/AIDS first struck this country and it was known - leave alone in 1979 when President Idi Amin used to say there is a strange disease coming from Tanzania which makes people lose their hair and people thought it was a joke. But by 1984 when HIV/AIDS first became open, the likes of Dr Okware were very active. For the next 10 years, there was a lot of repeated sensitisation going on in the media. Even if you had the idea and you heard that drum sounding, budu, budu, budu, you would think twice before suggesting anything. (Laughter) Yes, this is a reality. At that time, there were a number of approaches used to fight this disease: In churches; the Ministry of Health took the lead; and CBOs and NGOs alike were all in the field. Everybody played their role and that is how we succeeded. But over time, people have taken everything for granted that it is now safe to graze around.

I was amazed on KFM if you bothered to listen to the messages ridiculing Members of Parliament. It was about the approach of circumcision as one of the preventive aspects. People were asking on the radio, “If today you said you wanted to check MPs and they laid down their tools for inspection, the Rt Hon. Speaker will be left alone.” There was somebody who rung from Mbale, from hon. Simon Mulongo’s place, a Mugisu, who said, “If these people are not circumcised, they should not represent us. It means they are children.” It was on KFM this morning. (Interjections) There are people here who will say, “We are okay,” because of religious and health factors - but I think, they indeed drove home their point that we should lead by example. If it has been medically found out that circumcision reduces the instances of contracting HIV/AIDS, why don’t we, as a country, come up with a purposeful policy, like it is done in other countries, where a male child is circumcised at birth? (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Finish with one minute. 

MR WADRI: So, that the child on coming out grows with that type of situation where there is some reduction in HIV/AIDS prevalence. 

Lastly, as a country, we need to provide, at policy level, arrangements for social care for those who are already infected. There are children who have been infected – remember in the past, Rakai was a model region where all the NGOs went and showed how community interventions, “Munno Mukabbi” - there were groups where people would organise themselves to provide care for those who are infected and affected. But I think as a country, we have not done enough at the budgetary level to allocate appropriate resources for some of these sectors so that they can be able to once again reorganise themselves and make meaningful contributions as far as the fight against HIV/AIDS is concerned.

I wish to thank the minister and I think madam minister, you need to come out as the sector ministry, with Uganda Aids Commission – let us see you on the screens and hear you on radios in every bazaar so that we can all walk the talk and get engaged in this noble cause. I thank you.

6.36
MS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the minister for this elaborate report. HIV/AIDS is something terrible. It passed a wrong route; a route which is very slippery. It is very bad -(Interjections)- which everybody wants, but it is a wrong one and that is where it passed. (Laughter) Previously, HIV/AIDS was around 18 percent; we reduced it to six percent; but as we speak now, the most recent research says we are at 6.4 from six percent. It is terribly increasing. 

People thought that they have known about HIV/AIDS as hon. Wadri has said. They said, “Now it is okay.” The husband after having two there comes and says, “I want,” which is terrible. We, as parliamentarians, should go down and talk openly because we had reduced this rate, but now, the rate is again going up. We should encourage voluntary testing and counselling so that somebody knows his status. In case you are positive, please, go for ARVs. In case, you are negative, just keep yourself safe. Those ones who are positive, please, do not infect others. When you feel that you cannot help it; use ABC. But in case you can, please use a condom.

For men, circumcision; there is safety in male circumcision. Please use it. If you were circumcised when you are still young, the prevention is at a very high level of 90 percent; but when you are an adult, it is at 60 percent. That is the record as of now. So, I encourage MPs to start using that. I was the first one to go and test for HIV in my district to show people that we should do it. 

There is also father-mother-child transmission. We can prevent HIV by that. Once you have tested and you have known - we were having AMICAALL from 27th to yesterday and we had a couple; a father, mother and a child. The father is HIV positive, the mother is HIV positive but they had a son in primary school who is HIV negative. Why? When they knew their status, the wife went and told the husband and good enough, he was a gender-sensitive husband. He accepted and went for testing. He was found HIV positive. Then the lady got immunised; she got some treatment to prevent that child from getting HIV. Once we stop that transmission from mother to child, we can have a safe Uganda. (Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, one minute hon. Taaka.
 
MRS TAAKA: The child is okay. As parliamentarians, please, let us think about – we are almost going for the budget process. Let us think about funding. The honourable minister said donors are drying out. So, it is up to us to fight this. Let us look at it in our budgeting process and add something on the budget for this. Also, the health facilities, especially in the urban areas - Busia is a gateway to Uganda. The boda-bodas are harrassed and boda-bodas started from Busia. The boda-boda town in Uganda is Busia. They gave us a testimony of women taking them at night. Those long truck drivers are from Busia. The sex workers, the street children – Busia is next to Kampala in street children, coming all over from Kenya, Tanzania, Congo and they are many. 

Government can also increase health facilities for such things and also remunerate the health service workers. Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. 

6.41
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Minister for the Presidency. An area of interest for us and where I think we are losing focus so much is the message. Yes, research has talked about circumcision, but I want us to be sincere to ourselves. How many of the circumcised are not dying of HIV/AIDS? If they are dying, are we going to use the message to help our country and our communities come out of the epidemic we are talking about? I think we need to get to what hon. Wadri was talking about. 

In the early days there was a deliberate message which was entirely telling every person be it circumcised or uncircumcised and that is what will help. We are talking about ABC; let us be sincere; what are we talking about circumcised and uncircumcised. I do not think that we are getting it right here. 
Fine, there might be some other issues –(Interruption)

DR OKOUNZI: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. I have heard so much about circumcision. The information I want to give is that circumcision is really a borderline intervention. It is an intervention which can go either way and we should not put too much emphasis on circumcision as if it is the only thing that is going to help this country. That is for me of course. Why am I saying this? If you take West Nile and Bugisu, West Nile has HIV rate of three percent; most of the people are not circumcised including me. Bugisu is 90 percent circumcised, but it has an HIV rate of more than six percent, and that is not all.

In USA at least one out of three people are circumcised and the rate of HIV in USA is five times more than that of Scandinavia where circumcision is not adored. This is information that scientists and epidemiologists know about. I would like to say that it has some benefits, but I do not think that it is the thing that we need to put too much emphasis on.

There are things that we need to emphasize such as abstinence, behavioural change - if you want to circumcise us, go ahead, but I do not think we should put too much emphasis on it.

MR OGWANG: I want to thank the professional in that field. The second issue concerns the statistics given to us by the minister. When you look at the data which the minister gave us, Africa has high rates and I equate it to the issue of poverty. The issue in Uganda here; why are the old people finishing up the young girls in universities in cross-generational sex? It is because young girls are beginning to think that sex is the source of getting money and yet in actual sense it is weakening the society, giving away young girls and boys to death. We must do something about poverty.

The last one, which needs a law - there is an instance where the young girls are raped. Infected people rape girls and at the end of the day they become victims of HIV/AIDS. So, I want to appeal to the Minister for the Presidency that Uganda AIDS Commission should wake up with a message specifically targeting men. Let us go back to the olden days when messages were everywhere and at any time.

6.47
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Ms Kabakumba Masiko): I want to thank honourable members for their contributions and the support. There are two or three things – yes, we must lead by example; we must be heard; we must be seen in this fight against HIV/AIDS and if we do not do that, it will be very difficult for us to win this war.
 
Is Uganda ready to provide ARVs? I do not think we are as of now as I have already mentioned. We do not have enough funds, but we plan to find resources to support the eradication of HIV/AIDS because when the donors withdraw, it is up to us as Ugandans to ensure that we provide the necessary facilities for affected and infected persons. This is one of the things that we recommend in the strategic plan.

There is a contentious issue of male circumcision. The evidence we have is that male circumcision reduces the chances of contracting HIV/AIDS up to about 60 percent, but it alone cannot prevent it. So, whoever is planning to use this method must combine with other interventions. Please do not think just because you are circumcised, you are completely immune to acquiring HIV/AIDS.

I think apart from poverty, there is so much to do with attitude. Let us train our young people that it is better not rush for the good things in the name of sugar daddies and sugar mummies and then you end up getting HIV/AIDS, but when we are patient, we can get there. Sometimes when girls come to Kampala (first world) they are excited and many times they make mistakes. So, as leaders and parents, let us package messages to our people and we lead by example. I know we shall overcome. I thank you for your support.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. The facts are laid bare before us. We have known about this for a while and we can chose to look the other side, but that does not change anything. The fact is that the epidemic is here and it is hurting our people, and as Parliament, we cannot ignore it. We cannot look the other side. We can only talk to our people and encourage them day in and day out to refocus our population on this fight against HIV/AIDS because it is still very much with us. We need to do something about it. 

Honourable members, tomorrow is International AIDS Day; it is not a public holiday, but it is a day for public concern and, therefore, this House will not be sitting. This is to allow the Members participate in their constituencies, over radios and even in the events at Kololo so that we show solidarity with our people in the fight against HIV/AIDS. This House stands adjourned to Tuesday 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose 6.51 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 7 December 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)



