Thursday 30th November, 2000

Parliament met at 2.43p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Ssekandi Edward, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday the House was adjourned because it was not possible to proceed with the debate on the Political Organisations Bill. This was so because there was a doubt as to whether the Bill was still in existence, or whether it had aborted, or the Minister in charge had withdrawn it. I promised to check with the records to find out exactly what happened and then let you know. I have checked with our official record namely, the Hansard of Thursday, 4th May 2000, Page 202, third paragraph, and this is what was recorded:

“In recognition of tremendous efforts put by the Committees to discharge their responsibilities on the work referred to them, and being aware that even work that has not been embarked upon is of significance to this country; I have, in accordance with rule 10 of the rules of procedure, decided to save all pending business so that it is carried over to the next session” - and there was an applause. 

This means that the Political Organisations Bill, which was in existence at the time of prorogation in May this year was saved and therefore, it is still in existence and Members of Parliament can debate it. Maybe Members are not ready yet, but the fact remains that it is still on our Table and it can be debated at a convenient time. Although I wanted it to be debated yesterday, it was not possible and then I lined up another business for today. But we shall definitely debate it as soon as possible and decide one way or the other. Members will be free to bring in any amendments to improve on it or mutilate it, as somebody said, or reconstruct it as they wish. So, that is the official position.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. With due respect to you, I would like your guidance on a point of procedure. Yesterday, you elaborately directed this Parliament in regard to the procedure we shall follow between now and the end of the session. The people I represent, namely, Lubaga South say that last year, it is on record, that the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs took up the responsibility of carrying out an inquiry into the affairs of the popularly known National Enterprises Corporation, NEC. As I speak now, it has been reported that because of the delay in presenting the report of that inquiry, the joint venture, which the establishment enjoyed with the foreign company has been withdrawn. I would like to be guided on whether there is any hope of receiving a report to that effect before the end of this Session.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, this session will end when Parliament will be prorogued some time in April.  So, we still have time, and I believe we shall find time to deal with this particular point.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr. Wandera Ogalo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members. I beg to lay on the Table the annual report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission, 1999, submitted in accordance with Article 52(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.  

I beg to lay on the Table the Report of the Inspectorate of Government for the period of January to June 2000, submitted to Parliament in accordance with Article 231 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, we have been receiving these reports from the IGG and the Human Rights Commission. This morning I received this report on your behalf from the Human Rights Commission.  But I was a bit embarrassed because since they started submitting these reports to us, we have not said anything thing about them in House! Maybe it is because of a lot of work, but today I have promised the Commission that their reports will be dealt with by Parliament some time in January. So, I am appealing to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to prepare comments on these reports so that we can have an official debate on them some time next January.

MR.OGALO: Mr. Speaker, the report of the Human Rights Commission is ready. It is now a question of putting it on the Order Paper; even next week we can present it.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, if it is ready, maybe you should also consider this one so that we have one comprehensive report dealing with it. Otherwise, let us show that we appreciate what they do and make comments on these reports.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Opio Gabriel): Mr. Speaker, Members will recall that during the discussion on the Budget for the current Financial Year, I pledged to table the National Planning Authority Bill before Parliament by 30th November 2000.  

On 27th November, I wrote to the Speaker indicating the inability of the Ministry to present the Bill. However, the Speaker wrote back, and I got this communication, that instead of writing to him, I should make a statement.  Therefore, I have come to make a statement on that.  

The establishment of the National Planning Authority is indeed a constitutional requirement and will be critical in enhancing planning and overall development in the country. In view of this, my Ministry has been widely consulting to arrive at the most effective way of implementing this constitutional Provision, taking into account a changed role of Government in view of liberalisation of the economy and decentralisation of Government functions.  

During these discussions, as honourable Members will appreciate, various ideas were floated which had to be harmonised. It is the harmonisation of the various ideas that has delayed the approval of the principles and therefore the presentation of the Bill. I am however, glad to inform the hon. Members that the principles underlined in the Bill were reviewed again last week and approved by Cabinet and we have accordingly requested the Attorney General to draft the Bill for presentation before Parliament.

In broad terms, the NPA will be an advisory body of Government with particular responsibility for the co-ordination of national planning efforts, harmonisation of district and central planning processes, and articulation of long term strategic development priorities for the economy. In light of the above, and given the time required to draft the Bill, we have not been able to present the NPA Bill by November 30th 2000 and we regret that. I am therefore, appealing for the indulgence of the House to allow us present this Bill at the beginning of January 2001. Mr. Speaker you.

MR.MUTYABA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I proceed, I would like to seek your guidance as to whether I could make some comments on the statement of the Minister, since it deals with a matter on which the House felt very strongly and still feels very strongly about?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you can look at the provisions of rule 38 and you can make a few comments.

MR.MUTYABA (Makindye East, Kampala): Thank you very much. I have no problem with the statement of the Minister. However, this is not the first time that Government has made promises on the basis of which Parliament has made decisions only to be told later that they were unable either to fulfil the promise, or to give some other reason for not fulfilling these promises. 

The issue of the National Planning Authority has been outstanding for a very long time, and we have been insisting for the last five years that the Bill establishing this authority should be brought before Parliament so that at least from a planning level the Government can do something. Because what is happening now is that the Ministers are very quick to come up with requests for loans and for their approval, yet when it comes to matters where I believe the Government should be putting a lot of emphasis, they drag their feet. 

I think the Minister came here about two and a half or three months ago and gave an assurance - it was a big assurance to this House - that by 30th November we shall have this Bill. Now we are being told that Cabinet received this matter last week and it is before the Attorney General. I think as far as we are concerned, it does not matter whether the matter is with the Ministry of Finance or the Attorney General. Our interest is to see that the Bill is before us. I know that the Minister may come here in January and say that the Bill is still with the Attorney General and asks for another two months. And as you know, two months means going too far since we have presidential elections and then parliamentary elections. And that would mean that this Bill would not be considered by this Parliament. It will be passed over to the next Parliament, which itself may have other urgent matters when it comes in.  

I do not know whether the Government really considers the issue of establishing this authority as a matter of great significance for the economic and social development of this country. I wonder whether the Ministers' assurance that this Bill is coming before 30th January is a final assurance and he is going to stand by it himself or his substantive Minister. And does Parliament reserve the right to take any action against any person in the Ministry who is responsible for dragging this matter for this long?

MR.LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. The machinery of planning is diverse. I would like to confine myself to the phenomenon of the economic planner. It is on record that at the beginning of the Movement Government in 1986 when the late Kyesimira was still living, the Ministry of Finance appointed several people to work out machinery, which would put our economy back on a proper footing. Is the Minister aware that much as that was done, of three scenarios being elevated to cause a positive direction to the economy, only one dimension was taken up and those that were demeaned to have been the best were left out? 

Secondly, noting that Parliament on a number of occasions has been complaining about the reluctance of Government to involve it in budget planning, how does the Government plan its budget? We, as Parliament, are out of your way, how do you cause a national Budget without a National Planning Authority and without a national consultative programme? The taxpayers I represent in Lubaga South are far off. They do not know what is going on. They just see petrol raising from time to time, the taxes going up from time to time. They pay the taxes but they do not know what is going on! How do you determine the budget for us?  Where are we, the taxpayers of this country, involved? I thought I would concentrate on the mechanics of what constitutes the economic planning aspects of planning.  Thank you very much.

MR.NYAI (Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My worry is a very simple one. If early January comes and Parliament is not in session, they will say you were not here to accept our Bill. Now, it is many months when the Ministry of Finance said by 30th November we will bring this Bill, and hon. Gabriel Opio says Cabinet only approved it last week. What guarantee do we have that one week in early January he will not come back and tell us, ‘Oh the draftsman has just started the proceedings’? I would like to improve on what my hon. Friend there said; are they prepared to take responsibility? If so, he should now take the onus from this Parliament that, when we come back next year, whether it is early January or late January, if this Bill is not in place somebody in the Ministry of Finance resigns. Then it will be very neat. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The hon. Member has said early January, and you are worried that we may not be sitting and therefore, he may take that as an excuse of not presenting it. But we can cure that problem by requiring that the Bill should be gazetted, because once it is gazetted, we know the Bill exists. So it will be a question of bringing it for the first reading, but once it is gazetted then I think that will be the positive step to ensure that this request will be granted. That is my suggestion. Instead of continuing with the debate, the Minister has said, ‘give me up to early January’. Maybe let us put that condition of gazetting the Bill in January as a safeguard.

MR.ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Whereas your suggestion is really a good one, Members’ concern is whether this promise will really be met under such circumstances. If it again happens that there is still nothing in January, what will happen? That is what Members are asking. We want to put some condition. 

When I was contributing on this motionI warned Members that ‘now you are getting promises and promises have been made here before’, and some Ministers tried to shut me down. But now we have known and I am sure that at the time we were talking about this, the Minister was sure he was not going to meet the deadline, because nothing had been done according to the report. But he went ahead and promised, and now there is yet another promise of early January. We do not know whether early January is before the 15th? What is early January? Is it the second of January or what? I urge Members to put conditions. If nothing happens by early January, what do we do?  If that is what is being suggested, I think hon. Nyai has already made a specific proposal that somebody must take responsibility. And I agree that he has been fooling about with Parliament and, definitely, that cannot be taken lightly.

MR.OPIO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to state that, we have been working very hard to make sure that the very intricate problems which have been coming after one decision has been made are addressed. I would like to make Members share our problems of designing a document as complicated as a National Planning Authority. You think you have moved and you are about to finish, then a dynamic session of society comes and says, ‘this must be included’. You cannot just ignore that section, because we are here to respond to complaints or suggestions from various sections of society. When I made that promise here, we assumed that we had covered many sections of our society. But certain sections of society have come up and said, ‘also consider these areas’. Therefore, I would like -(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you have really explained. What the House wants is the request for January. Tell us the safeguards you have that your request will be made by 1st January. That is all.

MR.OPIO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, now we have made the first step of communicating to the Attorney General about draft the Bill. My job and that of the Ministry of Finance is to constantly remind the Attorney General of the Bill, and that is what we are going to do. The Ministry of Finance and the Attorney General’s office will make sure that we present this Bill as promised and we gazette it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We should conclude this matter, hon. Members.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, I think this House has been good enough to excuse the Ministers for the possible lies they would be making. Otherwise, there was even a possibility of moving a vote of no confidence in the Ministers concerned. Noting that we have not moved a vote of no confidence, I expected the Minister to look at the specifics of the issues raised in the processes related to national planning, but the Minister has not answered any question related to that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I think what we need is a Bill. When the Bill is produced here, if it is not a good Bill, we shall deal with it then and improve upon it here. So, let him bring the Bill, he has said in January, and we would like you to please gazette it. Even if we are not here, we shall know that you have gazetted it and then when we come back, he tables it for the First Reading. You see we cannot tell him what he is going to include there, that is his work. If what he includes in the Bill is not good for us we have the powers to improve on it. So, I think let us end this matter and proceed with other business.  

MR.NYAI: Mr. Speaker, whereas you have wound that fairly well, the only thing is that the fact that the Bill will be ready is still a promise. The issue was that, what if it does not materialise? The Minister was silent on that part.

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much, and I want to thank the hon. Members for raising due concern about the delay in presenting this Bill to Parliament.  At the risk of repeating what my colleague has just said, I would like my colleagues in the House to appreciate the fact that we are not the only players. The Ministry of Finance is not the only player, and the Leader of Government Business is not the only player. The fact is that there are many players. And also, because of our belief in democracy, we actually believe in a lot of input from everybody, professional organisations, civic society development partners and so on and so forth. In fact, I would like to suggest that at an appropriate time the Committees of the House that are directly concerned with this have a chat with the Leader of Government business, and he can explain to them a little bit more than the Minister has done.  

As to what will happen, I request my colleague, hon. Dick Nyai, not to speculate on the future. In fact, I do not think our rules allow us to anticipate what is going to happen. The only thing we can do in human terms is to promise, and mark you, hon. Ongom suggested that the Minister was fooling with this House. First of all, I do not think that that was parliamentary language.  Secondly, it is not true that Government has been seated doing nothing. That is why I have suggested that a meeting with the Leader of Government Business would be of value to Members of this House. A lot has been going on with regard to developing this Bill, and it is because there are so many schools of thought that it has taken this long for us to be able to come up with a properly developed Bill. I am sure even in this House there are many schools of thought. 

So, other than promise on behalf of Government, that what the Minister has said is going to be the truth, I do not know what else we can do. We cannot read the future, but certainly, we would like to promise, like economists say, everything being equal, there shall be a Bill in the House. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

MR.ABURA KENE (Moroto County, Lira): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to ask the hon. Minister of State for Privatisation the following question:

Could the Minister indicate to the House whether: 
the preliminary work before the divestiture of Lira Spinning Mill has been completed? 
If so, when is this Mill to be divested? 

I am aware of what was written in the newspapers. However, I would like the Minister to give me what he has and not what I read in the newspapers. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIVATISATION (Mr. Manzi, Tumubweinee): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uganda Spinning Mill Limited is listed under class 4 of the PERD Statute for full divestiture of Government interest in the company.  The factory closed in 1984 following a strike when the management failed to pay salaries for four months due to a severe cash problem. 

In 1993, competitive tendering attracted one bidder, IPS Group for US $ 3 million. DRIC suspended the bid process citing the low offer compared to the asset valuation of US $ 29.5 million.  

In 1994, a competitive tender was awarded to the highest bidder, Orient Snetex Group, for US $ 3 million.  Government failed to guarantee reliability of the power, and Orient Snetex Group withdrew the offer. 

In 1997, competitive tendering attracted two bids, and the award was given to Good Hope Transaction Enterprises at US $ 3 million dollars again. The bidder withdrew after failing to raise a bid bond for the purchase price. 

In 1998, DRIC at its 214th sitting awarded the Government of Uganda’s 100 per cent shares in Uganda Spinning Mill to Guoster Enterprises Limited at US $ 1.5 billion dollars under private treaty. Commercial terms were negotiated and approved at the 230th DRIC meeting on 21st May 1999. The schedule to the signing of the purchase and sales agreements was on 18th June 1999, but it aborted when Guoster failed to even provide an acceptable bid bond.  

On 15th October 1999, DRIC, at its 241st sitting, decided to terminate negotiations with Guoster and re-tender the Government shares in Uganda Spinning Mill. From 28th February 2000 to 25th April 2000, the public tender for 100 per cent of Government shares in Uganda Spinning Mill was advertised again in the local press and foreign media. Two bids were received from Guoster Enterprises Limited and Lake Kyoga Cotton Company Limited, a member of the DAWDA group of companies. The tender was awarded to Lake Kyoga Cotton Company at one Shs.1 billion for 100 per cent shares. Guoster Enterprises was disqualified for failure to provide a Shs.50 million bid bond. 

However, in September 2000, DRIC, at its 256th sitting, approved the cancellation of the offer to Lake Kyoga Cotton Company following their proposal for concessions on payment terms and pending litigation which had come up against Uganda Spinning Mill. The case was handed over to the Attorney General and he was requested to take it up. There was litigation that someone had not been paid and had taken his complaint to court. 

In support of the above application, a cheque of Shs.83,843,890 was put in court. The application was set aside, the ruling was dismissed with costs, and court went ahead to allow the sale of assets of Uganda Spinning Mill Limited. The properties were sold to Guoster Enterprises at Shs.300 million. The application to review the sale was dismissed thus the sale had been accepted by court.  

On 30th September 2000, Guoster Enterprises took possession of Uganda Spinning Mill premises in Lira, but the Attorney General’s Chambers in the meantime have appealed to the Court of Appeal. We are told that the chances of stopping the sale are very minimal.  Nevertheless, the Attorney General is continuing with his appeal. 

The process of divesting from Uganda Spinning Mill has been going on, but the litigation has given us a new twist. Guoster, who had been disqualified because he could not produce the bid bond, was able to buy from court. And as we talk today, the case is in the Supreme Court and we hope to resolve that. 

Nevertheless, we are told that according to the court procedures, Guoster is a bona fide buyer and we have only one chance, that is to challenge him. If we fail, then we take it that the enterprise’s divestiture will have been completed through a court order, not through the normal privatisation process. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.ABURA KENE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want a few clarifications. At the time when the last buyer or the court case was going on, what was the value of the Spinning Mill? Should the case go on and the buyer takes the Mill, what will be the role of the workers who remained to look after the Mill after it was closed in 1984 until the time of selling? 

Two, will he consider paying their leave entitlement? Because some of them had stayed there for over ten years and were not paid and they have problems. I am raising this issue on their behalf. Who will be responsible for paying those workers for this leave, which they earned but never took? 

Also, at the time of selling this Mill, I remember that the local people had asked to buy it at US $ 3 million. Why was it that the Langi people were not given opportunity to buy it? 

Lastly, should the new buyer take over the Mill, will he still offer some shares to the local people? I thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR.BAKU RAPHAEL: I would like the Minister to clarify to this House whether there are arrangements to pay the terminal benefits of people from West Nile. We have received complaints that the former workers of Lira Spinning Mill who originate from West Nile have been discriminated against in terms of payment of terminal benefits. May I know from the Minister whether this is true, and if so, what arrangements are being made to ensure that they do not lose out any possible benefit they might be entitled to.

MR.MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Speaker, what was the value of the company? It depends on which one you want.  The book value was slightly over US $ 20 million, but the going concern value was less than a million dollars, because the enterprise had been sitting and wasting away for over six years. 

We have paid all the known workers who were able to appear. We have so far paid Shs.l.4 billion to all the workers who were registered to have been workers in 1984, and for those who died, we have paid their families. So, if there is any worker who has not been paid and can prove that he was actually a worker and has got documentary evidence, we have no problem in paying him or her or the relatives of that worker. If it can been proved from the records that that person had been a worker up to 1984 when the enterprise was closed, which is actually 16 years ago, then they can be paid. 

The people around or in Lango area offered about US$500,000 for purchase of this enterprise when it was first tendered and they lost out. However, at the second time of tendering, we requested them to see whether they can actually pay, and at that time they said they did not have the money to pay for it.  We contacted those whom we knew and they said they did not have the money, and if Government was able to give it to them free of charge, then they would be able to take it up. And indeed, we advertised, and they did not respond to the advert. We would have been too willing and too happy to let them take it up. 

On the question as to whether the new buyer will offer shares to the local people, I cannot answer that one for him, because the buyer or the investor has bought under court order and therefore, the arrangements are actually different from buying from the privatisation unit. We have no contract with him since we have not negotiated the deal with him. He has bought it under court order. 

I was not aware that workers who had come from West Nile were discriminated against. As I said at the beginning, if the hon. Member is aware of some workers who were discriminated, he should let us know who they are and where they are and we should be able to pay them. As you realise, the workers have not been working since 1984 and therefore, those we found on the books are the ones whom we traced and paid. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LAND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS (Mr. Baguma Isoke): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Land (amendment) Bill, 2000” be read the Second Time.   

The Act we are amending is the Land Act, 1998 which came into force two and half years ago. The Bill we are considering today is a two-clause Bill amending only section 98, which provides for the determination of land disputes by local council and magistrates’ courts. 

Section 96(6) states, “Where any case relating to a land dispute was pending before a magistrates court or a local council court prior to the coming into force of this Act, the court shall carry on and complete the case within the period of two years from the date of coming into force of this Act”  

The law gave only two years to the LC and Magistrates courts to determine those cases that were before them. But in real practice, the Inspector of Courts has inspected the two categories of courts and recommended to us that according to his findings, the two years were inadequate. And in any case, it was not well advised for Parliament to have given these courts a definite period. 

In the course of litigation, an appeal may go to the High Court from these lower courts and the High Court may direct that the case may be re-heard in the lower courts. This is unblocking the channel of the administration of justice, and therefore, I came up with this Bill giving the LC and the Magistrates Courts power to hear these cases until they are completed. This is all that this Bill seeks to achieve. It is of an urgent nature, and I pray colleagues to give it urgent consideration and pass it without much ado. I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr. Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on Natural Resources on the Land (amendment) Bill, 2000. I beg to present this report in conformity with rule 96 of the rules of procedure of Parliament.  

The Committee met with the Minister of State for Lands with whom the Bill was examined in detail, and the committee took into consideration views of other stakeholders to enable it make a comprehensive conclusion.  

As the Minister has said, the objective of the Bill is to amend section 98 of the Land Act, by extending the time limit in which magistrates courts and local council courts are authorised to deal with cases pending before them prior to the commencement of the Land Act. 

Section 98(6) of the Land Act reads as follows: “where any case relating to a land dispute was pending before a Magistrate’s court or Local Council court prior to the coming into force of this Act, a court shall carry on and complete a case within a period of two years from the date of the coming into force of this Act”. 

Section 98(7) of the Land Act precluded magistrates’ courts and local council courts to deal with new cases related to land disputes. 

The two-year period given by the Land Act to these courts for dealing with the pending cases ended on 2nd July 2000, before many of such cases were finally disposed of, leaving a vast vacuum. The land tribunals that were intended to replace these courts are not yet in place, and it may take some time to have them established. 

The Minister informed the Committee that out of the budgetary request of Shs.22 billion, only Shs.3 billion was provided by the Ministry of Finance in each of the last two financial years for the operationalisation of the Land Act.  This has, therefore, disabled the Ministry in establishing the land tribunals at district and sub-county levels, and it has also affected the operations of the land committees. Because of the failure to establish land tribunals at sub-county and district levels, there has been a vacuum and accumulation of land disputes all over the country. This has resulted into many people using mob justice and the jungle law in dealing with land disputes. Consequently, there has been death arising from disputes, and others have taken such cases to Police whereas they are civil in nature. 

On the other hand, some cases have been handled by the High Court. It is it the only court with original jurisdiction as of now. This has enabled the rich who have access to the High Court to have an upper hand over the poor who cannot afford logistics associated with the High Court. 

It is on the above note that the Committee recommends that not only should more time be provided to lower courts, but also permission should be granted to enable them handle new cases to completion until land tribunals are established. This will greatly ease the administration of justice in this country. The Committee, therefore, intends to move this amendment. Fortunately Government, through the Minister of State for Lands, has agreed to the amendment. 

In the case of right of appeal, the Committee noted that there are some instances where magistrates’ courts and local council courts had passed judgement in land disputes before the enactment of the Land Act, 1998. This left the aggrieved party with only a right to appeal to a higher court. But before the aggrieved parties could exercise their right of appeal to the higher LC or magistrates’ courts or even the High Court, the Land Act came into force. The Committee, therefore, proposes extension of time within which to exercise the right of appeal for local councils and magistrates’ courts. 

You will agree that the issue of co-ownership of land by spouses has been a very contentious issue in both local and international forums. As a matter of fact, the Committee has received several appeals to this effect.  The Committee observed that the clause on co-ownership of land by spouses has not been brought to Parliament. The Minister of State for Lands informed us that Cabinet transferred the clause to the Domestic Relations Bill to be tabled before Parliament soon. The Committee recommends that, subject to a few amendments as attached to this report, the Bill be passed into law. I beg to move.

MS.KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for the work well done and express my concern on the last page. This is on the clause on the co-ownership of land by spouses. 

I am so disappointed that the Government we cherish so much, and which is supported by women and men all over this country, could come up with this idea of shifting this clause from the Land Act, where it is supposed to belong, and speculate that it will be included in the Domestic Relations Bill. 

We were told here, I think by you, Mr. Speaker, that as we legislate for our country we should not speculate. Nobody has seen the Domestic Relations Bill that the Cabinet is referring to. And from some circles, and through consultations, we are told that they have decided to abandon it for a while because people were not agreed about the provisions in this Domestic Relations Bill. So, I would like to ask Government and maybe the Minister or the Committee to inform this House when this Domestic Relations Bill will be tabled in this House. 

We were promised a National Planning Authority Bill in November, but the Minister has just told us that it has not been possible to bring that Bill. And for the Domestic Relations Bill, there has been no promise at all. I do not know who will define ‘soon’ for us, but I do not see it coming anyway. 

So, I would like to appeal to Government because the women have unreservedly supported this Government. They have put in all their effort, body, energy and mind to develop this country. They have tilled the ground. And when I am talking of women, it is because they are the disadvantaged. I could as well have used the word ‘spouse’, but the women are the disadvantaged gender. Time and again we have had cases where women, after staying on the land for a long time, are chased away without anything. They are told, ‘you do not belong here, you do not own this land’. This clause was supposed to safeguard these women, and of course it has been distorted. People think women want to grab land. I want it on record -(Interruption)

DR.KASIRIVU-ATWOOKI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want clarification from hon. Kabakumba as to whether she has not heard men who have been chased away from land or homes by women. In her contribution she is being biased. She is saying that it is only women who are chased away.

MR.OKIROR AUGUSTINE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also want clarification from hon. Kabakumba as to whether this clause would be able to safeguard marriages.

MRS.KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you very much. I have already said that the women or the female sex is the disadvantaged gender. And I am mindful that there are a few cases, very few indeed, where men are chased away from land. And in those few cases, all I know is that the men do not own this land. That is why I am saying this clause would safeguard or protect both the men and women who are unfairly treated as far as land is concerned. 

The second clarification was whether this clause would safeguard marriages. Yes, it would. That is why I was moving to the next point. People are saying women will get married just for the purpose of grabbing land. That is not true! In most cases, this is meant for the rural women. I will tell you, I, Kabakumba Masiko, can afford to buy myself a piece of land, and I can afford to negotiate with my husband to co-own land, but my poor mother who did not see the inside of a classroom cannot. My poor aunts, grandmothers, sisters who are down there in the villages, I can assure you, are suffering because of lack of access and control of land. Mr. Speaker, you can see my dear colleagues are coming out in their true colours –(Laughter)- they do not want real empowerment of women. Even when it comes to the Domestic Bill, I am sure some of them are now saying good riddance. When the Bill comes, they will say after all you can keep it out –(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are remaining with only 5 minutes to make a contribution according to the new rules.

HAJJI.SSEMBAJJA SULAIMAN: Thank you for allowing me to seek clarification from the hon. Member on the Floor. I would like to know whether what she is saying is what the rural woman is saying. I would like to know whether the rural woman has been consulted over this issue of co-ownership or whether she has consulted only the people within the city centre.

MRS.KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, I will answer you straight away. My constituency is not in the city. Masindi District is a rural district so I have consulted the rural women. We have records. The Land Alliance has consulted, and even when the Ministry of Finance was consulting, they were told that one of the hindrances was because women do not have access and control of land. 

I would like to wind up by saying that I support this amendment, and surely the magistrate courts and the LC courts should be given powers to hear and handle the old and new cases. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR.NSUBUGA MAYANJA (Ntenjeru North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the Chairman of the Committee for the report and the timely amendment Bill by the hon. Minister of State for Lands. The reasons are many, but I will dwell on a few, and I want to talk about specific issues arising from the report. 

You will note that there was heated debate before the Bill was passed into an Act. So many arguments were raised as to why we must pass the Bill into law. We want to empower those people who were badly affected by the previous law so that they are empowered to get access to land, access to credit from banks, and so that they add a lot to our economic development by using the land.  

Unfortunately after passing this law, it appeared that the Government was not as interested at the end as it was interested in the beginning. That is why you see in this report that the Minister informed the Committee that out of a budgetary request of Shs.22 billion, only a total of Shs.3 billion has been provided consecutively over two years. This is not even half of what was required in total, and this is very dangerous. I therefore, urge the Government to take the seriousness with which people consider land as a matter of utmost urgency and make sure that money is released so that the activities of land reform and the land law are realised.  

I have also realised, and actually I urge the Members here to take serious note, that we have some very important laws like the Local Government Act and the Land Act which basically touch the people in the villages. Normally, the assumption is that when you pass a law, every Ugandan or every person interested should have or will be having the money to access the documents. Unfortunately, many times you go to a sub-county or even a saza council and there is no one in possession of these statutes yet they are very important laws, which are supposed to be referred to. I suggest if it is acceptable, that Government should make it a point to provide for booklets of such laws, which touch the people in the villages. These booklets should be provided free at certain levels like the sub-county. I am sure some of the problems, which are arising in the villages, are due to people just speculating on what is contained in these laws, and you cannot blame them.  

So, with this Shs.22 billion, I think we shall have sufficient money to be able to distribute some copies of the Land Act to the local people so that they can decide on the issues from a point of knowledge.

I am also concerned that, according to the report, people have been killed through mob justice because of these land disputes. It is unfortunate that people are dying because of a law, which was supposed to assist them in running their affairs, but which the Government has neglected by way of not providing amicable means through the tribunals to resolve their problems. It is also unfortunate that contrary to what we expected when we were passing this law, we were supposed to assist especially the poor, and that is why we even put the ‘busulu’ at around Shs.1,000. But what is happening is that the poor are actually unable with the current law without these amendments, because people do not have access to justice when it is necessary. 

I am also concerned about what my hon. colleague, hon. Kabakumba Masiko was raising. I support the empowerment of women, and I think the problem has been how to present the case. What I remember and what has been repeated here is that the proposal was tabled here and somehow it did not appear in the law, and this is unfortunate. But I am sure and I do not think that the hon. Minister now is acting in bad faith when he says that the clause relating to that issue will be included in the Domestic Relations Bill. I am sure the Domestic Relations Bill is as good a law as the land law would be.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Hon. Kabakumba Masiko is understandably concerned about land held by spouses. I would like to point out that most of us here know of mothers and aunts with the same type of understanding capacity as the one she is referring to. But land as a property can be held and dealt with under our laws by anyone, man or woman. It can be by land law, or by land of contract, or whatever. So, there is no problem there.  

Where land becomes a commodity or a property of spouses, naturally once you talk about the Domestic Relations Bill concerning spouses, that commodity or that type of land must come under that Bill. So, other things being equal, the memo of the Domestic Relations Bill is ready for the Cabinet to consider, and I am sure almost within about 21 days that Bill should be ready for the First Reading here. We had to consult a number of women organisations about this, they only informed commissioners there to do so. This is why there has been a bit of delay, but it is certainly coming, and wherever land concerns spouses, not just spinsters and bachelors which is outside the spousing group, that land will be considered in the Domestic Relations Bill, which will be here soon –(Interruption).

MRS.KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Mr. Speaker, should we take it that the Minister has committed himself to bringing the Domestic Relations Bill within about 21 days as he says? That is in December before we go for recess.  

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Speaker, an intention is an intention. My intention is not just a frivolous intention, it is a serious one. So, as far as I am concerned, within 21 days the Bill will be published for the First Reading, ceteris paribus.

MR.MUKASA PASCAL (Nakaseke County, Luwero): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wish to thank the Minister and to the Committee on Natural Resources for the report presented. I wish to add my concern to those already expressed about the treatment of co-ownership in this regard. If I remember correctly, there was contention as to whether the House we had actually expressed ourselves and approved the incorporation of that clause in the Land Act. At the time, it was ruled out on procedural grounds that it had not been presented –(Interjection).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was not on procedural grounds, it was not presented.

MR.MUKASA PASCAL: It was presented in a format that did not incorporate it in the Land Act, if you remember correctly –(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Presentation means, you move an amendment, which is considered and passed.

MR.MUKASA PASCAL: Because it was not procedurally presented in the manner that you have stated, Mr. Speaker, we readily did not include it in the Land Act.  I accept that. But the expectation was that it would be coming in the subsequent amendment. That was my understanding. I think that its omission on the grounds that the Cabinet had decided to put it in the Domestic Relations Bill does not quite answer the concern expressed at the time we noted the omission.

I also would like to draw your attention to our rules of procedure, which do not accept anticipation or speculation. The fact that it might come in the Domestic Relations Bill does not mean that it will provide for what was considered at the time of the Land Act. I think that is a point that should be taken substantively by the House. I think this clause could fall by the way side simply because on one hand it was not presented procedurally as it should have been, as you have rightly put it. But on the other hand, it had been thought it belonged in the Land Act and just might fall nowhere. 

My second point is on funding for the Land Act. I again wish to share some of the concerns already raised. We have borrowed money for far lesser causes than this one. The Land Act is extremely important to the business of this country. We passed it as a constitutional requirement. We had to pass it by a certain day, which we did. When it came to its implementation, it has taken us more than two years to find appropriate resources to implement it. Looking at the other causes for which we have borrowed money, this would be the worthiest cause to borrow the Shs.22 billion to implement it in order not to fall back to the magistrates and local councils for its governance. We had already provided for land tribunals to properly implement the Land Act. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

MRS.BABA DIRI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for bringing this amendment on the Land Act. First of all, I would like to warn the House that very often we pass our Bills in hurry, and we later discover that it is not possible to implement them, then they are brought back. I think we have many more Bills to that are coming. We need to be very careful because it is ashaming to the august House to come to repeal Acts now and then. We have the Local Government Act and the Traffic and Road Safety Act, which are also coming back very soon. So, we better be careful when we are passing our Land Act. We better discuss our Bills thoroughly and pass them once and for all.  

I would like to express my disappointment on the removal of the clause on co-ownership from this Land Act. This clause was introduced by the women in line with our Constitution, which provides for equity with men and being able to share properties equally. And there were reasons for that. Women have no to stay. At their parents’ place, they will say they do not give land to the girls because you will marry and you will have your land there. When you are married, the man will say, your land is with your parents. As a result, women are left without land.

Secondly, women have access to land and we are the main producers of crops, but when you do not own the land, the man grabs all the produce. In the end, you remain very poor, your work is just only to produce and somebody else spends the money the way he wants. 

I am actually worried about what is happening in Parliament. We pass a clause and it is considered as part of an Act, then some people from somewhere remove it and hide it away and say it should be transplanted to the Domestic Relations Bill! I think that is being very unrealistic. The women are very disappointed, especially, the rural women. Very often when we are married, we work together with the men to acquire land, but because the land is around the man’s home, he takes it away and the woman is left without land. So, women of Uganda are very disappointed about the changes on this clause. I am very sorry to say this. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MRS.BWAMBALE LOYCE (Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for this report, and especially the Minister responsible for the Land Act, for bringing these amendments on the Floor. Land is a very important factor in production. Some of our constituencies, who mainly depend on land, were getting disappointed that some pieces of land were being kept redundant because of the accumulated land disputes. So, I request that as soon as these amendments are passed, the Land Act should be implemented. 

Secondly, I want to know from the hon. Minister whether Government has already embarked on the exercise of surveying its own land. My constituency, in Kasese District, has a lot of Government owned land. This is a concern which I am bringing here under this amendment, because the people we represent have requested that during the process of surveying that land, some of it should be degazetted on a proposal brought by the hon. Minister.  

There are three prisons in Kasese, the UPDF Hima Production Farm, which is unutilised, Mubuku Prisons, about half of which is utilised and Ibuga Prisons, which is also redundant. The problem is that the people of Kasese, especially the Basongora cattle keepers have no land on which to graze their animals yet there is Government land lying redundant! 

Over 1000 cattle keepers from the Busongora and a few from the Bukonzo have crossed from Uganda to the Democratic Republic of Congo in search of pasture and water. I want the Members to understand the situation; there are also two National Parks, Queen Elizabeth National Park, surrounding the Basongora who are cattle keepers, and then the Rwenzori Mountains National Park, where they are not supposed to graze animals. So, they are just in the corridor and yet there are these redundant Government pieces of land. The situation is pathetic! 

When you are entering Kasese, you see a lot of open land, and it becomes ridiculous to talk about lack of land when there is open land which is being held redundant by Government. So, I appeal to the Minister to consider this request.

Thirdly, I appeal to Cabinet and this House to refrain from making laws that are impossible to implement. It has been a shame that this law, which is badly required by our people, and which appeared to be politically on demand at the time we passed it, has taken so long. We even sat here on Sunday! I am embarrassed to see that it has taken us so long. We should have had foresight and refrained from introducing clauses that would make it very difficult or very expensive to implement.   

Finally, I would like to talk about an issue that concerns my constituency, the women I represent. The women of Uganda and especially Members of Parliament here wanted to move from lamentations about co-ownership by spouses to negotiations –(Interjection).  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Incidentally, you have said your constituency is women. I thought you were representing the entire district.

MRS.BWAMBALE: I thank you for your correction, but I represent mainly women. All right, let me direct my concern at this material time to part of my constituency, the women. We had moved from lamenting about spouses co-owning land to negotiations. And the women of this Parliament and other women in the civil society held seminars and workshops and lobbied the Minister of Lands and the Committee. We are disappointed to see just one paragraph in this report, which is saying nothing about co-ownership. The promise that it will come in the Domestic Relations Bill, to me, is an empty promise. When we get there, different issues will be mooted here in this House for rejecting and minimising the clause. The women of this country had wanted it to be where it belongs. 

I have carried out research in my constituency and here at the national level. The elite women who have the economic empowerment to own land do not want this clause of spouses co-owning in this Bill. This is the truth. But what percentage of the women do they make in this country? It is a small percentage. 

When you go to the grassroots where the Land Act has empowered women, it has given them user rights. They only have access to utilising the land. When it comes to owning the land, that one is reserved. And that is why the hon. Members in this House should be convinced that the other clause should have been in this Bill. So, the rural woman will be disappointed tonight to realise that the Land Act has been amended by this Parliament and the clause giving access and control of land, which is very, very essential in a family, has been ignored by Government. We demand an explanation on their behalf. 

What disappointed me most is that, in the Committee, which handled the report, there were three Ladies, and they also signed and consented to it! Why did they not present a minority report at least supporting the rural women? 

My final disappointment is with Cabinet. Last year we lobbied His Excellency the President, who is the appointing authority, to have more women appointed to Cabinet. I want to find out whether there were women in Cabinet when it was resolved that this clause should be minimised and thrown in the dustbin? What were you doing for us there? Because it could have been done without the press. The negotiations have now turned to lamentations –(Interruption).  

MS. KIYINGI NAMUSOKE: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. Mr. Speaker, I want to inform the hon. Member, maybe I am not even informing her, I am reminding her that in Cabinet, just as in this House, things are discussed and disposed of in a manner where the majority decision will take the Floor. In Cabinet, as she knows, there are fewer women than men, but that is not to say that all men disagree or that the voting depends on the balance between men and women. That does not mean that the women did not voice their opinions, and if the opinion is lost, it does not mean that the women there were not doing anything about it.  Thank you.

MRS.BWAMBALE: Thank you, hon. Minister, for the defence you have given. But our request is that you should have worked very hard and convinced the gender insensitive Cabinet to turn our way –(Interruption).

MRS.HYUHA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague, or possibly remind her, that we have only six women Cabinet Ministers. The majority of these women are Ministers of State, and I think they can only attend Cabinet when their bosses are not there. So, I do not see the impact these six women Ministers can make among the 21 male Ministers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, do you really want these Ministers to reveal the secrets of their Cabinet Meeting? This is a problem, because you will be tempting them to say, ‘oh, we defended but we were defeated’. It becomes a problem. I think you would rather put up your case, but do not tempt these people to reveal their secrets. Let her finish, please.

MRS.BWAMBALE: Since I was attacking Cabinet, I was anxious to hear from hon. Kagonyera, I do not know –(Interruption)

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. Member for giving way. I would like to assure this House, like everybody knows, that there is no question that gender insensitivity is part of Cabinet. It is not. And if anything, usually in Cabinet, although the Speaker has advised that we should not reveal secrets, there is actually plenty of sympathy with anything to do with gender balance, and evidence abounds for this in this Government.  

Lastly, the hon. Member knows that legislative powers lie with this House. The best that Cabinet can do is to make recommendations to Parliament. Therefore, if Parliament feels that the Cabinet might have been less sensitive than they would like to have it, then it is this House which can call Cabinet to order and make the legislation that is as gender friendly as the hon. Member would like to have it.  

I want to assure her that there is no question of gender insensitivity in the Cabinet. The Cabinet is made up of very progressive men and women who are very gender sensitive. That includes me for example, if I may be personal, Mr. Speaker. As far as I am concerned, when my wife is ready, I can bequeath her everything I own in this world. And the only thing I would like is the four by six, by six. That is all I will insist to claim. Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much.  

MRS.BWAMBALE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to conclude by thanking the Members who have given me the information. But it has gone further to entrench my fears that the women’s request and desire, in as far as empowerment through ownership of land is concern, is marginalised and minimised. The rural women can only till the land. They have no right to own it as we stand now until there is a law in place. And I cannot deliberate for a law which is not here and which is not passed. 

So, we would like to register our disappointment with Cabinet and with Government for failure to respond to our request. And on my part, I oppose the report. I want to reject the report until it includes an adequate explanation about what went on. All the negotiations that went on are now lost, at least those requests should have been in an appendix somewhere to put it on the record of this House.  

I would like therefore to oppose the adoption of this report, and I would also like to request the Minister and Cabinet to have a second thought. At an appropriate time, I will raise the issue of quorum when we start taking decisions. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as you were informed yesterday, the maximum time you have for a contribution is just five minutes.  

MR.ONGOM ABSOLOM (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have got a few comments to make. First of all, I would like to say that I support the report and the amendment very strongly.  

Secondly, I would like, for the sake of the record, to repeat what you, Mr. Speaker, have already told the House. This is because I was a very active Member of the Committee that considered the Land Bill. It was very lengthy work indeed. This question of co-ownership, in the first place, was not in the Bill. So, the question of removing it as the Member suggested is not correct, because it was never in the Bill. 

We know that there was an attempt to make an amendment to include in the Bill, but that was discussed and many Members spoke for and against, but when the correct time came for moving this amendment, nobody stood up to move it. That is why it was never there and that is on record. (Mrs. Bwambale rose _).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Member, we have exhausted this point. We checked the record. 

MRS.BWAMBALE: But, Mr. Speaker, I was here and that one is a wrong one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, if you want information, get it from him.

MR.ONGOM: No, I have not agreed to accept the information because we already know the correct information.

This amendment really sets out to facilitate the operationalisation of the Land Act, which has delayed because of certain problems in the Act. My problem is that the amendment did not go far enough to make it possible for the Land Act to be operationalised. The Minister informed me officially that the operation of this Act would cost a lot of money, the major part of which goes to the tribunals. They are so many that I even wonder whether the Act will ever be sustained. Even if you get a loan to start it going, you may never sustain it. 

So, I was expecting the Minister to find a way of coming back and saying that they shall do something about the tribunals, maybe reduce the number. We have so many of them that they will never really work effectively with our meagre Budget, however much you try, unless we are going to borrow every year to run this Act. So, I suggest that, maybe after passing this amendment, the Minister should go back and find a way of reducing on these land tribunals.  

I agree with the second amendment that the lower courts, the LC and magistrates courts should continue until this Act works. Perhaps that will be the only way that the Act will be workable. Without that, the cost of running the tribunals will just bog it down. And that is really the reason why I stood, because I support the other amendments.  I suggest that after passing this Bill, the Minister should go back and find a way of reducing on the number of tribunals so that we can make the Land Act work, otherwise it will never work. Thank you.

MRS.BALEMEZI LYDIA (Woman Representative, Mukono): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the Committee for the work done, much as I feel that there is a lot that was not looked at and which should be considered.

I will be more specific on just two points. The Committee has recommended that there should be an extension on time in cases of appeal, but this time was not specified. Many times people are frustrated because of those lengthy periods when an issue should be finalised. So, I would like to see the Committee coming up with a suggestion as to how much time should be allowed for the appeals.

Secondly, just like my other colleagues, I am also disappointed with the Committee’s work as regards gender in the Land Act. It is very frustrating and very disappointing to see that the co-ownership issue is being pushed to the Domestic Relations Bill, which has not even come, much as everybody feels that this is where it belongs. I get perturbed when I look at it. For example, if land is to be co-owned and it is in the Domestic Relations Bill and one of the spouses dies, what procedure will one take so that it is reverted to the Land Act so that the owner changes the ownership? This is from the Domestic Relations Bill back to the Land Act where that land is owned singly. 

I was further disappointed when our Minister gave an example of how he would give land to his wife if he were to die. He does not know when he will die or whether his wife would die first. So, this has indicated to us that he has not even written his will as to whether his wife is going to own this land –(Interruption)

PROF.MONDO KAGONYERA: Mr. Speaker, when I stood here I gave an example of myself as one of those Members of this House and the Cabinet who are sufficiently gender sensitive. That is all. I gave myself as an example.  Therefore, is the hon. Member in order to mislead this House that I was speculating about my death and that it is only then that I would bequeath my earthly belongings to my wife? The only thing I said about the grave was just to show that that is the only piece of land every one of us should strictly have a very vital interest in, because they would own that for eternity. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, is she in order to mislead this House? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have repeated what you said. I think she is now directed to tune her mind to that. Proceed, please.

MRS.BALEMEZI: I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for that wise ruling, and I thank the Minister for clarifying on what he meant.

Some Members of this House feel that if co-ownership of land is included in the Land Act, it might disorganise marriages. But I can assure everybody here, if this co-ownership is included in the Land Act, in fact, it would cement marriages more. I have travelled widely and I have seen that most women fear to invest on this land using their personal income. They have that feeling that they do not know who owns this land other than their husbands. The land might have been registered under some other peoples’ names, since they do not see the titles of the land on which they till. And in many cases, when women are asked to plant permanent crops from which they could get some income, they always give an excuse that they fear to put all their energies on land and invest in it. They said the man might realise that the land is very enterprising then he marries another woman - (Laughter)- or the men may chase them away. So, these women fear to invest so much on the land. And this is contributing a lot of poverty in the rural areas.  

So, I request the Committee and the Minister of Lands to reconsider putting co-ownership into this Act. I would like to remind the Members that whenever they go to their constituencies, they assure our women that they are coming here to fight for their rights, and this is one of the biggest rights that a woman is striving to achieve.  Much as our colleagues here tell us they are gender sensitive, they are gender sensitive theoretically, in practice you are not showing us that you are actually gender sensitive - (Applause). We would like to see this gender sensitivity by your inclusion of the co-ownership clause in the Land Act. I would be very happy and ready to second this report if it was brought back again with the amendment on co-ownership. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR.KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank the Government for the Bill and the Committee for the report. I have a few issues to raise. There are many disputes, which are supposed to be settled by the local councils or thereafter the magistrates’ courts. But there is a major dispute, which has remained unsolved. That is the dispute on who owns the land in Kibaale, and I request Government to put more emphasis in solving that dispute than in solving these small land disputes.  

When this Land Act was enacted, we provided for the land fund. The land fund has remained unoperational and it is a very big concern to the people of Kibaale District. I would have even wished that the money, which has been earmarked as being available for the tribunals, is channelled to the land fund, so that we solve a long historical dispute first. After that, we can think of establishing the tribunals, because the tribunals in Kibaale will be irrelevant.    

Secondly, I think in the Land Act it is the women who stand to gain, because in the Land Act we provided for consent by the spouse. Now, if that provision is in the Land Act and Government is proposing that the co-ownership clause will be in the Domestic Relations Bill, to me that is even much better. In the Land Act there is consent, and then there is co-ownership in the Domestic Relations Bill. So, rather than having safeguards in one law alone, it will be in two laws (Interruption)

MS.BABIHUGA WINNIE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to inform the small man, hon. Kasirivu – (Laughter)- that in accordance with our rules of procedure, no Bill which infringes on human rights as enshrined in the Constitution may be brought before Parliament. And the rights to own property are enshrined in the Constitution. Therefore, it is wrong for the Committee to deny women the ownership of land. This proposal is against the human rights of women on property. I thank you, Mr. Speaker -(Applause).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you have heard the observation by the Member of Rukungiri. Is this law depriving anybody of property rights? In fact, on the contrary, if you stretch this issue of property rights, you may get a counter argument that by trying to create co-ownership, you are depriving somebody of property rights. But I think we have agreed. So, let us not exploit this issue, because it can cause counter arguments on both sides. What we can say is that we want to include that provision here, or we want to include it there.  But if we go on analysing this issue, it may cause us some problems. So, I think the case should be whether to include this proposal.

MS.BABIHUGA: Mr. Speaker, what the women are fighting for is the ownership to matrimonial land where often times the spouses have worked for it together. They have owned this land together, and it goes to benefit the majority of the marginalised women out there in the villages who are chased out of their family holdings and are languishing without any livelihood. Therefore, for the Committee to slam a complete ‘no’, saying that women cannot be allowed to own property, for us is unconstitutional. We, the women, think it is unconstitutional.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are the one who has used the term matrimonial. You have used matrimonial property, and yet on the other hand, the argument will be that the domestic law will be dealing with matrimonial issues. So, I think let us really argue our case without exploiting some of these terms, because they may cause us some problems. 

But your point is appreciated. As far as you are concerned, there was an attempt when we were dealing with the Land Bill to have it here, but by a slip up, it was never included. You want it this time to be included here, but let us not go very far in these details. They may complicate our debate.  

DR.KASIRIVU: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, the women stand to gain when you have two laws to redress. There is consent in the Land Act that no spouse will transact in the land unless the other spouse has given consent, which to me is really good enough. And then when the Domestic Relations Bill comes, other issues will emerge. 

As I said, my interest is the bigger dispute of Kibaale. Parliament, in its wisdom, established the land fund to solve this dispute, which was created in 1900 when the people’s land was dispossessed. Even if we were to talk about co-ownership, what will the women in Kibaale co-own?  They will not co-own anything because the land does not belong to them in the first place. So, we must solve that problem first. 

I would have even wished the Committee to suggest that the available Shs.3 billion goes to the land fund so that we can solve the problem of Kibaale and then we can move at the same level so that the people of Kibaale are not left behind. Otherwise, tribunals will not be relevant in Kibaale. If we remain behind, will that be fair? It is not fair. The Shs.3 billion should be put to the land fund and we should compensate those who were given land titles in 1900 and thereafter, so that they are happy, and then we get our land back.

MRS.IKOTE ALLELUYA (Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the Committee for their effort in writing this report. I just have two or three observations to make. 

The first one is to condemn the practice of coming with bits and pieces of amendments when the whole law is full of holes. Since we passed this law, there are so many clauses that have been seen to be defective, but we just get this one bit and come with it because apparently, people have fought and have had very serious disputes over land, and there is no one to solve them. 

I have talked to a lot of people, particularly in the private sector, who are desperate to see that Parliament puts in place the Land Regulations so that they can operate. But although this report was prepared earlier than this amendment report, we are not getting it here now. It is putting our heads in the sand if we do not accept that we made a very, very big mistake when we made a law without looking at the financial implications of what we were passing. We need Shs.22 billion. I do not know whether it is for just one Financial Year or it is for a much longer period. But either way, I do not see us getting it in the near future. 

I would have liked the Minister and the Committee to sit down and look at what needs to be done to make this law operational instead of leaving it as it is and just hoping that one day it will work itself out.  Personally, I would have preferred that this Bill goes back and comes with conclusive amendments to each and every problem that is currently foreseeable and not just being with a small piece about disputes. 

We have heard Kibaale. Their problem is even longer than any of these disputes maybe, wanting to resolve now. I think they thought they had got justice at some stage and they were jubilating. They have gone back to the drawing board. We are amending this amendment because people are fighting, people have got terrible disputes. It is even alleged that these disputes have caused death. 

The issue of women not having a right to domestic land has caused many women to become destitute. They are forced into prostitution (Laughter); they have been forced into all kinds of positions, untenable, humiliating because of being unceremoniously disbanded from their homes. 

So, the writing is on the wall. This is the moment of truth. I want to call upon the women of Uganda to look very, very carefully at what is transpiring in this Parliament today. The Members of Parliament that you elect are the ones who are going to articulate your aspirations, your hopes, and your dreams in this House. But they are finding it abhorrent to look at the situation of the women of Uganda and understand that they need some small bit of security. They are therefore relegating this important Clause that we, women in Parliament, are trying to bring on board for you. 

Some Members would actually like to put forth that the women here are illicit and do not know what is happening on the ground. I would like to inform you that recently I attended a Church service in rural Pallisa and when I was asked to speak, I mentioned this Clause that we are trying to push for them. After that, the poor Priest could not get in a word. That was the sermon for the day, that women in Parliament are trying to bring them this Clause. It touched them so much. They did not want to hear any more sermons. Women are told they are nothing.  They should not discuss or have any input in normal day to day life because they do not own land. 

So, I want again to call upon the women of Uganda today. Look very carefully at what your Member of Parliament says about this co-ownership Clause and when they come again to ask for your votes, women of Uganda, shun these men, who come here and do not support your causes. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now hon. Members, so far got 10 people have spoken on this issue and it appears we are just repeating the same issue. Therefore, I will ask the chairman to make his concluding remarks. We have got two points, the inclusion of co-ownership in this Bill or in the Domestic Relations Bill. I think that has been the essence of the debate. I think the point is taken then we shall do the needful at an appropriate time. 

MR.KAJARA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I thank the hon. Members who have contributed to this report, applauding it that it is a very good report. Mr. Speaker -(Interruption) -

MS.BABIHUGA: Mr. Speaker is the hon. chairman in order to assert that this House has applauded the report as being very good when the women of this House have expressed their displeasure and disgust at the way the women's concerns are being ignored in his report? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members this is a point on which I cannot rule because it is an assessment. As far as the chairperson is concerned, he thinks he has received support although your assessment is that the report has been condemned. I think this is a personal assessment and therefore I cannot say he is out of order.  But he may be wrong to make that assessment. Maybe my assessment is different from his but because mine is different I cannot say my assessment should be his assessment. But we shall do the needful at an appropriate time as I promised.

MS.BIBIHUGA: But, Mr. Speaker, you remember even in my information I referred to rule 98 and I will just read it for record purposes that "No Bill, motionor amendment shall be introduced in the House, which in the opinion of the Speaker is likely to result in the derogation from the enjoyment of any of the particular human rights". And the human rights I referred to is the right to own property and freedoms specified in Article 44 of the Constitution. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, in your judgement if you feel that the denial of this Clause in this Land Act is not a denial of human rights, I will follow your ruling.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have really put your case so ably that you are persuading me to say a Law which has been existing. Because you see we are dealing with an existing Law, that is the Land Act, and you passed it some time in the past. Somebody has just brought a small amendment, which he thinks is necessary to amend the existing Law, which is valid now. So, I cannot say that that Law contravenes that provision. In any case this amendment is not depriving you of any property. If you have property interest you still keep. So how is this amendment going to deprive of property if you have any? I do not think I should participate in deciding where you include the amendment you want, whether here or the other. I am only listening and then decide. But for me to say now I should pronounce that this Bill - no I am unable to do so.

MS.BABIHUGA: Most obliged Mr. Speaker and the women's caucus will bring an amendment at an appropriate stage.  I thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR.KAJARA: Mr. Speaker I have a few comments to make.  First, I would like to assure this House that there was no attempt by the Committee to leave out the issue of co-ownership. In the first instance, this issue was not even brought before the Committee. In fact, it is the Committee that raised this concern to Government. Why the co-ownership Clause had not been brought along with these other amendments? And Government explained that this co-ownership Clause will be brought at an appropriate time and that it will be brought in the Domestic Relation's Bill. 

So, I would like to put it on record that the Committee did not leave out anything. We worked within the memorandum, within the object of this Bill and the object the Bill was to amend that section and extend time limit within which the magistrate's courts and local council courts are authorised under the Land Act. So - (Interruption)

ENG.WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: I think the agitation by the women is justified, not that I support women to start claiming my ancestral land, because that is not possible. But if what they are claiming for is to get their cake, which they have sweated together with the husband on another piece of land, I think the chairman of this committee is not doing justice to this issue when he does not address it squarely (Interruption.). Mr. Speaker, I am asking clarification for supplementary information -(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member what clarification are you really making? Because the chairman was only saying - (Interruption)

ENG.WAMBUZI: The clarification I wanted him to give to this - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. The chairperson said he was aware of this one and he is the one who raised it. Now what clarification are you making from him?

MR.WAMBUZI: Mr. Speaker really - (Interruption)-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think hon. Chairperson continue.

MR.WAMBUZI: I see a problem where my people are dying in my constituency because of land and this chairman comes up with just one paragraph of a Law as though our people are not suffering about Law. This is not fair!

MR.RWAKOJO: Mr. Speaker knowing very well that when a Bill is presented to the Committee anybody who has an interest in that Bill can go to the Committee and state what they want to state. Knowing that this amendment has been with the Committee for some time, is it in order for people to come here at the last hour and start taking us back?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have been having a general debate. This follows a motion for the Second Reading. If you think you have an amendment to make in this Bill, time has not come yet. Time will come, present your amendment, justify it, and solicit for support. It is not at this stage. We are not amending, we are not refusing amendments. Just prepare any amendments you want, provided it follows the rules, we shall deal with it. But this is a general debate therefore, do not think that you have been shut out. You wait for the proper time.

MR.KAJARA: Thank you Mr. Speaker for clarifying on that point. As I said earlier on, the committee on its own motion asked the Minister about the fate of the co-ownership clause and in fact the Committee has received so many letters from local and even foreign women groups.  Everyday on the average we were receiving a letter, we talked to so many lobby groups, the land alliance in particular and there is no specific person, not a single Member brought an amendment to the Committee! So, it is unfair to blame the Committee -(Interruption)

MS.BABIHUGA: Mr. Speaker, the chairman in his submission wants to shift the blame to women Members of Parliament, which is grossly wrong. This matter came before the plenary and the Speaker then, hon. Ayume, after ascertaining from the Hansard, assured us that we would move our amendment at Committee Stage, that is one. 

Secondly, Parliament can be lobbied through various ways, it does not need an individual to stand before it for the Committee to ignore those hundreds of memoranda and people crying out from civil society. To heap the blame on women Members of Parliament is grossly unfair. Is the hon. chairman in order to shift the blame on to women Members of Parliament who even are not members of his Committee, who have got work to do in their own Committee and they are ready to move appropriate amendments at the right time. Is he in order to shift that blame to women Members of Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think he is not shifting blame, but one thing, which should be clear to us, is this. It is not the Committee to effect amendment in the Bill, the function of the Committee is to study a Bill, make a report and make suggestions for amendments. It does not have the monopoly of suggesting amendments. You have the right to bring your amendments at the appropriate time.  So, why do you bother if the Committee has not brought the amendment and I think you need an amendment; you will bring it at the proper time. So, why do you quarrel with the Committee? The Committee observed in the report that it addressed its mind on that one, and it would have preferred but it received an explanation which we went with. But if you think you have a case, you put that case at the Committee stage. Please, let us proceed. 

MR.KAJARA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker for your wise ruling.  Concern has been raised about other amendments of the Land Act. It is true that there are so many provisions of this Act that need to be attended to, and the Committee raised this issue with the Minister. The answer we got was that Cabinet is considering a block of amendments to the Land Act, and that those have been submitted to a Cabinet sub-committee for finalisation and once they are ready, they will be tabled before the House. They wanted to separate that one because of the urgency with which we wanted to dispose of the pending land disputes. In other words, they wanted us to pass this law expeditiously so that we can have disputes being handled in an orderly manner.  

With those comments, I again thank the House for considering this report and I would like to implore the Members to pass this report as soon as possible. Thank you.

DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Minister?

MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS (Mr. Baguma isoke): I thank you Mr. Speaker and I thank the chairman of the Committee on Natural Resources for his report. I want to respond briefly to issues and concerns raised by hon. Members in the course of debate on the Bill.  

Hon. Saziri Mayanja wanted to know why fundamental laws like the Local Government and the Land Acts are not translated and made accessible to Wanainchi. I want to respond by informing him and the House that the Land Act has been translated into our local languages. 10,000 copies of the Act in Luganda have already been circulated more than seven months ago, 10,000  copies in Runyankole, Rukiga and Runyoro / Rutoro; Luo 5,000 copies, Ateso 5000 copies, Lugbara 5,000 copies and under preparation is the version in Kupsabiny, 5000 copies.  

I want to thank hon. Ongom for his wealth of  institutional memory about what transpired two and half years ago in the Committee, which dealt with the Land Bill regarding the fate of the co-ownership Motion. I also thank him about the need to reduce the Land Tribunals and other institutions created in that law so as to fit in the resource envelope. 

Should I make a pledge? The matter is before Cabinet, as the hon. chairman informed us of amending the Land Act comprehensively. Two years along the road, we have seen what is workable, what can be implemented, what is affordable, and Cabinet is considering a comprehensive amendment Bill, which among other things includes reduction of Land Committees which had been put at every parish level. 

We have got over 4500 parishes all over the country. To have four people on each Committee times 4500 receiving some form of remuneration is expecting too much from the treasury. So, we are coming with the proposal of amalgamating some parishes in a sub-county or a county and making them work together when there is business to be done rather than being standing Land Committees.  

Also for the Land Tribunals at sub-county level, we have got 962 sub-counties and Town Councils altogether, each one to have three members with the chairperson. The 45 districts next year will become 56, and the category of chairperson provided for in the law is that of a Magistrate Grade One. This is a Graduate Lawyer with a practising diploma and field experience. These are people to be paid nearly Shs.1 million per month times so many, this is why the budget estimates came to a total of Shs.22 billion.  

I want to inform the House and the whole country that, the enactment of the Land law is in a way a test case in the planning of Government after passing that law, and realising that it requires a lot of money to be implemented, almost the next day. Cabinet has now directed all Ministers to bring a Bill together with a budget to indicate whether the proposals therein are affordable in the next Financial Year and the years to follow. There is nothing else holding us behind in the implementation of the Land Act other than its affordability regarding the remuneration to the elaborate institutions created.  

A lot has been said about co-ownership, but let me respond to my Sister, hon. Balemezi’s case that all matters regarding land should be in one composite Land law. This is not possible and this is not the case. For example the Condominium law deals with land matters but it is not an amendment to the Land Act. The Land Registration of Titles Act, one of the biggest laws on our statute books is not part of the Land Act; the Surveyors Act, the Mortgage Decree - I could go on and on. 

When it comes to implementing land matters, the Registrar of Titles or Surveyor or whatever relevant officer carries out the function of making sure that the individual beneficiary receives his or her statutory benefit as given in that law. So, there is no loss of anything or of substance by having the co-ownership Clause in the Domestic Relations Bill. If I had the time and the mandate, I would share the content of the Domestic Relations Bill, which I know very deeply. It provides for land but also for chattels in the family and other things shared by the clan, family members –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well hon. Minister, since this is not here, please concentrate on what we have.

MR.BAGUMA ISOKE: Lastly hon. Loyce Bwambale of Kasese raised the issue of Government land in Kasese. My response to this is that Government has put a committee in place. It is housed in the Prime Minister’s office.  Unfortunately, its chairman, Mr. Kige, passed away two or three months ago. But this committee is in place to address land problems in Kasese in the way hon. Bwambale has articulated. Part of the achievements of this committee is the reduction of Mubuku giant prison farm by five square miles and allotting this land to wanainchi in Karusandara area. So the cattle keepers, the Basongora, of Kasese are receiving Government attention. 

Once again, I thank the chairman and colleagues who have shown support for this very urgent Bill because it is addressing a problem in the courts. The courts are clogged with business, even for cases, which have already been tried the judgement cannot be pronounced when it fell by the deadline of 2nd July, this year. I call upon colleagues to turn up in the numbers required to pass this singular amendment when the time comes. I thank you Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. It is now time to pronounce ourselves on the motion for the Second Reading. I seem to see that we do not have the quorum to do so. The House is adjourned until Tuesday at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 5.12p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 5th December 2000 at 10.00a.m.)



