Thursday, 30 November 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. at Parliamentary House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA NURSES AND MID-WIVES BILL, 1995

THE MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Dr Crispus Kiyonga):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that The Uganda Nurses and Mid-wives Bill, 1995, be read for the First Time.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE HEALTH PROFESSIONALS’ BILL, 1995

THE MINISTER FOR HEALTH:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: ‘The Health Professionals’ Bill, 1995' be read for the First Time.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INSURANCE BILL, 1995

Clause 1

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Mr Rukikaire):  Mr Chairman, I have got no problem in accepting that amendment and I propose that it should be inserted on Page 9 after the first Paragraph at the top, meaning, ‘Minister’ means, Minister responsible for Finance.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 2 be amended as proposed by Dr Yeko.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 3 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4

MR SEBANA KIZITO: Mr Chairman, I sent in my proposed amendments but they were not circulated.  So, I wish to move this very simple one.  I want to add the word, ‘direct’ between the words, ‘on and insurance’ so that the Clause reads, ‘no person shall carry on direct insurance business in Uganda except....’.  I beg to move.

MR WANENDEYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I beg to support the amendment.  In International Insurance Business, one can write insurance policies while representing an indirect Insurance Company in another foreign land.  So, in order to make it really Ugandan, this amendment would go a long way to stabilise the writing of the Insurance Business in Uganda.  But if it comes to a consortium when you want to re-insurance, that is a difference business.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KARUHANGA: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I would like to get clarification from hon. Sebaana Kizito, because I having difficulty in supporting his line of argument.  Well, the meaning of what he will leave us with, if we accept his amendment, would be, ‘no person shall carry on direct insurance,’ which means we shall be saying, ‘everybody is free to carry on indirect insurance business in Uganda.’  That will be a categorical statement.  

As an experienced Insurer, he knows that there is what is called ‘Re-Insurance’.  There is what they call, ‘Underwriting’.  Now, all these are Insurance.  If an Insurance Company goes and underwrites with an unknown company, then of course the persons who are being insured are in trouble.  So, does he not make a specific amendment whereby that intention of his comes in as is, but does not affect the opening statement, which if it is accepted, will leave this so open?  Why does he not make an amendment separate to bring in the meaning of his intention so that it is very clear?  The way it is, I fear unless he convinces us, that he is saying, we should pass the Law to say that every one shall carry on Indirect Insurance Business in Uganda.

MR SEBAANA KIZITO: What I am saying is that you have no way of preventing someone from carrying on Indirect Insurance Business.  You cannot because the Company could be registered elsewhere outside Uganda but can still carry on business here.  What we want to prevent here, is that any Company, which is not registered here in Uganda, cannot come and solicit business directly from Uganda.  But a Company is free and in the international practice of Insurance Companies do are, accept business indirectly when the direct insurer is one who is registered here in Uganda.  But then the one who shares in that business maybe registered elsewhere outside Uganda.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, if we adopted the proposed amendment by hon. Sebana Kizito, we shall weaken that provision.  As it is ‘no person shall carry on Insurance’.  That is to say, whether directly or indirectly.  Even if we are not in a position to control indirect insurance business, at least we are protected as it is.  But if we say, direct, it means that we are advising people to come here and do indirect business.  We are opening their eyes.  Therefore, Mr Chairman, the way the Clause is drafted here, is superior to what the proposed amendment by hon. Sebaana Kizito is.  But I do sympathise with his sentiments.  But I think his interest would be covered better if it remains as it is.

MR MANZI: Mr Chairman, I wanted to say what hon. Mwandha is trying to say, because here we are saying that no person shall carry on an insurance business in Uganda except accompanying cooperated under Companies Act.  That means automatically you must first come and register here before you are allowed to operate an insurance business here.  Really indirect insurance cannot be covered here and cannot be stopped because if you think the risk is so high, you can ask any Company to help you spread the risk.  But this Clause itself is enough to cover us because you must first of all come and get registered before any business is done.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Mr Chairman, I am begging the hon. Mover of this proposed amendment to withdraw for the sake of the child that he has fathered that is State-wide Insurance.  Because if we allow this to go on, it will turn around and he will be the same person who will suffer the heaviest.  I think it is just comfortable that it is allowed to stay the way it is so that even if anybody wanted to marginalise State-wide Insurance, he will not find any of doing so.  I beg to request that he withdraws.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Chairman, I think it is a bit dangerous to heed what hon. Ongora Atwai has said.  Even what hon. Manzi Tumubweine said.  If we say, we agreed with hon. Manzi, every Company which is going to have anything to do with Insurance in Uganda must come and go through the painful procedure of registering itself in Uganda even if for once in a while business.  Now, as consumers of the Insurance Business, a client should have a right to ask State-wide Insurance Company to go into business with someone elsewhere who is powerful enough to cover the risks involved.  For a foreign Company whose job is to insure you once to waste their time coming to Uganda and knocking on doors to be allowed to register in Uganda in order to do one business, is a little bit too much.  I would like us to avoid the temptation of over protection.  

If we are insuring Owen Falls Dam, US $ 300 million worth of a Dam, and you are saying that the Company which is going to do the re-insurance with State-wide or whoever must come to Uganda and register and do what.  Surely there are few Companies in the world who have that type of time to waste.  There are people who think that everybody is itching to come and do business in Uganda.  That is not true.  On the contrary you must call people to come and do business with you.  So, any hindrances we have put in their way, unless they are absolutely necessary should be avoided and that is why I think we should hit the proposal by an experienced insurer and we adopt his proposal.  Thank you.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I wish to give information to this House that there is confusion between an Insurance Business Transaction and actually Insurance Business.  This Act is very clear.  It does in Clause 5, and indeed in Clause 4, define what they mean by Insurance Business.  It is not just a one for once sale to an individual who is in Uganda.  That would not be a business; it would be a transaction.  Those transactions are not being prohibited by this Bill.  But when you want to establish an Insurance Business, then of course you must comply with this Act.  The business has been defined here and they are enumerated and they are much more complex than the transaction that hon. Kagonyera is talking about.  So, to me, I think there is a misunderstanding and the situation which hon. Sebana Kizito wants to cover, these are transactions not Insurance businesses.  The purpose is that you have to do is to establish office in Uganda, you have to be registered under Uganda Laws, and you have to qualify as an Insurer not a casual man who happens to come from America and say, by the way, I represent American Insurance, can I sell you some transaction, and you sell them.  That is not what is intended by this Act.  So, I think if we can understand the difference between the Insurance Business as defined in this Bill and the Business Transactions, which some people are worried about, I think we could go a long way.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR RUKIKAIRE: Mr Chairman, with due respect to hon. Sebaana Kizito and his experience, having listened to the argument, I believe that we should try and adhere to the interpretation of this in according to the Law, and accept that it covers the problem which the hon. Member is trying to protect.  So, I would hesitate and indeed not accept that we take the proposed amendment from hon. Member.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 4 be amended as proposed by hon. Sebaana Kizito.

Clause 4 as amended, negatived.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 4 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 5

MR RUKIKAIRE: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose that an amendment in this Clause by deleting sub-Clause 2 and also then re-numbering Clause 5; One should be Clause 5.  The reasons were given yesterday during my general comments and the reason was that the provision this particular section of this Clause is restrictive and if accepted, would have the effect of restricting the local insurance companies in participating in import and export according to guarantees, and we agreed in the Sectoral Committee that this restriction should not be accepted and we should therefore, delete this section of Clause 5.  So, I beg that we should delete that one.

MR WANENDEYA: Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like the Minister to clarify to me the multi-lateral insurance guarantee whether it would affect this section if it were to be applied because Uganda is a Member and of meagre.  Now, will this not affect our membership in Meagre? 

MR RUKIKAIRE: Mr Chairman, I do not believe that this would affect our membership in Meagre.  Meagre is a general accession to the multi-lateral guarantee system, which means that people carrying out business here or the investments both Ugandans and foreigners are protected against risks which may arise as a result of political instability.  So, by accepting the provisions of this particular Statute when passed, I will not in any way, be affecting the provisions of meagre as we have – to that membership.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 5, sub-section 2, be deleted as proposed by the Mover of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MAYENGO: Mr Chairman, I wanted to move a small amendment in Clause 5 1(b), (x), just to include the Fishing Industry among those which could be insured by just adding the word, ‘Fishing Industry Insurance’.  Mr Chairman, there is quite a bit of risk in the activity of fishing and I thought that could be insured more-or-less in the same way crops and livestock cause worry among those who are engaged in them.  So, Mr Chairman, I move that we include those words.  I beg to move.

MR RUKIKAIRE: Mr Chairman, in view of the reasons given, I have not problem in accepting that amendment.
THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question Clause 5 1(b), (x) be amended as proposed by hon. Mayengo.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR RUKIKAIRE: Mr Chairman, as again pointed out during my opening remarks, I would like to propose that in Clause 6 (1) that we delete sub-Clause (b) and renumber the present Clauses with 6 1(c), to be 6 1(b).  There reason given was simple that this was a repetition and that was the feeling of the Sectoral Committee that when you look at (a), which talks about UShs 200m in case of life, are non-life Insurance Business.  It means that if you are an insurer and you take out insurance to cover life, then you are liable to pay UShs 200m.  If you take out a second licence to cover non-life, then you are expected to pay another UShs 200m, which makes it a composite insurance business.  Therefore, a total of that would be UShs 400m and by repeating in (b) that UShs 400m would be paid in the case of composite insurance, one would be repeating what you have said in (a).  Therefore, that is why we agreed that we should delete (b) so that (c) becomes (b).  The same thing applies to 6 - 2.  That means we would be deleting also (b) of 6 - 2 so that (c) of 6 - 2 becomes also (b).  I beg to move.

MR MANZI: Mr Chairman, I have listened to the Minister’s explanation, but I there is something wrong in the numbering of the amendment, in that, according to the sheet we have, he is deleting of 6 - 1 and making (c) the (b).  Then in 6 - 2 he is creating a section where 6 - 2 (c) becomes 6 - 1 (b).  In other words, he is deleting the whole of (a) to (c) and shifting (c) to 1 and becomes (c) there.  If that is the case, that means that there is no difference between the foreigner and a local investor.  So, if that is the case, I support that amendment, Mr Chairman, because that is what I think we agreed in the Committee.  

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, my case is a little different and it is trying to read and understand the reasoning of the Minister.  If what he has told us is what he wants to achieve, then he is leaving a problem of interpretation in (a)  UShs 200m in case of life or non-life insurance business, which means that if somebody is doing both, he may actually qualify for the UShs 200m.  But in fact the Minister wants it to be UShs 400m and he is not achieving that by leaving it in this situation.  So, I wanted to propose to him another way of rewriting it to suit what he wants to achieve, if he still wants to achieve it. (Interruption)

MR RUKIKAIRE: Mr Chairman, the point of the Sectoral Committee was to try and remove what appeared as a repetition.  But if by emphasis wants to make it absolutely clear, by retaining (b) in both 6 - 1 and 2, ones does not make any change.  So, I will have no problem in retaining the provision as it is by retaining (a) (b) (c) in 6 -1 and (a) (b) (c) in 6 -2 so that the composite portion remains in the section as presently proposed.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now what is your amendment?

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, my intention is to make the Minister retain his intention but also delete (b).  But just adding few words on (a) so that what is intended in (b) is accommodated for him to make it easy.    For example, if it could read UShs 200m in case of life or non-life insurance business or UShs 400m in case of both.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: I think that better drafting would be for the Minister to withdraw his amendment so that it stays as it is.  Otherwise, we have confusion.  

MR RUKIKAIRE: Mr Chairman, I definitely, maybe I am not very good at procedures of this House but let me make my position clear.  I would like to withdraw my amendment of deleting (b) in both 6 - 1 and 2 and retain the position as presently in the Law.  Thank you.

MR SEBANA KIZITO: Mr Chairman, my amendment on this 6 was passed.  I want to insert the word ‘or re-insurer’ after the word, ‘insurer’ in the first line and to insert the word ‘or re-insurance’ between the words, ‘insurance’ and ‘business’ in the second line, so that the Clause would read, ‘no local company shall be licensed as an insurer or re-insurer or carry on insurance or re-insurance business or if licensed shall have its licence renewed unless it has a paid up capital of ..’.  On this one, I have got an amendment to delete 2 in (a) and substitute it with 5 in the first line of (a).  Therefore, I want to say, that a local company could be licensed to carry on insurance or re-insurance business if it has got capital which is not less than UShs 500m  This idea of having lower capital when everybody in this House is talking about the inability of many insurers to meet their obligations.  The insurance business is a very expensive business.  It requires a lot of money to transact.  It is not a business, which you must enter on a trial and error basis.  If you do, you are exposing a lot of innocent Ugandans to various risks and you may not be able to meet the obligations, which you undertake to carry.  

Therefore, the Uganda Insurers Association as well as the Uganda Insurance Institute is of the opinion that in order to have a company which is substantial you must have substantial capital.  You have heard this in the case of local banks yet local banks have fewer risks as far as financial risks are concerned.  Therefore, it is necessary that we should have a reasonable amount of capital before we allow somebody to start on this insurance business.  Some people may say, and they have been whispering that perhaps it is because I am involved in an organisation, which has already acquired that capital.  I am saying that -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, may clarify to my Brother that in some countries, both in Europe, America and elsewhere, there are local insurance companies which cater for an area almost to the extend service expenses. You do not get people from very far, but they come together and collect to bury their debt.  Therefore, will it not be better if the capital was lowered but the restriction would be at either county level at District level.  Could he clarify that.

MR SEBANA KIZITO: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I was making my plea.  I want this House to see that it will be in the best interest of Ugandan Economy if we have strong insurance companies rather than companies which come and pretend to be operating as insurers when as a matter of fact they are unable to meet the obligations to which they have agreed to take from the public.  Therefore, I want to appeal that the minimum required capital should be Shs.500m/= whether you are going to carry on direct insurance business or re-insurance business or whether you are going to carry on non-life or life business or composite business.  By the way I also want to educate my good Friend hon. Karuhanga that composite means a company, which carries non-life business as well as life business.

MR RUKIKAIRE: Mr Chairman, I would support hon. Sebaana’s amendment to increase the capital.  But I wanted him to clarify.  He wants to combine insurers with re-insurers.  But according to the definition given here, re-insurers are people who insure other insurers in case they fail.  Now, should their figure not be much higher than that of the insurer?  I wonder whether he could clarify that.
MR KARUHANGA: I am standing up to oppose this amendment by hon. Sebana Kizito.  My reasons are this: While I respect very much his knowledge of insurance and in this business and all that is involved therein, I think we will stand a danger, first of losing sight of the fact that the Government, before they came up with this amendment had done their sufficient research in this industry.  That our Sectoral Committee had done the same.  But that now a professional insurer is advising us that we put the business the requirement high to join that business.  It is like if you are already a lawyer, which I am, and then when it comes to say, people who should become lawyers should sit for four years.  You say, no.  I want now this to be eight years.  Because I remember very well, hon. Sebaana Kizito working in the National Insurance Corporation.  From there he moved and started his company.  I am sure if this law which now asking and convincing us to adopt was in place, we would never have heard of Sebaana Kizito in the insurance business.  

I also know that very many young people are coming up in business and they would like to afford an opportunity to go into this business.  Now to put the situation to such a steep penalty to join and compete, it would not be fair for this Parliament to do.  Bear in minds that the insurance or insurance people at least have not lobbied many of us.  That the only lobbyist we have who can lobby for the already there, my cars or twarires, and the rest, is one of us.  So, we should be careful.

MR KANYEIMBA: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is hon. Karuhanga in order to continue imputing personal motive when in fact many of us have been very well convinced by arguments of Sebaana Kizito.  Is he in order to continue imputing personal motive.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, he is entitled to his amendment.

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, seriously there is a distinction between insurance and re-insurance.  We are saying to re-insure insurance companies pay a certain fee because you are now in a different class.  You are in the National League.  Now, you are talking about District League and then you say, those who are playing football at the District level should have the same standard as those who are playing in the World Cup.  It cannot be the case.  If you are convinced, hon. Kanyeihamba, I am surprised.  Hon. Members, I urge you to reject hon. Sebana Kizito’s amendment.  Thank you.

MR RUTARO: Mr Chairman, I stand to oppose hon. Sebaana Kizito’s amendment, and the reason is insurance is to do with sharing of risks.  There are high risks and low risks.  Capital would, indirectly, reflect on one’s ability.  You can have somebody who is adequately funded with a lot of capital take high risk and that is why we also have re-insurance.  The level to which you can be re-insured is directly proportional to the amount of capital you have and how credible you are.  Of course the amount of capital lends you be more credible than somebody else.  So, I think people who have low capital can undertake small risks.  The big people continue to take the high risks and as hon. Karuhanga has put it, hon. Sebaana would never have come to town at the time he took up the insurance business.  If the requirement of Shs.500m/= had been on our Statute Books.  Thank you.

MR ASEKU: Mr Chairman, I stand to support the amendment.  I do not know whether the Figures of 8, 9 are the same Figures they can buy the same unit in year 1996.  They definitely do not.  So, the ease of saying, hon. Sebaana Kizito started maybe a small capital, now that he has improved, maybe he has more money, he therefore to raise the Figure so as to alone in the market does not arise.  But the issue, right now the cost of materials is rising.  The value of our money has gone done.  What we could buy in 1989 maybe with Shs.100/=, we cannot buy it now.  So, I do agree that the capital for doing a reasonable business should be definitely raised.  I therefore, agree with his amendment.  But there is one issue.  The question of insurance then re-insurance should make difference because re-insurance should actually demand more capital than first insurance.  So, I hope the change between the two figures should differently be demarcated and I want them to be large as he anticipates.  Thank you very much.

MR MANZI: Mr Chairman, first of all it was the wish of the Minister to retain what was, and why we had agreed at first the way it was one, in (a) you are talking of somebody who will want to do insurance either in life only or in non-life only.  That is possible.  If you combined the two, then you combine the capital requirement and move from UShs 200m to UShs 400m.  If you want to insure you pay more.  But importantly, what I feel the Minister should not have withdrawn is that we move this whole section into the Schedule so that should there be requirement for increasing the base, the Minister without coming back to Parliament, can change the base as my hon. Friend is saying so that if there is inflation and you think that UShs 200m is no longer a reasonable capital base for an insurer, then the Ministers who are Statutory Instrument can say, now the base is no longer UShs 200m but UShs 400m.  That is why I think that the Minister should have not have withdrawn his part of amendment.  

MR RUKIKAIRE: Mr Chairman, what the hon. Member is saying is correct. Indeed if you have seen the amendments which I have circulated, the third point, -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Which you have withdrawn?

MR RUKIKAIRE: No, Sir. I have withdrawn the amendment seeking to delete (b) in 6 - 1, and (b) in 6 - 2.  But if you look at the amendment I proposed, I go on to say after making that proposal and I said it was agreed.  Here I am speaking actually on behalf of the Sectoral Committee that it was agreed on that Clause 6, sub-Clause 1 and 2 be moved to the Schedule section to enable the Minister of Finance to make any amendment on this by use of Statutory Instrument.  This is not a new provision; the Law which you passed here, which is a higher law than this one as far as I am concerned on Financial Institution has the same provision which allows the Minister to raise the capital required for people t established Banks.   So, I think that even in this case, it is right that we should do it, and therefore, hon. Sebaana Kizito’s interests in this regard should be protected that now or in future, he can come and adverse strong argument why he thinks that there is need to change this one, and it could be done.  But not necessary during this one.

MR SEBANA KIZITO: Mr Chairman, I want to tell the House that re-insurance business can be done by an insurance company. In this sense that if company (a) accepts a risk, he can share it with another company in the same market.  So, whereas you may have a company, which is solely re-insurance; doing reinsurance business, but there is nothing to prevent an insurance company from accepting re-insurance business.  Having made that clarification, and also in view of what hon. Manzi has said, and what the Minister has confirmed - namely, that this is going to be in the Schedule which he has got authority to alter at any time, I wish to withdraw this amendment, but to inform or to re-assert to this House that the mere fact that I would like UShs 500m has nothing to do with my wanting to stay in business alone.

MR RUKIKAIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.   I am presuming that we have now agreed that these are three (a) (b) and (c) remain as they were and I wish now to move what I have already stated that Clause 6, sub-Clause 1 and 2 be moved to the Schedule Section to enable the Minister of Finance to make any amendments on this by the use of Statutory Instrument.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Mr Rukikaire):  While we are still in the same Clause, and this is a really technical small matter which I was not strong about but which some Members of the Sectoral Committee were strong about, and that is 6 3(a) where it says, ‘be invested in such assets in Uganda as Central Bank may approve,’ it was the view of the Sectoral Committee that instead of using the word, ‘may’ we should use the word, ‘shall’.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

MR RUKIKAIRE: Mr Chairman, in Clause 6, Paragraph 6, we want to substitute the word, ‘Minister’ for ‘Central Bank’ as we indicated very clearly in our Debate and avoid repeated request for amendment in future as we go through these amendments where the word, ‘Central Bank’ occurs, we would substitute it for ‘Minister’ except in one or two instances where I will explain why it would not be necessary.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 6, sub-Section 6 be amended as proposed by the hon. Mover of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR RUKIKAIRE: Mr Chairman, Clause 7, Paragraph 4, it reads all income are accruing from a deposit made under this section shall be -(Inaudible)- to the person.  I am proposing that the word, ‘person’ be substituted for the word, ‘insurer’ which is the same thing, but insurer is more technical and reflects what person it is.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 8 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 9 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10

MR RUKIKAIRE: Mr Chairman, in Clause 10, Paragraph 3, where we are talking about a mutual insurance company shall not carry on life insurance business together with any other insurance business except personal accidents.  For the same reasons explained earlier it was the view of the Sectoral Committee and also my view, that by making this restriction, one is imposing unnecessary restriction on mutual insurance companies locally registered, and it is my proposal that this Paragraph of Clause 10 be deleted.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR RUKIKAIRE: Mr Chairman, we are now dealing with the whole of Clause 11 which for the reasons very extensively discussed during the main debate especially about the question of blood relationship and irrelevance of it and the consensus which emerged yesterday on the matter, it is my proposal that Clause 11 as it stands be substituted by the following:

1. Every Insurer shall furnish the Commission with the names and addresses of its Board of Directors, Senior Executives, and Technical Personnel; and

2. An Insurer shall, within 14 days, after the event notify the Commission in writing of any changes in the Board of Directors, Senior Executives and Technical Personnel.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

MR MAYENGO: Mr Chairman, I would like to move another small amendment on Clause 12 1(a).  This lists the things in which if one mismanaged them, he would be disqualified from being an officer of an Insurance Company.

MR GASATURA: Cont’d.

for these Members to acquire degrees with more than 8 universities now in the country and I saw yesterday another one advertising for yet another University. There is ample opportunity for such Members to go back for study and even their own organisation possibly to sponsor them.

MR KALULE: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, on page 12 Clause 19 sub-section 2 (a) we say to advise on course of study just at the bottom. To advise on courses of study, conduct of qualifying examination. Now under that small section conduct of qualifying examination, we expect NIJU to set up exams, which will be able to elevate these associate Members to full Membership, Mr Chairman. Thank you very much.

LT.COL SERWANGA LWANGA:I am seeking clarification from the hon. Member holding the Floor.  He is telling us that there are 8 universities in the country; and as far as I am concerned, and may be he will educate me.  Because I know it is only Makerere University who is offering Mass Communication, and then we have a school of journalism, which is offering a Diploma. So why doesn’t he reduce his qualification of a Degree to fit also our circumstances.  Because some us are running papers but we do not have these University Degrees; and we have been in practice for the last 9 years; and he is saying we should close up. I am seeking a clarification from him.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Could you reply to the clarification from hon. Lt. Col. Serwanga Lwanga.  I hope it was not a warning. Could you clarify this and try to summarise this.

MR GASATURA: Mr Chairman, again article 20 sub-section 2 (b) having given 2(a) as a degree in journalism or Mass communication, 2 (b) says a holder of a University degree perse plus a qualification in journalism or Mass communication.  Even if you came with a degree in military science plus a weekend qualification in New Vision Seminar, it becomes a qualification.

MR MWANDHA: Point of clarification. I thank you, Mr Chairman. One of the major objectives of this bill is to establish journalism as a Profession, that is the most important thing.  We know very well that even in the legal profession if you go to Makerere, and get your degree in Law, you will not practice in our courts until you go via the Law Development Centre and get a Diploma in Legal Practice.  Some of the degrees in Makerere are supposed to be professional degrees while others are not. But even professional degrees, take for example the degree of Commerce in Accountancy option.  A person qualifying as Bachelor of Commerce with the Accountancy option he will not necessarily be a professional accountant.  My biggest problem I would like to have this profession established by law.  But I think the biggest problem with this-the proposals by the committee particularly with regard to section 20, in fact section 20 needs to be re-drafted. Section 20 does not make the journalism a profession.  If the person who was on the committee begins to tell this House that actually if a man has done any degree including a degree in military science, and then he can go for a weekend course in New Vision, and all of a sudden becomes a professional in journalism, surely are we being serious.  Shall we pass a law of that kind?  

In my view it would have been better -the clarification that I want to seek from my hon. friend, that has he considered the possibility of this new professional body?  Actually setting up a qualifying examination for somebody to be a professional so that the academic qualification per se will not necessarily have to make one a professional. We see it in law after doing your law qualification you still have to go and learn the profession at the Law Development Centre. Did they consider the possibility of NIJU actually setting up professional exams to qualify people for this profession?

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, know when you give too many points information, many points of clarification you drail the mover from effective participation.  Could you minimize your points of clarification.

MR GASATURA: Mr Chairman, first, I am impressed with my hon. friend and neighbour here hon. Mwandha that he has not had ample opportunity to read through the functions of NIJU, that one of the functions is setting qualifying exams. But we set the minimum that even with qualifying exams those people must be of this minimum standard, a University degree; and while he belittled a degree in military science, I thought he asked a question, Mr Chairman, but he is attending to other business, and that is why probably he does not get the necessary information.  He may have tried to belittle a degree in military science, but we have heard of war correspondents.  The other day my son was asking me about a computer question that came to him what a range of an AK 47; and I am sure somebody with qualification in military science would be a very competent war correspondent.  If you took somebody in Agriculture or Veterinary science, if I would be competent in environmental issues.  

However, as I was saying earlier, we have moved away from censorship by the state, and the replacement for that would be best put to the journalists themselves as a self censorship; and the best way to do that is to have these fellows informed; and as I said, I repeat, the only yard stick we could find is education to what level?  A degree level. Still, somebody who got a degree got a degree in Agriculture may be a better-informed person than somebody from S.2. 

We have been told that some of these gentlemen and ladies have worked for over 10 years in journalism and excelled in their professions; and I did raise this in fact in the committee, but I was ably answered. If they are so good then they should be better by going back to study.  Somebody who is well informed; a graduate has probably a better globular view of the world.  If he came across an article that he thinks might sell very well, but damage his country, he has a better understanding of IMF, World Bank, American relations with Uganda and so forth; and may opt not to publish that. He has done his own censoring rather than the state; and that is why we believe that, the best way to hand responsibility to them, is to assure that these gentlemen and ladies are well informed and have the capacity to judge on behalf of society.  Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)           

LT. COL. SERWANGA LWANGA: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification and also I want to clarify to the hon. Member holding the Floor.  That he is not getting us properly.

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Point of order.  Is the hon. Member on the Floor, Mr Chairman, in order to talk while pointing fingers at Members of the House? (Laughter) Is he in order, Mr Chairman?  
THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: I think the hon. Member has the habit of emphasising a point while pointing. It is just a habit.

LT. COL. SERWANGA LWANGA: Mr Chairman, the Member holding the Floor is not getting us properly.  What we are saying that when you look at Clause 19, it is not related with 20.  In 20, you are saying people can become full Members, associate Members; Hon. Members, and when you go in 23 you say that the General Assembly can decide.  There is no criteria you are telling us that if you have done these professional exams or if you have done these professional courses, you will qualify. You leave it so open that even somebody who may come as he was saying from World Bank and whatever and because he has not published an article all that, can be considered by the assembly.  Yet we people who have been struggling to qualify ourselves in the profession, we are not looked at. So what they are saying, and I want the hon. Member who is a part of this committee to redraft this 20.  To read 20 and 19.  So that at least we have future.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR WENENDEYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I want the hon. Member holding the Floor to inform me as to how talented people like Sir Winston Church Hill, he did not go to University, he did not really go in any school other than Hallo, but he came to write even the books of the history of the English-speaking people, about two volumes that are big.  So what I am saying, is how would such people be taken care of with the talent. Is it all anywhere here so that they can be members at a later stage?  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

DR LUYOMBYA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform hon. Wanendeya that Sir Winston Church Hill was an Author, and not a journalist.  There is a difference between Authorship and Journalism.  Thank you.

MR GASATURA:  Mr Chairman, hon. Serwanga Lwanga when he pulled down the finger he articulated his point that he would like to see how these gentlemen and ladies continue to operate.  How are we catering for them? We thought that rather than we deciding the standards, we set up a professional body, which has been a constant demand for the last many years by the journalists themselves that they want to be recognised as professionals.

HON. MEMBER: Point of order.  Is the Member holding the Floor in order, Mr Chairman, to mislead the House when he said we are not setting the standards, when in fact this very article 20 is setting a standard? You are setting a standard of a degree as the standard.  So you are saying we are not setting the standard.  Is he in order to mislead us?

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, you are giving him too many points of information, too many points of clarification, and may, yourselves be derailing him. But I think let him summarise.  Please, could you summarise.

MR GASATURA: Mr Chairman, I have said we set qualifications of a professional body. Which would then set standards, and I am surprised the Engineer cannot understand English. (Interjections)

HON. MEMBERS: Order, Order.

LT COL SERWANGA LWANGA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is the hon. Member holding the Floor in order to say that the Engineer does not understand English. Yet it is precisely written in Clause 20 that, a person shall be legible for full membership of the institution.  We do not want to be half, half. Half membership; I want full and we are there full time, and we work.  Is he in order, Mr Chairman, to say that the Engineer does not understand English yet the text exactly states that?

THE VICE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But you know hon. Members-I do not think hon. Capt. Gad Gasatura had any intention to insult anybody.  But it is also possible that some scientists may not understand their profession. It is possible. (Interjections)  
         
MR BUTIIME: Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, I want to seek clarification from hon. Gasatura if he is listening. I want to seek clarification from you to explain to the House the difference between being a member of the National Institute of Journalists.  That is Number one; and being allowed to practice journalism in Uganda. What is the connection?  To be a member of that institute, is that a licence for you to practice? And if I am not a member of that institute and I have been practicing journalism for the last 20 years but I do not qualify because I do not have a degree, neither have I practiced one year after a degree in economics can I -I think really that is the main point.  If you can explain that, then I think it will be easy for you to proceed.

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Point of information. Thank you, Mr Chairman. What the Members are expressing in this House, I hope I am on record, is precisely what the committee went through. Journalism is difficult to professionalize.  We read massive literature about it, and what you see here is an attempt, a heroic effort on the part of the committee to professionalize journalism. (Interjections) 

Yes, because everything we read people would tell you it is difficult to define what journalism is. It is difficult to set the standards for journalism. It differs from country to country.  Everybody says this today, tomorrow they say the other.  So we said now, what do we do?  We came up with this kind of write up; and the reason why we insisted that there has to be qualifications, is simply this.  That there is no way you can talk of professionalism without standards.  Now, if journalism became a profession with lower standards than we have set, it runs a risk of being in its own brackets of professional alone. All other professions you know must have degree holders.  The rest of the people, who may be in those fields are not full professionals. 

In Kabale we had a Medical Assistant called Kanwangali he was better than Macadam at surgery, but he was not a Doctor;and all the doctors  who went to Kabale to practice Medicine Kanwangali did the surgery for them.  Why?  Because he had spent more than 20 years or so in the theatre.  He never became a surgeon.  Thomas Edison has more inventions to his credit than any other Engineer.  But Thomas Edison was not a professional Engineer because he had no professional qualification in engineering. So yes, you can excel in some of these fields without necessarily being a professional.  Now, the House has a duty to decide whether they want to establish a profession with some qualifications that as I said last time, must be on at per with all other professions in the country, or a profession that belongs to its own class.  That is the information I want to give, Mr Chairman.

MR GASATURA: I want to first respond to hon. Butiime’s question, which I believe is the basic question of many. Mr Chairman, I want to refer hon. Butiime to article 21.  A person applies to be a executive committee for full membership or associate membership, and the committee shall be satisfied that the applicant is eligible as qualified in article 20, continue to enroll him sub-part 2 of 21. Upon the enrolment of a person under section 1 of this section, the general secretary shall cause to be issued a certificate of enrolment; and in article 32, the Council, now this is the prefect the one who gives practicing certificate. The Council shall upon, that should be receipt of the prescribed fees issue a practicing certificate “Shall” issue a practicing certificate”, to a person who is enrolled under this statute, and the enrolled, the full member who is a member of the institute-the group that sets standards, and they shall also enroll the associate member. The difference being, the associate member participates in all activities except voting.  Voting because we thought if we allow everybody to vote the majority of course are those who are not in the know. The majority of our population is, those who would not be the ones -(Interruption)

MR, RWAKAKOOK: Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, I would like to be clarified on this matter which I think is very important.  I think, the Government of the Republic of Uganda has recognised the profession of journalism through even setting the institute of journalism as part of Uganda Management Institute.  Now the graduates of that institute do not seem to future here; and I think we are having a problem because we seem to be having a carry forward from the CA to this bill because we are trying to do everything the institute would have done and will probably may end up doing it badly. Why did we not set up the institute and give it the mandate to prescribe what it considers as authentic. (Applause)

That we set up the institute, we set up the institute with qualifications of membership of the institute; and it is the general assembly of the institute these graduates plus, who are professional journalists who turn around and decide who then should practice journalism, whether somebody with a diploma, a certificate or just a plain school leaver.  It is not anyone but this professional body.  Mr Chairman, that is what we set up.

MR OBWANGOR: Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, thank you.  I think this question is very important why?  Because we want to make a good law. If the Members in the committee with all the intellectuality and wisdom of the whole House are refusing to listen to the voice of reason which we as a majority see that the draftsmanship in the bill is of hopeless***.  Then we say those were Members of the same committee say they do not know journalism. Have they read the ‘Encyclopedia of Britannica?  Have they read the New Encyclopedia?  What resources were these people referring to in doing these things? (Laughter)

So, look, the House is answerable to making a good law for the country. -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Are you giving information or are you criticising?

MR OBWANGOR: I am giving information, Mr Chairman that they cannot tell us that we cannot define by law what the journalist is and journalism, we can.

MRS MPANGA: I think we are getting confused over professionalism for journalists.  I want to give him information. Among teachers we have teachers with certificates, we have teachers with diplomas, we have teachers with degrees and postgraduate diplomas, they are all professional people, and they are all teachers.  I think we should remember that there are very, very few people with degrees in journalism. Unless we want to create a supper class of few people who will decide for the majority, and this country had set up a school of journalism in IPA with a diploma, and these are the people who are practicing and I think we should not make them non-professionals just because they have a diploma. We should leave it to the institute to take in people.
             
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 95 agreed to.

Clause 96 agreed to.

Clause 97 agreed to.

Clause 98 agreed to.

The Schedule

MR RUKIKAIRE:  Mr Chairman, there is in my proposed Amendment something which is not part of this Bill but which is necessary to make it complete and it was point No.33 of my Amendment which in terms of law is called Consequent Amendment to Bank of Uganda Statute No.5 of 1993; and it reads as follows:  The Bank of Uganda Statute is amended as follows:  In section 5 in subsection 2(j) by deleting the words ‘insurance companies’ appearing in the second line.  This is a necessary Amendment in the other Statute to give effect to the provision of this Statute.  I beg to move.

MR KARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, I find that the Minister has a point; the problem is the way he wants us to do it.  He will have to bring an Amendment on Bank of Uganda Statute so that we look at it and see whether this Amendment fits within the established Bank of Uganda Statute, but to amend another law while you are dealing with another law at this stage is a bit too much, and to me it looks very out of place.  I do not know how we can really accommodate it.  I am asking the Minister, if he leaves it, would bring so much chaos in the insurance law and then bring an Amendment on Bank of Uganda law?

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Mr Chairman, in this House we have ever amended laws using or passing another law, and in actual fact the Finance Statute deals with more than 11 laws, which are not part of the Finance Statute but amends them.  So, I think there is no problem in the Minister moving this Amendment unless hon. Elly Karuhanga has specific reasons why this particular section cannot be amended by this law.

MR KARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, I remember that it is we who recently passed the Bank of Uganda Statute; it is we who gave it certain powers and one of the powers we are taking away is on this deleting the words ‘insurance companies’ if in fact they had indicated what the whole section is; because this is saying section 5, in subsection 2(j) if they had included what section 5 of Bank of Uganda Statute is and written it out and said this part we want it deleted, then we would know in what context, but at the moment I myself find it very difficult to support it;  because really I am not advised properly.

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, section 5 of the Bank of Uganda Statute, subsection 2, only states the function of the Bank of Uganda, and it is out of that function that the Minister is proposing that we delete ‘insurance companies’ in other words, the supervision, control and regulation of insurance companies.  So, I do not see where the hon. Karuhanga does not see what is going to be amended.  After all, looking at the other clause we have just done away with 97, we have even done something bigger than what he is talking about.  We have repealed the whole Decree, why can we not do a little bit like this one.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Mr Chairman, in support of the Amendment by the Minister, certainly which is in order, we have in passed rejected an Amendment proposed in the Schedule, but where it is in the body of the Act, it is perfectly legitimate for the Bill to say section so and so of such and such an Act is hereby repealed.  So, it is absolutely in order.  It would be otherwise if he was proposing it in the Schedule.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Schedule agreed to.

The Title agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr M. Rukikaire):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the committee of the whole House do report thereto.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr M. Rukikaire):  Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled: ‘The Insurance Bill, 1995’ and passed it with Amendments.  I beg to move.

        MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr M. Rukikaire):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE INSURANCE BILL, 1995

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr M. Rukikaire):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: ‘The Insurance Bill, 1995’, be read a Third Time and do pass.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Bill read a third time.)

(Title settled and Bill passed.)

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that we have to the end of today’s session, we adjourn until Tuesday next week at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.

(The Council rose at 4.05 and adjourned until Tuesday, 5 December 1995 at 2.30 p.m.)

