Thursday, 30 November 2006

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s meeting. This afternoon in the distinguished strangers’ gallery we have students and teachers from Rainbow International School, Nsamizi Training Institute of Social Development, and Walubira Primary School in Mukono. 

We also have a group of pupils and teachers who were facilitated by Plan International to go and present our memorandum to the Speaker of Parliament on behalf of the children of Uganda. They are here to witness the proceedings; these are children from Kamuli District. I want to take this opportunity to welcome all of you who have come to visit us and see how we proceed with our business. (Applause)

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT ON THE NATIONAL MEDICAL STORES FOR FINANCIAL YEARS 1998-2004

2.42 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr John Odit): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the National Medical Stores Financial Statements for the years as ended 30th June 1998 to 30th June 2004 together with the report and opinion by the Auditor-General thereon. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. There is something that I should announce before we proceed: His Grace Archbishop Henry Luke Orombi will be visiting Parliament on Tuesday, 05 December 2006 and there will be a Holy Communion service at 12.20 p.m. in the Members’ Lounge. Please come in big numbers to welcome the Archbishop. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.44
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Mr Speaker Sir, colleagues, hon. Members of Parliament, I take the Floor to make a statement on the security situation in Karamoja and on the allegations that Uganda deployed troops in Somalia.

Sir, I believe that my colleagues have heard of the allegations that we deployed troops in Somalia and they have also heard of the accusations of violation of human rights in Karamoja on the part of the UPDF. 

The UPDF is in Karamoja disarming warriors and Karacunas who over a long time have been carrying these guns illegally and have used them to carry out raids between the different tribes, but also to make incursions into the neighbouring districts. The objective of this statement, therefore, is to give Parliament the factual position from the perspective of government. 

Sometime in July this year there were reports from Karamoja to the effect that the Army, while carrying out disarmament in that part of the country, had committed crimes and violated peoples’ rights. Examples given in the accusations to justify these claims included accusations of rape, castration and extra judicial killings.

Later on, on November 29th and 30th, the UPDF clashed with warriors in Lopuyo parish in Kotido District and Morongole hills in Kabong District. There were significant losses of life on the part of the UPDF, the warriors and the population.

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me please, was it 29th and 30th November?

DR KIYONGA: Oh! Sorry it was 29th and 30th October. Colleagues, the dates should be corrected to read: October 29th and 30th.

These clashes resulted into loss of lives; we lost soldiers including an able soldier, Major Rushande, we also lost warriors and other innocent members of the population. In addition, houses and granaries of food at Lopuyo were destroyed in the crossfire. These events of 29th and 30th brought forward further accusations of brutality on the part of the Army. 

Mr Speaker, the Government and the Army leadership quickly responded to these accusations as follows:

The Army leadership ordered an inquiry; a board of inquiry was constituted to go and check out the facts.

The Office of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister also set up a committee of inquiry.

In July I held a number of meetings with our colleagues, the hon. Members of Parliament from the region and also in this month of October on 15th and 16th, I also had further discussions with hon. Members of Parliament.

His Excellency the President met the Karamoja Parliamentary Group on 13th of this month and since we took the accusations very seriously, the Commander of the Land Forces of the UPDF, Lt. Gen Katumba Wamala went to Karamoja on the 30th of October and stayed there for about three days. Later on my honourable colleague, the Minister of State for Karamoja Affairs made a trip to the area in the company of some development partners on Friday, 24 November 2006.
 
The Chief of Defence Forces and I were also in Karamoja from Saturday the 25th to Tuesday the 28th of this month. During this mission we travelled to the districts of Kotido, Moroto and Nakapiripirit. We were, however, not able to go to Abim and Kabong.

In each district we held the following meetings: we started with the meeting of the senior army leaders in the area, brigade commanders, and sector commanders. After that meeting, we called in battalion commanders to join the same meeting and we thoroughly examined the situation.  

After the meeting with Army officers, we held and attended the district security committee meetings and after that we also met a larger formation, which included the district executive committees, district councillors, sub-county chairpersons, kraal leaders and opinion leaders.  

The main findings from these responses are as follows:

In summary the report of the committee is set up by the Rt hon. Prime Minister found that some of the allegations made were true, others were exaggerations and yet others were found as outright falsehoods.  

From the meeting we held in Karamoja with the Commander of Defence Forces, I came to the following conclusions regarding the situation in that area: 

There is increased lawlessness in the area as illustrated by the warriors and Karacunas moving in large formations of between 400 and 800 armed people. For the first time, the warriors and Karacunas have acquired the capability to shoot at military aircrafts, which has never happened before.  

We also found that the warriors are still opposed and resistant to disarmament. However, the wide majority of Karimojong people are speaking clearly, loudly and publicly calling for the removal of the gun from the population.  

The above narration notwithstanding, Mr Speaker, the security situation on the overall is improving as exhibited by one, highway robberies have reduced and; two, the frequency of raids has also reduced both inside and outside Karamoja.  

We also found that the deployment of forces had been incomplete. There were insufficient forces deployed in this area for this purpose during the second phase of disarmament. There were also some limited operational mistakes and in some cases there was breakdown in the accountability system of the army in terms of reports going back and forth regarding mistakes that maybe have been committed during operations and because of this, there was deterioration in the civic-military relationship. 

We also made sure that our eyes did not escape what is going on in the region regarding development. And I am pleased to report to colleagues who have not been to Karamoja that its economy is getting integrated into the national market economy. Some ex-warriors come to town to ask for work so that they are paid. The cattle markets, which are now a regular feature in the area, are bringing significant amounts of money to the region. People bring cattle to the markets, sell and take money home. And the elites in the region are investing significantly in buildings and hotels in the area. In my view, this is a good development.

Lastly, we found out that there is a widespread shortage of food in the region, in the population, everywhere you go the people are asking for food.

Mr Speaker, following those findings over this period, a number of steps are already being taken, and more will be taken:  

As I said, a military board of inquiry was called. Once it has completed its work, soldiers who will have been found to have made mistakes will be taken to the court martial and appropriate punishment will be given. But we are also taking active measures to re-establish the discipline in those units that have caused the problems.

The third division commander has issued operational guidelines to all the commanders in the field. And I am glad to report, Mr Speaker, that copies of these operational guidelines were distributed to our colleagues of the Karamoja Parliamentary Group. I must add that all of them attended the meeting and expressed happiness about what the guidelines say. These guidelines among other things emphasize protection of the innocent women, children and the elderly. 

In the operation at Lopuyo we found that there were errors committed mainly by the unit composed of LDUs although they were operating alongside the regular forces. This unit has, therefore, been dissolved so that we do not get a repeat of those mistakes.  

The Army is going to be extremely sensitive to cultural norms within the area as they carry out their operations.

Lastly, the department of inspection at the army headquarters in Bombo will make it part of their regular business to visit the forces in Karamoja in order to check on how they are performing. 

As I stated, the deployment had been incomplete and insufficient. The UPDF has now taken measures to send more troops to Karamoja and as a result, deployment in areas that the Army had not reached like the hideouts of the warriors and armed Karacunas are now being effectively reached as we deploy in those areas. 

Intelligence gathering is going to be improved and we are going to take steps to ensure that the markets that the warriors use to re-arm themselves are either destroyed or closed. In this respect, we are going to activate our contacts with our neighbours in Kenya and southern Sudan at ministerial and chiefs of defence forces level so that there is more effective coordination in the work of regional disarmament. 

The coordination and sharing of information among the Army, political and civic leaders is also going to be improved starting with the district security committees. They are going to be required to meet weekly. And the reports arising from these committees will now not only be sent to the Minister for the Presidency, but also the Ministers of: Defence, Internal Affairs and that of State for Karamoja Affairs. Through this mechanism, we are also going to get informed more frequently as to what is being done about the aberrations found.  

The sub-county security committees will also be revived and wherever there is an army detachment, the army officer in charge of that detachment will establish a regular consultative mechanism between the unit and the local leaders at that level.  

As I said, we held meetings with our colleagues from Karamoja. In those meetings, we agreed that there is need for our colleagues from Karamoja to more frequently visit their constituencies so that they can assist in consolidating the disarmament exercise. In this regard, Mr Speaker, I want to express my gratitude for your agreement to pay additional allowances to the Members of Parliament from Karamoja so that they are facilitated to make these mobilisation trips. 

The civil military coordination committees in the region are also being reactivated. We have been having a draft document entitled, “Karamoja Integrated Disarmament and Development Programme”. We hope that this document will be brought to Cabinet within a period of four weeks so that it is considered for adoption and formal launching.
 
We are now approaching the dry season in Karamoja and, therefore, there is going to be major movements of cattle and people towards the neighbouring districts. In order to avoid any complications, we should prepare well for these movements. We have, therefore, agreed with our colleagues, the MPs from Karamoja region that they are going to initiate a draft of the guidelines as to how cattle and people will move. This draft will be subject to discussion, which will involve the hon. Members of Parliament from districts neighbouring Karamoja. The Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs will also be discussing the same draft document besides the Executive arm of government.

In regard to food needs in the area, the Office of the Prime Minister in conjunction with development partners is making arrangements to deliver food to the affected people.  

As I conclude on this particular subject of the accusations and the security situation in Karamoja, I wish to state as follows: 

Mr Speaker, the security and development situation in Karamoja region remain key challenges to the Government and the people of Uganda. Efforts to stabilize Karamoja and transform the region have to date not produced the desired outcomes.  

From a security point of view, the encouraging results obtained in phase I of the disarmament in the year 2001/2 when we removed over 10,000 guns in a short time, point to the fact that the removal of the gun from the Karimojong can be successful. What is required is to sustain adequate deployment of the UPDF troops. This has to be accompanied by a sustainable mechanism to ensure good relationship between the military and the population.

Further to this, we have to strengthen coordination of the regional disarmament efforts.  

In respect to economic and human development, there are adequate signs to show that we can quickly achieve positive results. Karamoja is getting integrated into the national market economy as exhibited by the fact that even warriors are coming to take up paid labour; cattle markets are regular; and the elites are making significant investments within the area.

Once again, Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for accepting to provide additional facilitation to our colleagues in Karamoja to assist in consolidating mobilisation for disarmament in the region. The role of leadership, particularly of Members of Parliament in this disarmament effort, is critical. Our colleagues from Karamoja will have to take risks and further sacrifices. In some cases it may mean taking risks of possible loss of electoral advantage. This in my view is a worthy price to pay for the sake of the stability and transformation of that part of our country.

Mr Speaker, I will now turn to the second part of my statement regarding the allegation that Uganda deployed troops to Somalia.

The UN monitoring committee on Somalia in its report to the Security Council of November, claimed to have received information that on the 26th of August this year that President Yusuf, Prime Minister Gedi, the Chief of Staff, General Naaji and others of the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) of Somalia conducted a closed door meeting to conclude preparation for the arrival of Ugandans at Baidoa. The report goes on to say that Ugandan troops arrived in Somalia with military equipment in three aircrafts.  

I want to firmly state that Uganda has not deployed any troops to Somalia. In this context I wish to inform my colleagues, hon. Members of Parliament that an extra ordinary summit of IGAD Heads of State and Government on Somalia was held in Nairobi on September the 5th this year. It was attended by Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, Sudan and Uganda. The communiqué issued thereafter recalled that the sixth session of the Assembly of the African Union held in Abuja on the 31st of January 2005, made a decision to deploy an IGAD Peace Support Mission to Somalia.

Honourable members, Uganda had been selected to participate in this noble mission. Uganda has, therefore, over a period of one year been getting ready to participate in peace keeping in Somalia. However, the deployment of troops to Somalia has to await two clearances: one, the partial lifting of the UN arms embargo on Somalia and; two, the appropriate resolution of the Parliament of Uganda.  

Both of the above requirements have not been obtained and so Uganda could not and has not deployed troops to Somalia. 

In the meantime, after the resolution by IGAD, we as a government have been taking the following steps to prepare for our participation in peace keeping in Somalia: 

One, Cabinet passed a decision endorsing the IGAD resolution.  

Two, I briefed the Parliamentary Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs about the IGAD resolution and the decision of Cabinet. I informed the committee that we were preparing to table a resolution in Parliament after the UN partially removed the arms embargo on Somalia.  

Uganda has been working through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs with other partners to obtain a lifting of the arms embargo on Somalia. I, therefore, want to reiterate that there is no way that Uganda could have deployed troops in Somalia before these clearances we are seeking had been obtained. Uganda has now protested to the UN Security Council about this serious negative and false report on our country.

Lastly, I want to re-assure Parliament and the people of Uganda that the NRM Government, which has re-established the rule of law in the country, cannot be the one breaking the law. 

In the interest of stability and progress in Africa, Uganda will not be found wanting in respect to calls to assist fellow African countries whenever the need arises. This will, however, be in accordance to the domestic legal framework, and international law. I thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable minister for the statement.  

3.05
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Minister of Defence for having conceded to the Speaker’s request that these issues be handled today.

I just have two brief comments on pages 7 and 11. One is in relation to Karimojong cattle rustling. Mr Speaker, the people of Aruu and Agago counties in Pader District told me to come and register their appreciation to the operations of the UPDF in Karamoja. They are very happy about the latest trends, but they told me to come and appeal to this august House that once the Army is carrying out operations, let us not interfere as politicians because it will automatically give cold feet to the military operations.  

Pader District has suffered at the hands of Karimojong cattle rustlers. In fact even last month in Agago alone they killed 17 people - beheading five of the 17, which is a very bad way of killing people. At least I can accept to die but to imagine that my head will be cut off after being killed is a very bad thing. At least I should die with my head intact! So, the people of Pader are not happy. 

Now that the Speaker has accepted to organise an additional constituency fund for Karamoja MPs to go and mobilise their people, I would appeal to them to go and tell the warriors that if they come peacefully to collect grass, pasture and water, the people of Pader would not mind them. But in a situation where they don’t come peacefully and leave after killing people, it is very unfortunate.

Usually they send an advance team. I was talking to a Member of Parliament from Karamoja, hon. Lokii who raised me and said that their warriors would want to come for some grass and water. I said it is okay but the problem is by the time they leave, they will have really carried out tremendous atrocities, including raping the ordinary people in the village. So this one, we pray to the MPs to go and talk to the warriors and if the instances continue, it will be a very unfortunate incident.  

There was a raid in Agago last month but the UPDF soldiers who repulsed the Karimojong were instead arrested and they are still at the division headquarters. At an appropriate time I will privately avail the Minister of Defence with the names of those officers who were chasing the Karimojong cattle rustlers from Pader but unfortunately ended up in prison. So in Pader there is a feeling that it is okay if we are raided, but it is bad when the raiders are repulsed. For us we are behind the UPDF and where need arises, we shall mobilise our people to join the LDUs to ensure that at least in the year 2006 of our Lord you can have a right to live and a right to own property. We shall do everything it takes to ensure that.

On the UPDF deployment in Somalia, I was one of the MPs who came out publicly and threatened to censure the Minister of Defence if it were true that the UPDF had been deployed in Somalia. My friend hon. Minister of Defence, I would still contend that we are not in a very safe zone. It would be appropriate for this Parliament to get a statement from the former Minister of Defence - a personal statement to either refute that he was misquoted, or to say that what appeared in the papers, which we as FDC have a recording of, was just out of his mind. Those were very serious statements from a senior person in this government - the Minister of Security, hon. Amama Mbabazi. 

Besides that, Mr Speaker, I have information to the effect that as we talk now, we have 50 UPDF soldiers in Somalia as an advance party. I do not want to jeopardize the security situation, but I want to take on the Minister of Defence that I don’t believe what is in the statement on page 11; it is just a denial but not refuting that particular fact. And I will hold my glory. Thank you so much.

3.12
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to air my views about the two issues that the hon. Minister for Defence laid for us on the Table. 

First I would like to thank him for picking the courage to keep us informed. The issue of Karamoja has not only touched Ugandans, but also the international community. I say this without any prejudice unlike my colleague, hon. Samuel Odonga Otto who neighbours Karamoja and has been able to give 100 percent support to the ongoing military activities in Karamoja for the last one month.

The place where I come from has no common border with Karamoja. So, I wish to talk first as a Ugandan and secondly but also more importantly as a human being because I believe that no human being should have pain excessively meted out onto them. I say this because what has happened in Karamoja over the last one month was as if Uganda was at war with another separate state.  

I know that, yes a few Karimojong warriors might have equally applied excessive force, but my concern is more on the usage of the helicopter gunship. The helicopter gunship threw bombs on indiscriminate civilians, children, women and the aged and even cows to the extent that Karamoja, which has suffered from lack of food for quite a long time of course, lost its cows. The warriors and other people had nothing to do other than eating the carcasses. And when they ate the carcasses, what happened? They died in large numbers.  

I still feel the UPDF could have been professional enough in handling some of these issues because the warriors were not - and I do not think they were exercising their military might in the manyata. Some manyata were attacked, children were killed and the women were raped. I don’t think all those were necessary steps if the UPDF in its wisdom had really wanted to disarm the Karimojong warriors.

I am happy the minister in his statement has alluded to the need to have a regional tripartite arrangement and network. I still feel as I said earlier on, much as we may be committed to disarming the Karimojong, we will in the long run have committed murder if we don’t adequately provide security on the two external fronts, that is our common border with southern Sudan and north-western Kenya.

Through the media, we were also convinced that the first group of warriors that shot at a civilian aeroplane were not Karimojong. This was carried by a number of newspapers; they suspected that they were warriors from southern Sudan. Indeed if these warriors were able to penetrate the common frontier and enter Uganda, armed and unchecked, until when their presence was detected, the worst could have happened if they had found a totally un-armed community. That proves that the community does not have enough security on the common frontier. Because I believe if the UPDF had exercised its presence along the common frontier, these armed warriors from southern Sudan would not have entered.  

I feel Uganda needs to do much more, because it is not just a matter of going for meetings to say: “We had negotiated with our counterparts in Kenya and southern Sudan.”  I think what is more important is really for Uganda to show its presence in terms of defence along these two porous regions.

Over the last year, peace and tranquillity is increasingly returning especially to Northern Uganda, where many times we were told that the UPDF was overstretched while confronting the LRA. Now that the situation in Northern Uganda is fairly improving, it is time for the UPDF to rise up to the occasion and prove that its existence is to protect the people of Uganda against external aggression. 

I look at external aggression more pronounced from north-western Kenya and southern Sudan through the activities of the warriors. So, if we could concentrate more on that, disarmament of the Karimojong will certainly receive the blessing of every other person. But the most important concern from a human perspective is: if you disarm these people and you don’t provide alternative security for them, what will happen especially from the neighbouring countries?

I also wish to take the minister to page 11, where he says, “Lastly I want to reassure Parliament and the people of Uganda that the NRM Government, which has established the rule of law in this country, cannot be the one breaking the law.” I do not want to give a number of examples. You can pride in establishing and instituting the rule of law and that pride will be null and void if it cannot be exercised in a meaningful manner.

Dr Crispus Kiyonga, who until recently was a Minister without Portfolio and NPC, that is, the brainwork behind the conceptualisation of ideas for the NRM as a party; you have played your part. We have interacted with you in a number of political fora especially before the political space was opened up through the Constitution amendment. If really the NRM has brought rule of law, what happened to the FDC members’ card launch exercise? Was that an indication that NRM has brought the rule of law? I think we need to calculate our words because you may be shooting yourself in the foot with your own bullet, Mr Minister.

I also wish to make a rejoinder to what my colleague, hon. Odonga Otto has said about the presence of Ugandan soldiers - sons and daughters in Somalia. It is one thing for a person to come and attempt to rinse the dirt on his own shirt here, and it is another for us to believe as to whether his shirt is dirty or not. What am I saying? A number of media have openly reported that daughters and sons of Uganda - the Ugandan children who are there, man the Presidential Guard Brigade in Somalia. We may not have deployed as a policy, but the fact of the matter is, Ugandans are there. We should not wait until when they begin arriving or coming back in coffins that we begin to say, “Yes it is true a few went there by mistake”.  But the truth of the matter is, Ugandans are already in Somalia.

And it is also a fact, as has been carried by a lot of international media, that Uganda and Ethiopia are being pointed fingers at as the two countries that are supplying arms to Somalia. While Yemen and Libya are also being pointed fingers at as the countries that are supporting and supplying arms to the Islamic group also fighting in the Somali Government. I think the most important thing is, we as Parliament, have enacted the relevant laws to implement the constitutional provisions. If there is need really for this country to show solidarity with Somalia and more importantly the fact that the chair of IGAD is none other than His Excellency President Museveni, we then should follow the law.  

You have already earlier on said that you are a law-abiding government. Since it is that, I will respect you if only permission, involvement and the decision of Parliament as required by law could also be engaged and be taken into account when we are making these deployments. But not when we are sending out the daughters and sons of this country secretly. I thank you very much for the courage that you have picked at least to come and share with us your findings in Karamoja and also trying to whitewash a dirty shirt as far as Somalia is concerned. Thank you.

3.20
MR FRANCIS KIYONGA (Independent, Upe County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am seeking two clarifications from the hon. Minister of Defence. I am, however, not pre-empting what my colleagues, the MPs from Karamoja intend to present to this House. Although the Minister of Defence was able to visit the region, his visit was just to some sported areas and we think that what the Members of Parliament from Karamoja will present will be a more detailed report since they have been there longer. They also normally go there and we think that information will benefit this House when presented. That matter is within the knowledge of the Speaker’s office because you are well aware how the business in this House is arranged.  

Hon. Minister of Defence, a number of people died in these clashes and in two villages alone, in Kabong and Potido, over 100 people died and most of them women and children. That shows there was something wrong, and if we accept this then what will government do and how shall we handle that situation?  That is the clarification I am seeking. 

Secondly, you have said that the warriors are resisting disarmament. When you talk of warriors, almost every adult male in Karamoja is a warrior because that is the way they are brought up. That means that the entire population of men is resisting this disarmament, which is not true. There is information to show that about 80 per cent of the entire population in this region supports this disarmament. Now, if that is the percentage of people that are supporting the disarmament then who are you saying are resisting? These people handed over 10,000 guns in 2001 within just two weeks without any single bullet being shot.

Lastly, the allegation that the warriors attempted to shoot an aircraft may not be true. This is because there has been bombing in a number of villages for about two weeks and many people have died, as we shall present in our findings.  Many cows have also died and surprisingly the 18 people who ate the bombed meat have also died. Therefore, we need more detailed research over the bombs that were dropped. 

Now they are saying that the Karimojong warriors have big guns seems to be a defence to justify the area bombing which was carried. Where are those big guns and how are they carried? Are they using vehicles to pull these guns? We need more information on this. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I see that many people are interested in debating this statement and the old rules allow us to do so. However, the new Rules, which have been published here- I do not know whether it is an error or whether it was intentional. The Chairman of the Rules Committee is here so we can confirm. 

I have been examining this book that I just got today and I can read Rule 40(1) to you. It says: “A Minister may make a statement at the appropriate time on the sequence of business prescribed by Rule 22 with the prior permission of the Speaker whether for the purpose of explaining Government policy or action upon any matter. 40(2) No debate shall follow from the statement but elucidatory questions may, with the permission of the Speaker, be asked of the Minister making the statements.”  While we clear this, let us proceed with the debate; I will see what to do. The Chairman of the Rules Committee may have to examine this matter. 

3.28
MR LOKII ABRAHAMS (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Actually, most of the things that have been reported have been in my constituency. There are just a few things I thought I would comment on. I come from Jie County, Kotido. I want to begin with a question: “Is there a contest between the State and the Karimojong?” If there is a contest, does this mean therefore that Parliament justifies the killing of innocent people? Those are things that need to be put in perspective. 

I am saying this because of the impression that the statement has created in regards to the frequency of raids and so forth. I do not agree with some of the things, which have been said. This is because UPDF has targeted cattle markets and many people were arrested while others lost cows and money in Kotido. 

The honourable minister will agree with me that during the meetings that we held in July and August this was the song that we kept on singing but nobody seemed to respond. Now worse things have happened and they are related more to the recent bombings. 

I would like this House to know that as the situation stands Kotido district has lost 14,042 cows that have been killed. This is related to the statement where the minister says there is food shortage because the helicopter has killed the source of livelihood of the women and children of Karamoja. In those bombings about 50 cows and 4,602 sheep have been killed. Also many homes have been destroyed due to the use of auxiliary forces. This raises questions on the professionalism of our Army and its use.  

I would also like to raise the issue of deployment. It seems that the deployment in the region is creating a feeling in this Parliament that the disarmament is going on. I would like to say that disarmament is not going on in the whole of Karamoja but has only been going on in one constituency that is in Jie. This is also where most of these clashes have occurred and there has been a spill over into Kabong district. 

Therefore, ladies and gentlemen, if the policy is to be applied uniformly we need to report facts on Karamoja. The last two to four months have really been very difficult so it is important that these things are put into perspective. This Parliament should help us because the people of Karamoja are now ready and willing for disarmament. 

The problem has been the method of application. If during the 2001 disarmament 16,000 guns were brought without a bullet being shoot then how many guns have been recovered with all these gunships and killings that have been going on? We need to revisit the disarmament policy in Karamoja, retarget and reorganise and maybe also transform the kind of command that is carrying out these operations.  

I would really like to call the attention of members to what is going on. It is exactly as hon. Wadri has said, there is no need of making Ugandans to suffer especially those who are innocent. Karamoja is like any other society which has criminals and bad people but why should this be taken generally? A few weeks ago it was written in The Observer Newspaper that the enemy has changed tactics and when you read the story it is about Karamoja. Who is this enemy? There is a lot that is going on that is being used to justify these killings. Is there a move to wipe out the Karimojong? Is someone interested in something in Karamoja? Is it land? Is it minerals? What is it? These things should really be brought out. 

This is very unfortunate and I must speak for my people because that is why I am here. What is it? What do people want from Karamoja? Is it the cows? I mean killing cows in Karamoja is like a man going to the bank and carrying out somebody’s bank account with all the money. That is what has happened. People have been left homeless; they have no food because their cows have been killed and the markets have been raged down. I am just lost on some of these things that are being said. It is really very unfortunate, Mr Speaker, and that is what I wanted to observe. Thank you.

3.32
MR CHARLES OJOK (INDEPENDENT, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to add my voice to those of us who have thanked the minister and his team for visiting the Karamoja sub-region. The reasons for visiting this sub-region are best known to all of us in this House. However, at this point in time permit me to make a statement that has a direct bearing on the wishes and aspirations of the people I represent that is the people of Usuk, Katakwi. 

My constituency is the gateway to Karamoja and I want to say that once Karamoja catches a flu it sneezes, the neighbours sneeze, individual families sneeze and finally the UPDF sneeze. I want to give information that my constituents have requested me to thank Government for its current efforts that are focusing on the forceful disarmament of Karamoja. 

Mr Speaker, the reasons why we support the disarmament are obvious. We have been victims for a very long time and even without the rest of Uganda being involved we as Iteso have been taking the initiative to have dialogue with Karamoja. Maybe at this point let me distinguish something as we discuss this topic. 

There is a difference between the Karimojong warriors and those who are law abiding. Although my honourable colleague, Francis Kiyonga, has just said that for them there is no difference and that anybody who is above 18 years by implication is a warrior. I thought our understanding is that there is a great difference between law abiding Karimojong such as the representatives here who do not support rustling and those who are karachunas and survive, support and manage raids. 

I wanted to make that distinction. What I will say will be addressed to those who have been causing permanent disturbance to the peace in the Teso sub-region that is the karachunas or the ones that we know as warriors in the sense that they use the gun to inconvenience their neighbours, to rustle cows and to kill. In that regard the people of Usuk are very happy and indeed support the government’s move to forcefully disarm Karamoja. In the statement, I would like to make an observation regarding page 5 and 7. 

Mr Speaker, on top of page 5 the minister has made reference to the establishment of very vibrant cattle markets in Karamoja. As a neighbour to Karamoja I will argue that this is precisely one of the reasons why cattle thefts have not ceased in Teso. I want to urge the minister that mechanisms have to be agreed upon like you have made mention on page 7 on how cattle movements within and outside Karamoja will have to be managed. 

As I speak we were recently rustled of a total of 56 heads of cattle, which have not been recovered to date. The commander of the Arrow Group has handed over this process to their forces in Karamoja. If we are going to have very vibrant markets, and understandably many cows from Teso are not branded, then you will find that the rustling will go on for as long as there are markets that will provide selling points for these cows. 

On the same page 5, the minister talks of the operational guidelines that have been handed down by the third division commander. Mr Minister my people have been raising this issue for a long period of time. When it comes to tracking down the cows that have been rustled from Usuk or from Teso, the forces are requested to withdraw from the border with Karamoja. 

Is Karamoja a separate state so that we need permission for troops to completely trace and recover these cows or what? If this is not the case then the UPDF and the Arrow Boys on the ground should be allowed to comprehensively trace and recover these cows. The current practice is that they are required by the operational guidelines to withdraw from the border area and hand over the tracing to the forces on the Karamoja side. We wish this could be improved upon.  

Finally, on an issue very related to the cattle movements, some of the leadership of Karamoja have made assertions regarding the border between Karamoja, especially Moroto and Katakwi district and this is causing tension in my area.  

Mr Speaker, I do not remember this Parliament changing any borders between Karamoja and Teso let alone on between Katakwi specifically and Moroto. Therefore, when leaders from Karamoja begin to make inflammatory statements that the border between Katakwi and Moroto has been changed and some have suggested as far as Komoro. 

Recently an honourable member of Parliament and the then LCV stated to the press that they know where the actual border is. This is causing a lot of tension in my constituency and I would like the Prime Minister to take steps to have this question of the border sorted out. Otherwise the fear is that even after cows have been rustled, the land is also under threat.  Therefore, Mr Speaker, I wish on a very sincere note to attract the attention of the Office of the Prime Minister to the question of the border between Katakwi district and Moroto district. I thank you.

3.44
MR JOHN OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for this very good statement particularly on the forceful disarmament of Karamoja and I urge Government to continue with this process. I am happy that Government has diagnosed the disease. Now what Government needs to do is not to give a half dose but give the full dose after diagnosing the disease. I would also like to urge government to give a full dose to the issue of cattle rustling in Karamoja.  

The people of Teso and particularly in Serere where I come from are extremely happy with what government is doing because we have lost a lot of people along the way and so we encourage government to carry on with forceful disarmament. Of course, for every action there is a reaction and in this case it is called forceful disarmament. When you are carrying out forceful disarmament, you have to use a reasonable amount of force and I am sure government is doing that. 

Honourable minister, you talked about cattle movement during the dry season and you have said that you will call members of Parliament from Karamoja and the neighbouring districts. I think that it is better to call the local leaders from those areas for this meeting so that they will be able to tell us what problems they have. This is because it was stated that when the Karimojong want to bring their cattle to neighbouring districts for instance Teso, they should come without guns.  

Some of them come without guns but then there is also another issue that we have discovered and it is that although they come without guns they have no respect for watering points. They will put all their cattle into the same watering points where we fetch water. They also have no respect for gardens so that if you have a cassava garden their cattle will pass through that garden without any problems and of course there are underlying problems to that.

Lastly, one of the forces that has been helping the UPDF under their guidance are the Arrow Boys. We are having a bit of a problem because the Arrow Boys have now lost morale. Mr minister up to now they have not been paid their allowances for the last five or so months. There is need to pay them their allowances so that they will be able to help the UPDF with forceful disarmament of Karamoja.

3.36
MS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Mr Speaker, I know that before the disarmament exercise started in Karamoja a lot of consultation went on between government and the local leaders. When the exercise started it started well, so something must have seriously gone wrong for the regrettable incident that occurred recently.  

I regret the plights of the women, children, elderly and the innocent people but the problem of Karamoja as we all know has been there for nearly as long as Uganda has been. I believe the time has come for government to be more than firm so as to solve the problem of Karamoja.  Mr Speaker, I come from a neighbouring region-

THE SPEAKER: I do not want to interrupt but there is an honourable Member of Parliament from Karamoja- I think it was hon. Lokii who said that the Karimojong are now willing to disarm. This statement has not been exploited. If they are willing to disarm then cant we examine this, test it and give it time to see whether they will disarm? This was a statement that I captured from the contribution but I do not know.

MS LAGADA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I believe that there are many people in Karamoja who are willing to disarm but the same members told us here that any society there are criminal elements and I believe that it is those criminal elements, which is causing problems in the area.  Unfortunately, it would seem that the criminal elements are quite many. So, what does one do? Does government sit back and allow the quite substantial criminal elements to continue causing problems? 

The Minister has said that there are going to be discussions between the leaders of Karamoja and their neighbours. It seems the dry season is about to come. For us when we hear about dry season we get worried. We get worried because of the presence of Karimojong cattle keepers in our areas. This will not be the first time that those discussions have gone on. Every year before they come, there are discussions but when they come, the opposite happens. 

I would like my colleagues here in their mobilisation, which you are graciously supporting to try even at the risk of losing votes to impress upon their constituents that the neighbours of Karamoja are also human beings. Whereas it is very painful for them to lose cows because somebody has just stated here that losing a cow is like somebody emptying your bank account. However I want to tell you, Sir, and the House that the Langi have no bank accounts anymore because of the activities of Karamoja. They took all our cows and we are trying very hard to resettle and have a few cows so that we can also have bank accounts. Therefore, when I hear that they are going to come into Lango, I imagine even the few are going to go away again. As leaders, we have to bite the bullet and tell our people things that are not necessarily nice. 

If you are going to have peace in Karamoja and in neighbouring places, we are going to have to stop being too much on the defensive for the sake of our people and tell them a few hard truths. I would be very happy, Mr Speaker, if the government completely succeeds in disarming the Karimojong so that not one single gun is left there so that the Langis and the Karimojong are at par. Why should my people not have guns and then I have people with guns coming to harass me? The government should make it their duty to protect the borders of Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, it is a pity that after so many years we are still talking of a comprehensive resettlement of Karamoja. I remember so many programmes that government came up with regarding Karamoja. We are still talking about cows coming into the neighbouring districts and yet at some point I know government was talking about valley dams in Karamoja. What happened to the programme of providing water in Karamoja so that the cattle of Karamoja drink water from Karamoja and not from their neighbours? I am not convinced about these things and I would really like government to come and tell us in this House what has happened to the various programmes of Karamoja and how successful they have been especially the water dams. 

This is because I do not want the Karimojong cows and warriors to come into my district to kill people and rape women. I find it very painful. Sixteen years ago, my daughter who is now 20 years was only four years old and she had a very traumatising experience when I was with her as a headmistress of St. Catherine. Up to now that child has never recovered from that experience at the hands of the Karimojong. Therefore, you will appreciate that I am not amused to hear that we are going to talk again and see how can they come with their cows to my area and how can they behave because they will come and they will still misbehave. I thank you.

3.54
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want the honourable minister to clarify one or two things. We have just heard from two honourable members of Parliament from Karamoja. One talked of 100 people dying and my neighbour talked about 50 people dying. Since the honourable minister went to the scene, how many people died? This is because the future Hansard readers will want to find out what exactly happened.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, the issue of Karamoja brings three issues: peace within Karamoja region, the economic activity and how that affects the peace and settlement of the neighbours. May I find out from the minister whether adequate preparation has been made to ensure that the prevalence of guns in Karamoja does not in any way affect the neighbours by effectively deploying the UPDF to first and foremost to guard the neighbours against the Karimojong incursions? 

Secondly what has government done to guarantee that when the Karimojong are disarmed there will be no intrusions from the neighbouring countries to destabilize the very peace that the Karimojong have taken for granted to own?

Finally, Mr Speaker members of Parliament are being facilitated to go and mobilise within Karamoja region. For how long is this going to be? Who is going to draw their terms of reference? What are the objectives? This is because the information being given seems to indicate that they are not in tandem with what the government is planning to do. Are we facilitating them to go and disagree with government on what exactly is going to be done? Do we have a specific timeframe and objectives that are going to be measurable and must be achieved? (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: In the last Parliament, the President of the Republic of Uganda gave members of Parliament from that area a brand new double cabin pickup, UC and some money. I cannot remember the actual figures. Can we be given a value for money audit? This is because apart from seeing that car parked in the car park here, the raids were just continuing in Pader. May be we should be told –(Laughter) 

Secondly, at the time when the President gave the vehicle to the members of Parliament, there were also unconfirmed reports that a raided cow was found in the kraal of the honourable minister Lokeris. Is the facilitation really going to bring any result? (Laughter)

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, the honourable Minister will have an opportunity to make a formal response –(Interruption)

MR LOKERIS: Thank you, honourable Speaker. Of course my friend is always teasing me over one cow that I do not know. I would like to give information on the audit of the vehicles we got. We went and mobilised people and collected over 10,000 guns from all over Karamoja. Immediately after that attack by the Kony rebel group from that area where you come from intensified and soldiers had to be located there. Now again we are going back to tell the people to bring guns as disarmament goes on. 

You were informed the Karimojong have accepted to be disarmed. We want to go and tell them that we want these guns. You talk to people all the time and that is why we come to this Parliament. We discussed yesterday, we are discussing today and we shall continue to discuss forever Amen. I thank you very much.

MR DOMBO: Finally, Mr Speaker, as we conclude this statement has indicated that a number of inquiries have been made including one by the Prime Minister’s Office. I do not know whether the findings of the Prime Minister are also part of this report or whether the Prime Minister will specifically at his own time also come and report to us so that we can put to him other comprehensive questions. This is because the problem of Karamoja does not seem to emanate only from guns but also from whether government is doing enough to ensure that Karamoja is provided with the alternatives that can support them as a community. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.00
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): I thank you, Mr Speaker for the opportunity to talk about the subject of human rights abuse by the UPDF in Karamoja. I also wish to thank government for the report they have given and the efforts made to sort out this matter. 

In my opinion for a report that took six months to fail to compile- that is from July to November- concrete facts and figures leaves me as ignorant as I came here. The summary of the findings of the six months inquiry according to the minister is that some of the findings were true, others were exaggerated while others were outright falsehoods. 

If I was commissioning this inquiry, Mr Speaker, and I was sending out investigators, I would certainly have told them that you will find some of the allegations to be true, others exaggerated and still others to be outright falsehoods. Therefore, for them to go there and come back with this kind of summary leaves me as empty as I came here.

What I would expect like my colleagues that have talked before me is some concrete details like the number of cases that were investigated, the percentage of cases that were true, those that were exaggerated and those that were false. In the minister’s report, allegations of rape, castration and extra judicial killings have been mentioned. These are very serious crimes so for not one to be mentioned as an item is I think a gross omission. 

We should have been told whether there was actually a case of castration and whether there were actually cases of extra judicial killing. We should have heard some concrete details of this matter because this would have helped us understand the gravity of the matter. What I read from the minister’s report is pretty much what we read in the newspapers, which is that there were cases of human rights violation in Karamoja. Therefore, to send an investigation team, which has to spend a lot of money only to come and tell us what we have already read in the newspapers leaves me as empty as I came. 

I seriously ask the minister to beef up this report so that we can really understand the gravity of the matter of human rights abuse in Karamoja. These facts and figures will help this House and other people responsible to allocate resources responsibly and appropriately while knowing exactly what is happening in Karamoja. While on the subject of human rights abuse in Karamoja, this area is not the only one in which the UPDF is alleged to have committed human rights abuse. 

Even right here in Kampala there are cases and I would like the minister to make a statement on such cases where the UPDF has murdered people right here in Kampala. I can quote a case two months ago where one Abdu Kasule was shot and killed in Kawempe. There is another example of a murder in Mengo where a student of Kololo Secondary School was killed. As we handle the matter of an inquiry into human rights abuse by the UPDF, I suggest that they broaden it to include other cases around the country.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to know what happened to Lt. Shaban Magara of the UPDF who shot and killed three people and seriously wounded another who is currently in hospital in Mulago, one Haruna Byamukama.

On the matter of sending troops to Somalia, I have two passionate questions. Must we, should we, do we have the money and can we afford it when our House is on fire with Umeme, with Makerere and with shortage of drugs?  Must we go to Somalia? This is because the minister said we are preparing to go to Somalia. I appreciate that government is making efforts to go through all the protocols necessary to send our troops to Somalia to participate in a noble cause of providing peace to Somalia. However, our House is on fire. Can we afford it, must we, should we? Thank you very much.

4.05
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will draw your attention to page 5 of the minister’s statement. Item (h) says, “There is wide spread shortage of food in the region”. There is no right or need that exceeds that of food. The Karimojong are hungry people. No one would be comfortably sitting here if that person were extremely hungry. Our friends are suffering because they have an unrecognised economy. 

First of all, it is important to realize that Karamoja as a region has special problems. For a Karimojong to be sleeping instead of raiding when his family is hungry is unthinkable. If government responded positively by providing food for the Karimojongs we would not be suffering the way we are doing right now. If a Karimojong’s cow is dead, that is a red bank account and that has been stated. To imagine therefore that we shall only be reporting wide spread food shortage without a plan in place for averting that food shortage is actually telling them that you can continue with the raids. 

Somebody here just said, “The Karimojong are born warriors. They are even chief warriors.” That is what this House may assume but we should not make such statements. Unless you solve the targeted problem of poverty in the region, there will not be any progress. If you looked at the poverty distribution in this region -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  But, honourable member, we were discussing this issue generally. It does not concern only Karamoja. I have witnessed people crying from Kapelebyong, Kitgum and Pader. When discussing this issue of Karamoja, please go beyond the borders of Karamoja. I think we may have to constitute ourselves into a special committee to discuss this issue. You do not discuss Karamoja issues in isolation. Please, proceed. 

4.05
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to say that the Karimojong do what they do because there is a bigger problem. There are some things they cannot afford to do. Knowing that will help us to appreciate the fact that our neighbours are suffering. Therefore, it is important that government finds a way of putting them into a better state so that they can overcome what we are doing. 

Mr Speaker, I also regret the fact that there are so many abuses of human rights in the region as a result of what goes on there. The fact that women are being raped and abused to me seems to be as a result of external influence. In the olden times, I used to be told that the Karimojong are one of the morally upright people in this country. Cases of rape, killing and so forth to me seem to be an infiltration of a culture that is not of their own. This could be due to the presence of the forces or other persons who do not understand their culture. But it is indeed bad that while you hear the death of cows – mainly cows not even bulls, it is women who are being raped.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.12
MR TABAN KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are now discussing Karamoja and her neighbours.  I thank the Minister of Defence for making an effort to come up with this statement. There are some issues that disturb me whenever the issue of Karamoja comes up in this House. 

First of all, the debate is reduced to tribal quarrels in the House. Discussions zero down to the Langi, the Acholi the Itesot and many others. There is nothing tribal in the Karamoja issue. This is a national problem. Mr Speaker and honourable members, bombing of civilians is a crime against humanity.  The last person to do it in this country was Ida Amin; To the Karimojong, 30 years later we are still doing it. Yet, some Members of Parliament are saying, “Continue.”

I know that the Karimojong are suffering at the hands of corrupt people like Zzimwe. I travelled to Karamoja and saw the so–called dams that were constructed by Zzimwe.  Today you go there and start bombing people. Why don’t you arrest this so- called local investor who ate the money? I want government to explain the water programme in Karamoja.  
  
While I was in Karamoja, I found a programme, which I thought was going to give hope to the people of Karamoja and the neighbours. This was the integration of the warriors into anti-stock theft unit. The warriors had volunteered to join these units with their guns. Unfortunately, the units were used by UPDF to continue stealing cows.  

Mr Speaker, the question of Karamoja as it stands today is a creation of our own corrupt officials who are handling the programme within Karamoja. The blood that UPDF is shedding right now will live on their heads forever.  I thank you.

4.16
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala):  I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his statement. One of the reasons we have problems and conflicts in Uganda is because we are over involved in conflicts outside our country. Therefore, I will shift a bit from the Karamoja issue and return to it later on. 

Allow me to disagree with the honourable minister about the report he has presented to this House.  I agree that he one time came to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and gave us a short brief on what government intended to do. I remember - and I was quite clear – I told him the dangers of getting involved in the Somali conflict.  I beg that this House demands the minister to lay on table the Cabinet decision and the response they have made to the allegations made by the United Nations.
  
As a matter of information to the House, just in preparation for the informal request by the minister in case it materialised, I would like this House to know the following:

1) That there are three dimensions to the Somali conflict. Firstly, the original Somali discontent which hosted Mohammed SAIDI Barrie –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, the subject about Somalia was only the denial of the fact that there are Ugandan troupes in Somalia.  There was an indication that should they want to take the troupes to Somalia, they will come here to justify.  Do you think this should really be the appropriate time to deal with this issue? 

As the honourable member for Lubaga North was saying, why not wait until the time when they come here to justify rather than now? Otherwise, now it is just a question of denial that they are not there. It is not that they are going there. Before they go, they will come here to ask for your permission. 

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not in contradiction with that fact. However, it is my prayer that I give this information to the House just to prepare for that, if you could allow me, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I allow you.  I was just guiding you.

MR KYANJO: Thank you.  I was on part (b). The dimension of this Somali conflict is the past American experience in Somalia. America was not successful there. Because of the current wider conflicts in the Middle East, America would not like to be directly involved and would somehow wish to have some other government or institution willing to test the grounds in Mogadishu or elsewhere and see the proxy war of Ethiopia and Djibouti, which has been transplanted from there - their original fields - into Somalia itself.  

Furthermore, is the fact that our history in the involvement in conflicts has not yielded very fruitful results.  As you may all remember, we have not gained a lot in our involvement in Rwanda, Congo and to a certain extent the Sudanese wars.

As we all know, modern conflicts have always crossed borders and it is very likely that when we get involved, these conflicts will spill over into Uganda and fuel the wars we already have in the North and Karamoja.  

Lastly, I would like our government and this House to be conscious of what we call Somalia.  There are three governments there now.  I do not know which one our government deals with.  Because in the minister’s document, they say they had a meeting where Somalia was involved.  I do not know what Somalia they dealt with. 

There are three governments: one is the transitional government, which is in Baidoa, headed by Abdullah Yusuf.  The second government is the Islamic Courts Union, which is in Mogadishu the capital of Somalia, headed by Sheikh Sheriff Ahamed. The third government is the break away Somali land in the North-west of Somalia. This is in the city called Herigesa, headed by Taheri Rayal Kahin.  So, I do not know how we are going to avoid the spill over by getting involved in such a delicate conflict. I beg that this House takes this caution quite seriously so that we prepare ourselves to confront the minister when he comes.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.23
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  This issue of Karamoja and the disarmament reminds me of 1998 when I saw my 500 head of cattle being taken away by the so-called Karimojong clad in NRA military uniform. I think we need to support the government effort until the last gun is recovered and ensure that no gun enters Karamoja again. 

The allegations of human rights violation have come in because the Karimojong have not taken heed of the plea of the government and neighbours about the atrocities they have caused in neighbouring districts as well as neighbouring countries.  Therefore, the issues to be addressed here are many.  

The first one is the disarmament, which I support in totality and it must continue until Karimojong are able to talk peace with government and tell us that they will surrender all the guns they have been illegally keeping.  

The most serious effects of these atrocities has been that whenever they are returning from grazing, there animals in the neighbouring districts, they always carry some of the animals with them.  One of these is Lira district, which borders Karamoja, and this has caused us a lot of suffering.  For how long will we keep restocking some of these districts neighbouring Karamoja?  This is disappointing. So, the Karimojong must be able to surrender all the guns through their leaders.  

I understand some of the leaders also have guns and they have not yet surrendered them.  That is what the local Karimojong have been telling us, their neighbours. So, this is also a very serious matter which the leaders in Karamoja should address in order to encourage the local population.  

While the most important issue is the gun, I think the government must also address the water and pasture issues.  This is because year in, year out, during the dry season, they leave their areas and move to other districts in search of water and pasture.  A lot has been said about the dams, which were initiated in Karamoja. We went to Karamoja and witnessed this with the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry. In fact, the dams we saw do not qualify to be called dams.  This was just a plea to eat the money, which was meant to make these dams.  I remember seeing only one dam, which was still operating- it was dug during the UPC government. Indeed people appreciate the effort by the UPC government to address their plight.  Therefore, if this government could put in a little bit of effort, they will have helped a great deal. Thank you.

MR LOKERIS: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank you, my honourable friend for giving way.  There were 16 dams constructed in Karamoja during this government’s time.  Some of them actually breached but others are there. There is no dam constructed during the UPC government that exists.  A few dams there were constructed long before. This was during the colonial days. Otherwise, this government had attempted to provide dams in Karamoja.  Of course, we need more dams now so that the Karimojong could settle in their own area.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, many members have contributed to this debate. It is not a debate on a motion but comments on the minister’s statement. I do not know whether we should spend more time on this same issue. I think we should come to the conclusion by allowing some two people on this side and three people on the opposition side then the minister here will respond. After that, we will see how we utilise this statement and the debate to improve the situation in Karamoja as well as the neighbouring districts. 

MR ANGIRO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement. However, he made an error by telling the House that the dams he talked about were constructed during the colonial era. I do not know which administration that was. We left Karamoja sometime back to come to Lango. You know we are our brothers. There were no dams there. We looked for water until we reached the Nile. So, there were no dams there before the colonial administration. That was wrong.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to emphasise that the issue of Karamoja now draws my attention to one big meeting between the Karimojong, the Government, the neighbouring districts and neighbouring countries so that at once we listen to each other and conclusively draw the way forward. If the Karimojong still want to keep the guns, they must declare it to that meeting and we advise them accordingly. Otherwise, the culture of keeping the guns, even to the extent of manufacturing them, is the cause of all this suffering. We pray that this government takes it up and calls a meeting of leaders between the neighbouring countries and the neighbouring districts so that we listen to each other and we put this matter to rest. Thank you.

MR DAVID EBONG (Independent, Maruzi County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me add my voice to those of my colleagues especially about the international connotation to the Karimojong problem. The proliferation of small arms in Africa presents a very significant problem not withstanding the internal efforts we put to this issue. In fact, I am asking myself when a gun would be the most expensive property in Karamoja because for now if you wanted the cheapest gun in the world, you would have to buy it in Karamoja. This is worth just one cow, yet the Government of Uganda spends so much at the international market, to buy an AK 47. 

I am left wondering how possible it is to make guns expensive in Karamoja. That way, we would have dealt with the question of the disarmament. Otherwise, you are disarming today, tomorrow they are getting more guns at very cheap prices. This trade in guns is taking place at the very nose of the developed countries who call themselves our friends. I wonder if the minister has intelligence reports on the businessmen that are dealing in arms in the horn of Africa. I think the proliferation of small arms is one of the most regional and international issues to be addressed if we are tackling the question of disarmament.  

In addition, whereas we all agree on the disarmament process, I think we seem to have conflicting strategies on how to go about it. I think our colleagues from Karamoja region should look at other options that could be exploited if culturally there are dynamics that can speed up the process of disarmament and open out to this Parliament so that we probably give a more informed perspective. We seem to do more lamentation than policies, options and solutions to the problem. I think offering solutions is key at this point if we are to proceed with the disarmament process in Karamoja. As far as I know, the warriors in Karamoja do not hold guns for just raiding but also a survival strategy. This is because the other warriors will always have guns. 

I have also been disturbed by the report that the UPDF sometimes sidelines with a group or a particular category of warriors. I think that becomes more complex. I do not know if this information has reached the ears of the Minister of Defence. Broadly, as other colleagues have hinted, the development package could be a great mitigating factor to all these instabilities both in the North and in Karamoja. The biggest problem we have in the country now, which does not make us really attain the intention to support such communities with development packages, revolves around corruption. 

I think the Executive should come out more broadly in fighting corruption and enhancing integrity while they execute public responsibilities. These are all delegated responsibilities from the people of this country. If a responsibility is delegated to you, you should be accountable to this country. In my capacity as an independent Member of Parliament, I am not going to mince words or compromise on some of these issues, especially corruption, which is the biggest problem. It is high time we opened up and dealt with corruption. Otherwise, the NRM Government will become a victim of their own creation. Thank you.  

4.36
MRS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Defence for his statement. However, I think all the discussion today has been revealing a trend that Members of Parliament might be very uncomfortable with. This is because the statement has been hanging. Some outright truthful statements on the query investigation will be very helpful to find a long-lasting solution instead of statements like, “We are not in Somalia, but if we are to go, we will seek your permission. There could be the need to go to Somalia and we will not hesitate to help a neighbour.” So, members feel that this has happened already. With Congo, I think members are very uncomfortable because I think the UPDF went before they got Parliament’s permission. We are not very optimistic about the UPDF getting Parliament’s permission to go there. It might be a postmortem as was the case in the Congo.

As for the Members of Parliament from Karamoja, this is their take. Some have come out with very sad statements, some are quiet and some others are undecided. When I said, “Yes, government has attempted to build valley dams ...” Well, I know he is a minister. He could come out concretely and say, “Government built dams there.” These are the hanging statements that this House does not need especially from cabinet ministers. 

Members from Karamoja region have an obligation to report to this House. We are talking about them as if they are absent. We are talking about them getting allowances and having meetings with the Minister. Don’t we deserve a report from Members from Karamoja? I know they have been saying some have come out openly. The ladies from the affected districts are very quiet because I think - well, they represent Karamoja more because the areas they cover are the districts that they are talking about. Are they comfortable? Do they have issues to tell us? We are getting concerned –(Interruption) 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you my honourable colleague for giving way. You have just talked about Members of Parliament from Karamoja having an obligation to report to this House. In the minister’s statement, he mentioned on page 2 that the Minister of State for Karamoja just visited the place on 24 November 2006. He is also a visiting minister, maybe absent landlord. I think the minister also has an obligation to report to this House. And in fact, I even want to encourage him to be a resident in Karamoja, the way the Minister of State for Northern Uganda is operating. Thank you.

MRS SEMPALA: Thank you for that information. My last comment on this is that a report from Members of Parliament from Karamoja would help a great deal. In fact, it would save this House all this time of debate. This is because we are debating issues where Members wanted to have examples. None us can have the examples. It is Members from those areas that should have these concrete examples. We need to have a programme. How can we get the programme when we do not have that report? We are committing especially funds from this House. Like the Member said earlier on, we need to have terms of reference so that we know a timeframe and when it has failed we know which steps to take. Thank you very much.

4.42
MR OMWONY-OJWOK (NRM, Labwor County, Kotido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I really deserve it because first, I am from Karamoja; secondly, I have direct links with all the neighbouring districts. I have been a Minister for Northern Uganda.

When I talk about Karamoja, it is with a lot of pain. This is because I do not think the people of Karamoja deserve the situation in which they find themselves. A difficult environment, periodic famine, an economy which is really very difficult to integrate into the national economy, insecurity, lack of opportunities, the lowest human development index in this country! The Karimojong do not deserve to be in this situation. 

I had an opportunity when the recent clashes took place, I went to Karamoja and specifically to my constituency, and I consulted with over 100 leaders from across the border. I want to briefly share with you what they told me.

Insecurity is currently the most worrying concern of the people of Abim District, whom I represent in Parliament. It is particularly so now because of the recent clashes, which have taken place. I want to inform this House that as a result of these clashes, the armed warriors from other areas have converged into Abim District and are hiding in the hills there. Naturally, they do not have food there. They have a whole range of challenges. They are descending everyday to the villages. They come day and night and even move along the roads. The people of Abim are suffering the consequences of their actions, which include looting, stealing, abducting, raping and all sorts of violence. I do not want to make this thing just a question of general talk. I want to give you specific information.

Sir, on Friday 25 July 2006 two local defence unit persons from Chela battalion namely; David Ocen and Patrick Okello were posted to an area called Koya. On their way, they were ambushed and both of them were killed. 

On Saturday 02 September 2006, a UPDF soldier in the district was shot dead in Morulem sub-county by unknown warriors. 

On Saturday 09 Sept 2006 a truck loaded with head of cattle was coming from a neighbouring area in Bugisu. They were attacked one and a half kilometres from Otukei sub-county headquarters. Two Bagisu civilians were killed on the spot and seven head of cattle were taken away. 

On Sunday 24 September 2006, seven armed warriors went to Abuk in the southern part of the area. At midnight, they were roasting meat near a UPDF detach. One warrior was in the process killed and the LDUs recovered four SMGs.

Friday 29 September 2006 in Obolokome, which is in Morulem sub-county, one armed warrior was killed and his SMG recovered. I can give you the number of that SMG, but there is no need to get into those details. 

On 26 Tuesday 2006, one LDU of Yankee battalion was ambushed in a place called Lakikok. This was the area between Lakikok and Adea. These are two parishes. He was injured and the culprit was identified. This culprit was from one of the neighbouring counties. 

On Saturday 21 October 2006, a man called Charles Omwony with an old man called Acak was shot dead in Loyolit sub-county. On Monday 23 October - I can go on and on, ladies and gentlemen but I must respect your time. 

Mr Speaker, arising from this situation the people of two counties in Abim District are really concerned. They are appealing first of all to their brothers and sisters from the neighbouring counties within Karamoja. They are asking, “What have we done?” What wrong have these people done to deserve this kind of treatment, from their own brothers? And I can testify to all of you through the Speaker that Abim District flows with blood of the people from the neighbouring areas where these warriors come from. My paternal grandmother was from a place called Nakapelimoru in the constituency of my brother here, Abraham. I have no cause to feel any hostility towards these people. And the Etur people have no cause to be hostile to the people but please, –(Laughter)- let us discuss this issue of Karamoja in a spirit of nationalism and patriotism.

Mr Speaker, I would like to say that I have been striving throughout my life as a freedom fighter, as a person in government, as a Member of Parliament to achieve the following:

One, I stand here to defend human rights of all the people in Uganda, including the innocent Karimojong.

Two, I condemn in the strongest terms, the activities of the warriors, of criminal elements and of those who violate the human rights of innocent people. I invite all my colleagues both from Karamoja and outside - please when you deal with the Karamoja situation do not only condemn one side but look at the human rights of the innocent. These people deserve to be protected and it is in light of this that our neighbours are correct. They are doing their job and they are right to criticise and attack the wrong elements that are causing instability, disorder and confusion. They are actually making it impossible for Karamoja to develop. Development is a human right. However, you cannot have it when some few people cause trouble and I want to confirm - my colleague has said that 80 percent of the Karimojong support disarmament. 

I can go further that from my experience more than 90 percent of the Karimojong are actually innocent and they defend disarmament but those who have the gun in their hands work to intimidate everybody and they even work to intimidate us Members of Parliament, let us be frank. So the question of leadership, the test of leadership for me is whether you as a leader accept to be intimidated or not. That is the test. Check your mind. Check your brain. Check your heart. Do you accept to be intimidated by criminals? Do you rally on the side of the people and the innocent?

Finally, Mr Speaker, I would like to make the following recommendations:

One, I fully support your suggestion that we should have a special committee to get all the facts about the situation in Karamoja. It is complex. This committee will have an opportunity to get the facts and educate itself and the rest of Parliament about the challenges facing the Karimojong. In that regard, I am happy that the Karamoja Parliamentary group is preparing a position paper. I insist that that position paper must be a result of discussions by all Members of Karamoja Parliamentary Group. Not just a few. And if their names are to be put on that paper, then they must sign and commit themselves. It is only on that basis that we shall be able to go to the realities of what is going on. And I want to state here categorically that if I am not consulted on this matter, I will not append my signature and I will denounce that paper. Let that paper be used by the committee together with the paper from the Minister of Defence and other people so that we come to a harmonised position -(Mr Samuel Abura rose_) I thank you. But this is my colleague and brother. I will accept the information.

MR SAMUEL ABURA: The information I would like to give to the Member holding the floor is that as long as he can take some time off his desk in the office and join us, we shall be very happy. This is because most of the time state functions keep most of you in the Executive away from our deliberations. So you are welcome; we shall call you. (Laughter)

MR OMWONY-OJWOK: Mr Speaker, this problem is of such a magnitude that I will put aside everything else to make sure that we harmonise our positions. Thank you. (Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: I think I am going to allow the Leader of Opposition because he indicated he wanted first, then the honourable minister will come in. Chairperson on Defence, I think you are still working on the matter, why don’t you wait? 

4.56
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Just to enable people appreciate what I will say, I would like first of all to put on record the killings that have taken place in my constituency in the hands of the cattle raiders. I have since February to-date a record of 24 people killed. I did make reference to some of these before we adjourned for recess and I will only want to mention, from July, the following: 

•	Okidi Pangrasio from Lapono in Amyel together with Oyet Bosco and Okidi ACellam and Okello David. All these from Lapono were killed on the 9 June 2006. 

•	Jale Wilfred from Paimol was a teacher of Longor Primary School and was killed on 10 June 2006

•	Okello Edward Ajogi and Odongo Sizario were killed on 13 September 2006 from Lukole as I did mention last time.
 
•	On 28 September 2006, Labeja John was killed from Paimol. On the same day, a group of young boys from my constituency went fishing in one of the colonial dams – Longor Dam. They were caught by the warriors and four of them were killed. The 503 Brigade took effort and escorted the people to go and recover the bodies and returned them in the traditional ways. These were Labeja John, Adeya Marino, Otto and Okidi John. 

•	On 23 November 2006, Okeny Tiberio of Paimol mutu was killed while in the garden and just today, I received reports that on 27 November a man and his wife in Lapono were shot while they were cultivating in the garden.

So, I stand here as a Member who could be very angry and emotional. Unfortunately, I have to stand here as a Member of Parliament of Uganda who is challenged with national problems and who has to address them from that perspective. In this regard, I would like to thank my two colleagues, hon. Kibanzanga and hon. Betty Kamya, for their contributions.

I would like to start my debate by expressing my extreme disappointment with the Minister of Defence. As a human being, I know you very well, but responsibilities sometimes demand you to live beyond your humanness. I would like also to register my very strong objection to the contribution made by hon. Otekat of Serere who says that more fire should be added to what is happening in Karamoja.

Why am I disappointed with the Minister of Defence? We can come here to debate and the minister comes with an objective which could be to inform the country, or to own up to the mistakes that people under his charge have made, but it could also be to deflect blame from government. But when you read this and you follow the debate that was going on, that last objective was apparently the purpose of this statement and he largely achieved his results. And that is why I felt very constrained to stand up and say something. 

There are two things about what has happened in Karamoja: one is the principle that a government put in power has a responsibility to its citizens. The institutions of the state have guidelines and regulations under which they must operate. A simple question would be; were those principles upheld in Karamoja? 

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit that none of them was upheld. It can be a laughing matter when people talk of removing the guns. When I was campaigning - and the Karimojong problem is big in my place - I used to tell people that the problem of the Karimojong is not the gun. Because if you went to the United States, every home has probably two or three guns, but you do not hear people raiding cattle in Texas where there are lots of cattle. So, to just focus on picking the gun is such a simplistic way of doing things that you do not expect of a government that considers itself worth the challenge of leading a difficult country. (Interruption)

MR OLENY: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to first of all thank the Leader of the Opposition for the statements he has made. I also want to join him to share the pain he has expressed but also say that it is not limited to him. There are so many Members who represent constituencies in this House who have suffered perhaps greater than he can register. 

Now, the minister’s statement was clear with a purpose to give Parliament the factual position. From what he has just been saying, that the issue of Karamoja is not the gun, it is much documented in this House and in the engagements of government for a very long time with Karamoja that a lot has been done to develop Karamoja. Is he, therefore, in order to reduce this discussion that has encompassed Karamoja to saying it is not the problem of the gun whereas it is known here - we have talked several times about the issues pertaining to the development of Karamoja. Is he in order to mislead this House as though the discussion of Karamoja did not integrate all other concerns that government has put in Karamoja? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: This debate is an assessment of the situation. Each one makes his or her personal assessment. The fact that my assessment is different from yours, does not make me out of order simply because we do not agree. So, he is in order to make his assessment.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank you my brother. Maybe you have learnt something from that order. I was just saying that that is what I was telling my own people and my colleague who was a former Member of Parliament used to say, “You see, the problem with Latigo is, he is a Karimojong and that is why he is pleading for his people.” And I said, even if I were a Karimojong, we still need an answer particularly for those who come from the bordering districts. Whether we like it or not, the border between us and the Karimojong will not change. Therefore, while you can gloat about disarmament while you are far away, the consequence of that is that the process causes discontent and further anger, yet the victims are not you; probably the victims are not even me, because I am in Kampala, but the victims are my own people. 

For me, I know as a fact that in the past, we used to live with the Karimojong in spite of the cattle raids and when there were relationships, something would happen and the very people who are closely linked to one family or the other would be the source of investigation and resolution of this conflict. What has happened over these years where the gun was left loose and the problem was not critically analysed is that, even the human relationship between communities within Karamoja and those neighbouring them are broken down. 

Under those circumstances, the solution cannot be merely disarmament; the solution must first come from ensuring that the guns in Karamoja are not abused.  If it means deploying even when you leave the Karimojong to have their guns, as long as the deployment is in such a way that the guns are not used, then the next phase is to build the human relationship within the communities in Karamoja and between the communities surrounding Karamoja. This is why I will forever mourn the death of Fr O’Toole.  

My brother, hon. Omwony Ojwok knows when we joined the Seventh Parliament we had started a process where the guns fell silent because we were talking and building human relationships. Disarmament should be a supplement to a bigger attempt and human intention of making the Karimojong live decent lives or making the Karimojong and their neighbours live like Ugandans. In the slogans of FDC: One People One Country.

The other principle - and I made reference to that before - is the principle of the responsibility of the state and the way it exercises that responsibility. I take extreme exception to the fact that excesses beyond that mandated to the UPDF by our Constitution - because the UPDF are not meant to quell the Karimojong in our Constitution, unless people have revised the Constitution when I was sleeping. The UPDF’s role should have been to exercise and impose maximum restraint while the government uses the relevant machinery to resolve the gun question in Karamoja.  

I was in my office, but I was listening to hon. Kiyonga when he said: “The Karimojong have acquired the capability of shooting aircraft.” You should have said they have got this gun. When you say acquired capability, it is like saying, “I believe in God”, which must be accepted. But what capability are you referring to? You can quickly mislead people to suggest that if somebody fires at an aircraft with an AK47 that means the person has acquired capabilities. The only intention of that statement was what hon. Kiyonga said that the idea was that since they have acquired this capability, you can only use helicopter gunship that is armour-plated and therefore legitimises the use of helicopter gunship to mow down the cattle raiders.  

Let me tell this House and the country that, regardless of what the individual warriors in Karamoja do, when they kill, you do not judge their act as abuse of human rights, it is murder. But when government kills, when an institution of government kills, that is abuse of human rights and in Karamoja that happens. I do not accept that the Karimojong must kill my people, but I will not accept that the state must mow down innocent Karimojong on my account. (Applause)  

Mr Speaker, the guidance we need in this matter is talking. It was very unfortunate I noted hon. Omwony Ojwok said he will not sign and hon. Abura says, “Please come to our meetings.” If the Karimojong amongst themselves –(Interruption)

MR OMWONY-OJWOK: Mr Speaker, thank you very much.  I made it very clear that if I am not consulted, which is the basis of what the Leader of Opposition is talking about, I will not sign. So, is it in order for the Leader of the Opposition to give the impression that I am not prepared to sign anything including when I am consulted? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I think the statement he made was a clarified statement and now you have given him the statement you made. I think he is entitled to change. It was said you will not sign if you are not consulted.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Mr Speaker, the simple point I was making is that, if our leaders who come from Karamoja even when we talk now have not met in totality, then we have a big problem. I urge my colleagues from Karamoja, particularly the minister, to make the initiative instead of crying but distancing yourselves from the problem. In the past, you provided very good leadership on the Karamoja question. This time you say, “If I am not consulted, I will not participate in the dialogue amongst leaders from Karamoja.”  

Secondly, once you have agreed to meet as leaders from the affected place - talking here in Parliament, I can guarantee you, will not resolve the Karamoja problem until we appreciate that we must work together on this.

Finally, the solution to the problem of Karamoja cannot come in one day. The minister says the security situation has improved and there are no more ambushes of vehicles. You have merely contained the insecurity; the security situation has not improved. You have merely contained the one on use of guns. The fact that you are still pressing for the removal of the guns, the fact that the Karimojong are still angry with you, the fact that the government is still with the Karimojong, means that the security situation is actually very volatile. You have just put a very strong cork on top of the bottle. 

I have written a proposal and my colleagues from Karamoja will sign, but I have already submitted this. The biggest problem in my zone is that, you move from the road to Abimu and almost to Sudan more than 60 miles and there is no functional road between this road and the border of Sudan. So, when these guys raid and they are chased from Jie, for example, he says they come to Lapono hills, but they come to the whole of this place. When they raid from my place, all they need to do is take the Adirang/Namukola road and 50 metres away, they are in total wilderness. The Army cannot do anything about it; nobody can do anything. 

I have pleaded for a long time for a road, which goes through Longor Dam. Longor Dam is so vital to the Jie that if access to it and control of it is tightened, it will be very possible to restrain the reckless cattle raiders from doing something like that. Let us have the road coming from Oromu side down to Abimu and once we open up this place, you can deploy and then you can have trade between the Karimojong and our people. That interaction is in the long term but ultimately I have a clear education programme for Karamoja. I even have things like re-seeding or pasturing. In Austria, it is much dry; in the start of the rains, they put seeds there and there is enough pasture.

On the issue of water, we went to Karamoja; if any of the contractors were near, you would have heard that MPs got contractors. In one place in Matheniko, we went down several valleys and when we reached they told us we would pass through. We asked about where the dam was and they said we were standing in the middle of the dam. When we asked them how much this dam was, they said Shs 600 million. 

You get really upset, not with the government, but with the people who even cannot understand that they are really murdering people.  Now, these are the challenges that I beg of you honourable minister and the government in power to look at in the Karamoja question. Not in terms of defence of hiding of the things that have happened; because like hon. Kamya mentioned, the observation does not help anybody.

Lastly, I wish your government could learn to apologise when things go wrong. I thank hon. Kajara for when he went to Karamoja, he apologised. But I expected you to apologise for the death of innocent people. If only you could stand up once in a while and apologise when things have gone wrong –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us curtail our contributions, it is taking too long.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: We would be very grateful. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

5.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KARAMOJA (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The conflict in Karamoja has to be looked at in very different dimensions. First of all, it is characterised by the struggle for limited resources by the inter-clan, inter-ethnic raids, by traditional and cultural beliefs, by the supply of arms by the neighbouring tribes and states. We have to look at it in terms of the inter-district conflicts that exist especially with the neighbouring districts to Karamoja, which are Katakwi, Amuria, Pader and Lira.  

I can tell you, together with the Rt hon. Prime Minister, we visited Katakwi and Amuria districts in the internally displaced people’s camps and we found internally displaced people who have lived in camps for over 40 years because of Karimojong raids. This situation was contributed to by the political marginalisation since the colonial times. I looked at the map of Karamoja and I found that part of Karamoja is a forest reserve; we have the national parks and the rest of the countryside is supposed to be a controlled hunting area. All these were imposed by the colonial government and that is the situation we have to live with. 

Mr Speaker, until the NRM Government came into power, there was very little economic activity to talk of in the Karamoja region. The incidents we were talking about –(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and my colleague. I want us to help by doing this objectively. You know my background: I am FDC now and I was a DP. But in Obote I Government, the meat packing plant in Soroti was built on account of the extent to which the livestock industry in Karamoja had been developed. If you go and check the records you will find that there were regular vaccinations, there was branding of cattle, there were provisions of water and the Karimojong were in extreme prospects. You need to talk to them now that you are a minister there to be informed that they were much better off in the 60s than they are now. (Applause)

MR KAJARA: Thank you, for that information. I wish that livestock industry had been built in Karamoja itself and not in Teso because that is one of the causes of conflict in that region. Mr Speaker, these characteristics have –(Interruption)  

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, the meat-processing factory in Soroti actually reached a total halt when the Movement Government came into power. And because of failure to protect us, cattle rustling reached the peak in 1986 when the Movement Government was in power. Is the honourable minister in order to add insult to injury by even saying that it was a mistake to have built the industry in Teso, when Teso was very prosperous in terms of cattle keeping, when we had such a cordial relationship, we used to stay in peace with the Karimojong until a time came when the gunship aided the few cattle raiders to raid Teso?

THE SPEAKER: I think both of you are right. His opinion is that, the location of this industry should be in Karamoja. Your opinion is that, it helped Teso. He is not talking about Teso as far as he is concerned. Currently, he is addressing the issue of Karamoja. But as I said earlier, difference in assessment of situations or opinion should not attract points of order.

MR KAJARA: Thank you, for your wise ruling, Mr Speaker. What I am saying is that, this conflict in that region has grown into the violence, which we are seeing. Because of those characteristics, very many incidents have taken place. We are talking of the recent incident where 16 UPDF soldiers and a number of civilians, including children and women, were killed in a conflict situation. Mr Speaker, not in the long past, 65 UPDF soldiers on a peace mission were killed in Panyangar in Jie County.

We are talking of market. In another incident and search operation in Pokot County, 320 guns were recovered in one operation alone. Some of those guns belong to the Kenyans and they were returned. But in one operation alone, in a cattle market, 320 guns were recovered by the UPDF even without a bullet - just cordon and search. 

Mr Speaker, between Sunday 26th and Tuesday 28th November, in a conflict between the Bokora and Pian in Nakapiripirit District, 18 people were killed and over 50 herds of cattle were raided and killed. In my visit to Karamoja, I did find a document raised by the district of Kaabong which was documenting incidents of raids, clashes and in the month of September alone - and these were raids between Dodoth and Jie - 28 civilians were killed, no presence of UPDF and 11 people injured and several herds of cattle lost.

Mr Speaker, I have already talked about the Katakwi and Amuria incidents where people permanently live in IDPs because of these Karimojong raids. The House would gladly learn that even the settlement pattern of the Karimojong where they live in Manyatas is not voluntary but they are kind of internally displaced people’s camps because the warriors have harassed these wanainchi from the countryside. So, they are forced to live in camps. 

Mr Speaker, what effect has this violence brought to the area of Karamoja? People were talking of contractors. Contractors who have been contracted to do programmes like water, like roads have used the excuse of insecurity to run away from their sites and therefore they have denied services to the people of Karamoja. The resultant effect has been in terms of social services like education, which has suffered in that area. We have the lowest enrolment in that area; we have insufficient provision of health services because the health workers cannot access people in those areas simply because there is insecurity. 

Mr Speaker, we have talked of the poor infrastructure, of the roads and water problems. The people who were contracted to construct the roads have taken advantage of the insecurity, so they have not construct the roads. Some of them have required UPDF mambas to protect the people working on the roads. So that is the situation of the warriors in Karamoja.

As a result, the highest mortality rates of children and mothers, and even cattle are recorded in Karamoja because even the veterinary assistants cannot access the herds, which are far away from the centre.  

The local governments cannot execute their programmes very well because some areas are very hard to reach; some have been cut off by the warriors withdrew into the areas, which were declared out of bounds. So, what would you expect government to do in such a situation, honourable members? 

So, government intervention has been mainly in trying to mobilise resources through the Karamoja Integrated Development Programme to address these issues. But they should first of all establish law and order in the area: establish police, law courts, establish magistrates and even prisons. These warriors raided most of the prisons in that area. So, even if you arrested somebody, you would have nowhere to keep him.  

Government is trying to establish alternative means of livelihood for the warriors, which has been the source of conflict. There is also a plan under that programme to promote development infrastructure starting with water and roads. (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr minister, who is also my old boy, for accepting this point of clarification. When the Movement Government came into power, there was the first programme made for Karamoja, commonly abbreviated as KDA (Karamoja Development Agency) and hon. Anthony Butele for a long time served as a resident minister charged with the responsibility of overseeing the implementation of that programme, and many Karimojong turned the KDA and called it Karamoja Developing Arua. 

At this point in time, while you are outlining all these that you intend to mention, could you kindly account to us what has been achieved by all these development programmes set aside for Karamoja, specifically because you are talking about road construction, health infrastructure - you are talking about a, b, c. Were not these things there in KDA? How much did we achieve on top of what you are going to build there as the resident minister?  Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have really taken a lot of time on this statement and there have been indications to me by, for instance, hon. Alaso and hon. Dr Epetait. But because we have been contributing generally without being timed, we are saying that there is an intention of moving a motion to tie up what we have said. I thought I should inform you that there is a proposal to end this debate by a motion, which will be brought up next week, and that a number of things, which you wanted to say, will come when this formal motion is tabled. But you can continue.

MR KAJARA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your timely intervention. Regarding the Karamoja Development Agency, it had been created by an Act of Parliament purposely to spearhead government interventions in bringing about development and peace in Karamoja. But because of the same reasons, which I have outlined, that project was rundown and that is why government is now proposing another project, which will carry out those interventions.

Government is also pursuing dialogue; we are talking to the kraal leaders and the local leadership of Karamoja to embrace the disarmament exercise and also to participate and help the army recover the guns.  

I noted one Member who said that I am supposed to be resident in Karamoja and yet I am not. It is true I am not resident in Karamoja. So, government intends to establish a permanent presence of the leadership in Karamoja.  

Lastly, I would like to call upon Members of Parliament to support the government programme of recovery of guns from Karamoja. I would like to call upon the leaders of Karamoja, right from the grass-root up to those who are in government and in Parliament to work together in finding a lasting solution together with government. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: So, honourable members, what should we do in view of the fact that a motion is coming? Do you want to wind up your statement? 	

But meanwhile, I want to welcome our people from Kigulu South, Iganga District. They have come to witness the proceedings of the House. You are welcome! (Applause)

5.36
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank my colleagues who have taken the opportunity of this statement to make very important contributions to the long standing problem of resettling Karamoja and transforming it.  

If I can start with the hon. Prof. Latigo, the objective of this statement was quite clearly stated. There have been allegations in the air; there have been concerns, and my mission here was to come and put the facts as we see them from the government side.  

This statement was not intended to be a comprehensive statement to address the development question in Karamoja, although I did at some stage in the statement make reference, for example, to the Karamoja Integrated Disarmament and Development Programme. So, my objective was clearly stated and I would like to advise my colleague hon. Latigo not to read other intentions other than what I have stated.

Secondly, I did say that if we are going to get on top of this problem in Karamoja, we require leadership. I did in the statement make particular reference to our colleagues, Members of Parliament from Karamoja and I am happy to hear that there is intention to make a formal presentation to this House. 

But when I talk about leadership, particularly in Karamoja, I want to associate myself with the statement made by hon. Omwony Ojwok. What is out there for colleagues who have been in Karamoja? Although it is a sad situation, people are dying at the hands of illegally held arms; out there that situation is used as a campaign tool. If you passed today as the MP of a certain constituency in Karamoja, the one you defeat would precisely use this thing to say, “The person you elected is going to take away your guns, he is not in support of cattle rustling.” 

So, I said that we need to stand up, even if it means losing votes, and speak to our people firmly and advise them that we must bring security in our midst by letting the gun go. 

So as I said, Mr Speaker, I talked at length with the honourable Members of Parliament from Karamoja and I am surprised that a honourable member can stand here and question the intentions of government in Karamoja. The insinuation that we are looking for land and gold is most unjustified. 

The President has gone to all length to negotiate with the community and leaders in Karamoja in a peaceful way. He has pleaded with neighbours in Teso, Lango and Kapchorwa that despite the problems we have with the guns in Karamoja, they should allow our brothers and sisters when the need arises to access pasture and water in their midst. So, for a leader from Karamoja to come here and question our intentions and insinuate that we are looking for gold and water is most unfair.  

Having said that, I will mention about eight points in my summary. First is that I agree with my colleagues, hon. Kyanjo I think was the lead person here, that this statement needs to be supported by some references. I have made them, and I want to undertake the responsibility, Mr Speaker, to table the following documents in our next sitting:

1.	The report of the committee that was set up by the Rt hon. Prime Minister to investigate the allegation of violations of rights in Karamoja.

2.	I will present the protest note that we have sent to the United Nations Security Council regarding the falsehood that we had deployed troupes in Somalia.

3.	I will present what I call an “agreed minute,” between my colleagues from Karamoja and I, on when we met and what we thought we should work on and how we thought we should move

4.	I think it is also important that I present the operational guidelines that guide the army operations in Karamoja.  

Secondly, let me also be fair to my colleague the Chairperson and the Members of the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs. They did on a number of occasions ask me to go to them so that we can discuss this issue of Karamoja. But I pleaded with them that I had received reports, but I had to go to the area and have an assessment of the situation so that when we discuss, I would speak with facts. 

Today, because we had agreed with you, honourable Speaker, that I make this statement, I pleaded with the chairperson of the committee to let me make this statement first, then we would return to the committee for deeper discussions. 

So, in line with what you have said that we need a mechanism to push this matter forward, we need to consider also that the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs has been asking to discuss this issue with us.

The next point I want to speak briefly on are the causes of death in recent times, or even over the time in Karamoja and I will start by quoting a young man who attended one of our meetings. He was an assistant chief administrative officer in Moroto. He literary shed tears in our meeting. He said that if the gun were not in Karamoja, young as he is, with his job and salary every month, he would now be very rich. But alas because of the gun, he cannot do that.  

More seriously, he said in his statement that when he goes to his village where he was born and he looks around, the people he used to play with as a boy are all gone. He estimates that for every 100 people of his generation in his village, 90 have perished at the hands of these raids and the use of the gun. That is how serious this matter is.  

As my colleague hon. Kajara has just said, day-in day-out, our brothers and sisters in Karamoja are dying due to these raids by these warriors. So, I am surprised that my namesake and good friend, hon. Francis Kiyonga, is playing games that everybody is a warrior. What are you talking about? This is not the leadership that we are talking about. Surely, when we talk of a warrior in Karamoja, the last person to question this should be my namesake. So, our people are really dying at the hands of these warriors besides the diseases.  

In this statement, I have admitted that there were some errors committed and I have presented how we are going to address these errors. I have told you that a board of inquiry was set up within the Army. I have told you that some people are going to the court martial because the inquiry found that they were at fault. I have also indicated that the deployment was insufficient and it is going to be stepped up. I have also indicated among other things that the inspectorate within the Army is going to put particular focus on Karamoja so that while we remove the guns, the un-intended effects are kept to the very minimum and if possible completely be avoided.

Let me be fair to you and make a brief description of the two very unfortunate incidents that happened recently at Lopuyo. The soldiers had information that there were guns in Manyatas. They set out to go and search and remove these guns. At the point of action, there were shots not only from inside Manyatas, but also from behind them. That was the situation in which the soldiers were. 

You were absolutely right to say that the Army should protect the people. But that is the situation they found themselves in. The intelligence they had did not reveal that they were going to face a situation like that. They thought they were just going to call out people and check them. But suddenly there were people shooting from inside and outside. This Maj. Rwashande who was killed has been one of our best commanders and he was really trying to calm the people that, “Let us calm down, stop shooting,” and he was shot there and then. 

So, yes, I hear you very well hon. Latigo and colleagues that the government must protect people. Absolutely true and every effort must be made that is why despite that difficult situation, there are operation guidelines, which I am going to present here so that people can see and appreciate that we take that issue very seriously. 

But the leadership, which I am talking about, cannot end with Karamoja. It also must be here. Without implying anything, my colleague, hon. Latigo, I think this matter should be bi-partisan. We should not use this matter to score marks either for the Movement people or the Opposition. This is a national issue, this is a common interest issue and we must discuss it within its own right without placing blame here or there and in that way we would go a long way. 

But also, leadership means that once we have the opportunity to be here as leaders of our country, as MPs, if you come here and make a serious allegation, please back it up. While I sat there, I wanted to rise on points of order, but I did not think it worthwhile. Someone comes and tells you that so many people died, yet she is not presenting any document; another comes and tells you that in Somalia there are 50 UPDF soldiers. Another comes and says that the evidence is in a newspaper. This is not helpful! 

If we are going to solve problems, if we are going to make proper analysis, then we must get at the bottom of things. We must present facts. The story I have heard that everybody is willing to disarm could not be far from the truth. If people were willing to disarm, then obviously the guns would be finished; they would be in the hands of the government. 

In the meetings I held in Karamoja, from point to point, the elders were asking to give them time to plead with their sons because they know that these people do not want to give up the guns. So, for the leadership to come here and say that 100 percent of the people in Karamoja are willing to give up their guns is wrong otherwise why have they not given them up?  

The raids in Karamoja are mainly internal, one ethnic group against another. Actually they describe them as revenge raid. Then, there are these collateral raids into the neighbouring areas. From what I read, there is total willingness on the part of the warriors to give up guns. We would have to be firm with them; we will have to go out for them wherever they are, but ensure that we do not cause trouble to people who are innocent.

Concerning the food situation, we should put it in context. The difficult food situation in Karamoja is not because people do not want to work, but because the area is a difficult area. Actually, one of the committees, maybe the one on Defence and Internal Affairs, should be beefed up by this Parliament to go to Karamoja and sit there for one day or two. The plans are there, we should over fly the area and you see how people live in Karamoja, it is a very difficult situation. 

So, the food situation is because the land is dry; the rains are very unreliable and therefore it is very difficult to cultivate. Like this season, the rains were expected at a certain point but they did not come. Now they have come, but the people cannot tell how long this rain which has come this late will last. So, on the food situation, I think we should sympathize with our colleagues and do everything possible to ensure that they get access to food.

Lastly, let me once again reassure Parliament that we are definitely not yet in Somalia. My colleague there was saying that we were in the Congo, that is true and really we have no apologies for having been there. But, in Congo, we had a different legal framework because the present Constitution states that we cannot deploy troops outside the country except with the permission of –(Interruption) 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I did not really want to disrupt the Minister of Defence, but for him to stand in this Parliament and say that government has no apology for having invaded the neighbouring country to the extent that Uganda was sued and we lost the case and now we are going to pay in billions, including my grandmother and my children, is regrettable! Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: That is his judgment. (Laughter)

DR KIYONGA: Really, on a more seriousness note, hon. Ekanya, we are MPs of Uganda but I want to believe that if not all of us, at least the majority of us have a feeling for Africa - we call ourselves Pan-Africanists. True Pan-Africanists must look beyond the boundaries of their country and see what is going on, what help we can give. I heard even someone here saying that we had no results in Sudan. But we assisted our brothers and sisters in Southern Sudan, now they can speak for themselves, they can govern themselves. So, how can one say that our efforts there have been nil? That is a misjudgement! But, I want to say firmly, Mr Speaker, that -(Mr Okupa rose_)

THE SPEAKER: No, please, wind up.

DR KIYONGA: Mr Speaker, I was really at the end of my round up. I want to repeat again and again that UPDF has not deployed in Somalia. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister and thank you honourable members for the contributions you have made on this important subject. It is true we have taken a lot of time but I think there was justification to take this time to debate this issue of Karamoja. Since people have indicated to me that there is a formal motion, which they want to bring on this subject, I will entertain it and I will accord them time and space on our Order Paper so that we debate it. 

But I do not think that it is convenient to continue with any other subject now, because next should have been questions, but hon. Okulo Epak just returned from South Africa, and he rung me that he will not be able to attend today. So, the Minister of Education and the others who had to answer the questions went away. So, I think it is the right time to adjourn. House is adjourned until Tuesday 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.57 p.m. and was adjourned until Tuesday, 5 December at 2.00 pm)





