

Parliament met at 2.28 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting, and as you can see, I have only my natural eyes and if I have some difficulties going through the text, you will forgive me.

I wish to warmly welcome you to this special sitting to pay tribute to hon. John Odit, who passed away on the 9th November at Mulago Hospital. Hon. John Odit was a Member of Parliament who represented the people of Erute County South in Lira District both in the Seventh and Eighth Parliaments. He also served as Chairperson of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises; and Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, respectively. 

Hon. Odit was totally committed to serving his people. His attendance in Parliament and committees was satisfactory. Hon. Odit regularly contributed to various debates on the Floor of Parliament.

On behalf of the Parliament of Uganda and on my own behalf, I wish to join the other Ugandans who are mourning the loss of hon. John Odit.
 
Honourable members, the cortege of the late hon. Odit will leave Parliament for the deceased’s residence in Luzira for an overnight vigil this evening. A funeral service will be held at All Saints Cathedral on Thursday, tomorrow 15 November, 2012 at 9.00 a.m. and because of that, the earlier communication that Parliament was adjourned to 10.00 O’clock would now be shifted. Parliament will be sitting at 2.00 O’clock in the afternoon. Thereafter, the cortege will depart for Lira Municipality for an overnight vigil at the deceased’s residence.

A funeral service will he held on Friday, 16 November 2012, in Lira Municipality after which the cortege will depart for Agali sub-county for the burial of the late John Odit. That burial will take place on Saturday, 17 November 2012, in Agali Sub-county Lira District. May his soul rest in eternal peace!

Honourable members, on another note, Mnara Interfirm Limited are here to display how their equipment work and will take care of your massage needs and provide relevant health preventive information. They are located in the former HIV/AIDS Resource Centre next to the First-Aid Room in the Basement in the South Wing of Parliament Building from 12th to 23th November 2012. 

Please note that the massage services are free of charge for a period of 10 days. They will also be operating up to late in the evening of every working day depending on demand. Please take note and use this opportunity.

Honourable members, the Finance Committee and the Clerk to Parliament have organised a half day sensitisation workshop on the Public Finance Bill, 2012 for all Members of Parliament to take place on Wednesday, 28 November 2012 at 9.00 a.m. in the Parliament Conference Hall. Please make this event a high priority in your diaries and endeavour to attend. The purpose is to enrich our discussion on the Bill that is already before this House.

In the public gallery, we have the prefects’ body of Silver Spoon School together with their teachers. They are represented by hon. Ssimbwa and hon. Nabilah Naggayi Sempala. They are here to observe the proceedings of Parliament. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We have three condolence messages addressed through the House to the family. I will pass them to the family: One is from the Office of the Government Chief Whip; it is addressed to the Rt Hon. Speaker:

“My colleagues Members of Parliament, the family of the late hon. John Odit, the Uganda Peoples’ Congress fraternity in Parliament, ladies and gentlemen.

On behalf of the NRM Parliamentary Caucus and on my own behalf, I join the rest of the country to pay tribute in honour of our fallen comrade, the late John Odit.

Rt Hon. Speaker, it is sad that the late John Odit has left us. I joined Parliament in 2001, the same year with hon. Odit. He had vast experience in the field of agriculture, the resource we shall miss given the fact that Uganda is an agricultural country. 

While serving as Chairperson of the Agriculture Committee in Parliament, hon. Odit promoted Government programmes of NAADS, the programme aimed at alleviation of rural poverty.

Hon. Odit was a man of integrity, and a dependable and hard working Ugandan. Those of us who worked with him, hon. Odit balanced both religion and politics. This is seen in the various development projects in Lango Diocese and the Province of the Church of Uganda. He helped to initiate a number of development projects in his constituency and Lango Diocese, for example, schools and maize mills for the poor.

Rt Hon. Speaker, the late hon. Odit was a unique leader in Parliament though he belonged to the Opposition. He served all of us without discrimination. He was humorous and approachable, and he would not hesitate to assist any Member who had difficulties in his or her work here in Parliament irrespective of the political divide. 

Lastly, the gap the late hon. John Odit has left is huge and will be extremely difficult to fill. However, I pray to the Almighty God to strengthen us and the family in particular such that we are able to cope with this loss. 

Eternal life grant unto him, Oh Lord, and let your perpetual light shine upon him. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Amen.
 
Justine Kasule Lumumba, MP
Government Chief Whip.”

The second one is from Web Advocates and Solicitors:

“It is with grief and profound shock that I learnt of the passing on of hon. Odit John, which occurred on the 9 November 2012 in Mulago Hospital. I extend my heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family and the people of Erute South, Lira District for the loss of a valuable leader. 

At times like this, we pray that the Almighty God grants his family strength to go through these difficult times. 

May his soul rest in eternal peace! 
God bless you all.

Hon. Lydia Wanyoto Mutende.”

The final one is from the East African Community, East African Legislative Assembly, addressed to the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament: 

“Honourable members, Mrs Odit and the children, the family, and Lango Parliamentary Caucus:

Condolence message

I have learn’t with deep sorrow of the demise of hon. John Odit, one of the most outstanding legislators in the Uganda Parliament, which occurred on the 9 November 2012. 

Hon. Odit has been a national leader and has served diligently as a Member for Erute North in Lira District in the Seventh Parliament of Uganda. He served as a Chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and I recall the passion with which he supported the modernisation of agricultural programmes, the support to Uganda rural farmers including access to NAADS programmes. He also supported East African Community programmes under the sectoral Committee on Agriculture, which formed a basis for the East African food security.

I had an opportunity to work with him closely in the Seventh Parliament of Uganda and we found him an honest, trusted, efficient person who always reached out to everybody irrespective of their political affiliation. 

He was one of the leaders of Lango sub-region who brought out harmony in Parliament. As a Member of Parliament, he continuously talked about the issues that affected his people. We celebrate and salute him as a true son of Uganda.

On behalf of East African Legislative Assembly Members and on my own behalf, we convey our deepest sympathies to the family and the people of Lango upon this unfortunate loss. We pray that the Almighty grants his soul eternal peace.

Margaret Nantongo Zziwa,
Speaker.”

That is all. Please join me in welcoming the Speaker who for the first time is sitting on this other side. (Applause) You are welcome.

(Entrance of the late hon. John Odit.)

National Anthem (Three Verses)

East African Anthem (One Verse)

Laying of wreaths

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. JOHN ODIT FORMER MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT FOR ERUTE SOUTH, LIRA DISTRICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me first make some recognitions before the Rt Hon. Prime Minister takes the podium. 

In the public gallery, we have students and lecturers from Uganda Martyrs’ University Nkozi. They are here to observe the proceedings of Parliament. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

My sight is not very good this afternoon because I do not have my glasses, but I recognise some dignitaries in the VIP gallery, those with distinct features like:

•		Hon. John Livingstone Okello Okello; he was a former Member of Parliament for Chwa in Kitgum; 
•		Hon. Angiro Gutomoi, former MP Erute North;
•		Major Rurangaranga, National Chairman, UPC;
•		Hon. Anthony Butere; 
•		Hon. Annette Mukabera, formerly Kisoro;
•		Hon. Nyakaisiki, formerly for Hoima District;
•		Hon. Ojok B’Leo, formerly for Kioga;
•		Hon. Kajeke Wilfred, formerly of Mbale Municipality;
•		Hon. Patrick Mwondha, formerly for Bukoli North;  
•		Hon. Bahane Silver, formerly for Bufumbira;
•		Hon. Anthony Wopuwa;

My sight is not very good today; somehow my glasses got messed up so they are trying to fix them. When they come, I will recognise all of you. 
 
2.56
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, I rise under Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of this House to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. John Odit:

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda notes with deep sorrow the untimely death of the late hon. John Odit, which occurred on the 9th of November this year at Mulago Hospital;

AND WHEREAS hon. John Odit was born on 9 September 1954 in Erute County, Amat sub-county, Lango District, Northern Uganda;

AWARE that hon. John Odit achieved high levels of academic excellence from Amuca Primary School. He joined Lango College for his secondary school. He obtained a Bachelor of Science Degree in Agriculture Economics, a Masters Degree in Rural Development from the University of Sussex United Kingdom, a Diploma in Education and short courses in rural credit development, project planning, development analysis and pro-poor budgeting;

FURTHER AWARE that after completion of his studies hon. Odit was employed by: One, the National Sugar Works as a plantation manager and later promoted to a rank of administrative manager and secretary of the board; two, the Wood Industry Corporation as sales manager at Kiira Saw Mills in Jinja; three, also by the Church of Uganda Planning, Development and Rehabilitation Department to develop income-generating programmes and infrastructural expansion of the Diocese of Lango; four, the Provincial Office of the Church of Uganda, where he was in charge of setting up development activities in all the four provinces;

RECOGONISING that hon. John Odit effectively represented the people of Erute South Constituency Lira District in the 7th and 8th Parliaments, and also served as Chairperson of the Parliamentary Committee on Agriculture; and the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:

1.	That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the family, relatives, friends, the people of Erute North and the entire country upon the loss of this gallant Ugandan.

2.	That it takes cognisance of the distinguished services rendered and contribution made by the late hon. John Odit in the political and social arena of Uganda.” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by hon. Kiiza, Opposition Chief Whip and hon. Otada, Whip of the Independent MPs.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, the late hon. John Odit was born on 9 September 1954 in Amach sub-county, Erute County, in the then Lango District. He studied at Ocamonyang, Amach and Adola primary schools. He later joined Lango College for his secondary education from where he proceeded to Makerere University.

By the time of his death, he had the following qualifications:

•	Master of Agriculture in Econometrics;
•	Bachelor of Science in Agriculture; and
•	A diploma in Education.
•	He also attended a number of short courses in management at the Management Training and Advisory Centre Kampala; project designing and planning in Bukoba, Tanzania; and
•	Grameen Bank in rural credit for the poor in Dakar, Bangladesh, among others.

The hon. Odit will be dearly remembered for having served the people of Erute South Constituency in Lira District as a Member in the 7th and 8th parliaments.

Having served for two terms in this august House, is true testament of the faith that the people of Erute had in him.

Despite the late Odit being a member of Uganda People’s Congress (UPC), an Opposition party, I can attest to the fact that he respected divergent political views. He never criticised the National resistance Movement (NRM) and its leadership unnecessarily as it is always with some Members of the Opposition. He instead offered solutions, which are the true hallmark of a responsible Opposition.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, you may recall that while the late Odit was serving in this august House, he was a member of a number of committees, and to prove that he was indeed a true leader, he chaired two committees in the Seventh and Eighth parliaments. This is very well known because of his performance which was quite outstanding. He chaired the Committee on Agriculture; and the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises. Having chaired and been a member of this accountability committee, the late Odit was a strong advocate of having checks and balances in our systems. It is precisely for this reason that he so passionately and very clearly spoke so much against corruption.

The late Odit will also be remembered for the efforts to bring about peace in Northern Uganda, and in particular, in the Lango sub-region. He was one of the leaders who advocated for a peaceful solution to the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) insurgency, and indeed spoke so much for dialogue with the leaders of the LRA.

The late Odit was also a very strong believer in cultural institutions; it is for this reason that he supported the Lango traditional chiefdoms because he believed that traditional institutions fostered unity amongst the people in the community. The Lango cultural institution will dearly miss him.

Having had a background of agricultural studies, the late Odit will also be remembered for promotion of large-scale agriculture in his area, and this helped him gain enough popularity to win a parliamentary seat in 2001. 

He also made enormous contribution to the growth of the Anglican Church, having served as project supervisor for the Provincial Church of Uganda overseeing development activities in all the four zones of the province, namely: Northern, Eastern, Central and Western. 

The late Odit’s role as an educationist cannot be understated. His expertise as an expertise was exhibited at Lira Town College where he was a student teacher and head of the agriculture department at the National Teachers’ College, Ngetta, and where he taught agricultural economics and on the invitation of Makerere University at the Department of Agricultural Economics, where he presented a number of papers to the graduate students from the University of Ohio, USA.

Having failed to win back his seat in the 2011 elections, the late Odit was subsequently appointed Secretary General of the Uganda Peoples’ Congress (UPC) by Mr Olara Otunnu, the Party President. He served for a short period before falling out with Mr Otunnu, after which he fell sick. He then spent four months in hospital where, unfortunately, he met his death.

Government has taken the decision to honour the late Odit for his immense contribution to the well-being of this nation by giving him a decent send off, and also taking full responsibility of all the burial expenses. (Applause) 

To the widow and orphans of the late Odit, you have lost a husband; you have lost a father. I want to use this opportunity to thank you for looking after him at the time he was sick. I want to assure that the Almighty God will watch over you and, we, who have known and worked with the late Odit for a long time, will be available to offer whatever assistance we can. May the Almighty God sustain the bereaved! I beg to move.

3.09
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Mr Speaker, I rise to second the motion to pay tribute to the late hon. John Odit, who passed away on 9 November 2012. Colleagues, I would like to convey my sincere condolences, and on behalf of the entire Opposition, in and outside Parliament, to the bereaved family, the people of Erute South, the UPC party, the friends of the late Odit, and all the people of Uganda, for the loss of hon. Odit.

Mr Speaker, although the late hon. John Odit battled his ailment, which culminated into the stroke that claimed his life, it is right to say that he had an untimely death. At the age of 55, hon. Odit was full of potential to serve this country, and indeed, his family. 

The hon. Odit, I am aware, was a loyal subject of the cultural leader of Lango and a committed member of the UPC. I bring condolences from the cultural leader of the Rwenzururu Kingdom to the leader of the Lango Cultural Institution. I bring special condolences from the people of Kasese, most especially the members of UPC and the entire community of the Kasese people, to the family, all Ugandans and Members of Parliament, for the loss of hon. Odit. 

Honourable colleagues, today, when we come to pay our last respects to our fallen colleague, we are remembering him, and we also try to think about what impresses us about him, since we are only human. 

The widow and the children must be in deep pain and grief because to them, this occasion is only a reminder of “daddy’s workplace”, “daddy’s goodness”, and daddy as a father, a husband and a friend. I know it brings you sad moments, but take heart because the good Lord will see you through this situation.

Mama Dorothy, I think this should console you to know that your dear husband and the father of your children was a brave man. He was loved across the political divide in this House. I vividly remember in the Eighth Parliament, as we were ushered into the multiparty dispensation, many people did not want to associate with some offices in this House. I remember some of our NRM colleagues who found it difficult to even move close to the Office of the Leader of the Opposition for fear of being misunderstood. But our late colleague, the hon. John Odit, took some decisions, which at one point made him to be misunderstood. He was even chased from the position he held on behalf of the Opposition.

But I considered him to have been a gentleman and a peace-loving Ugandan, because even during that time, he did not want to put up a spirited fight – for he believed in peace and democracy. You had a gentleman in Odit, as a husband and a father, while we had a legislator and a good leader in him. 

The Parliament of Uganda will indeed miss the type of hon. Odit. To the widow, I know our words may not mean a lot, because you knew hon. Odit much more than we did. But I want you to know that God gave us and He has taken away; and may His Name be glorified.

The late hon. Odit, like I said before, was a peace-loving man, who was not antagonistic, and I am sure, most of you concur with me on that. He was always calm despite the prevailing situation. He was a good listener; whether he had a solution to the problem you presented to him or not, at least he gave you a listening ear. And that comforted some of us who at times shared a lot with him.

Mr Speaker and dear colleagues, people like hon. Odit do not just grow, they are raised. His career, like the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has mentioned, speaks volumes about the man we are saying bye to. As a teacher, a social worker, agriculturalist and a great leader, he believed that the Opposition political parties would work together and bring the desired change that we all talk about. And these are the things that made him stand out as a great leader.

Let us not only say bye to the late Odit and forget the legacy he left behind; let us continue to advocate for peace, better agricultural services, better education and better medical care for all Ugandans. These are some of the things hon. Odit believed in and advocated for. 

Hon. Odit, this world is a stage where each one of us must play their part and exit. You did your best. May your soul rest in eternal peace! 

I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I beg to second the motion.

3.16
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryadongo): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I rise to support the motion that has been moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, and ably seconded by my sister the Opposition Chief Whip. I also want to convey my condolences to the bereaved family, to the Parliament of Uganda, to the people of Erute County South, to the political party that he belonged to, the Ugandan Peoples’ Congress and to all Ugandans for the demise of this gallant son of Uganda. 

Having heard the profile of the late John Odit read out by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it goes without saying that this was a great brain, a great human resource to the people of Uganda - for the African people! We lack a lot of resources in Africa, but one great resource that we lack is the human resource, and it gives me a lot of hope when Government decides to accord a person of hon. Odit’s calibre a befitting send-off -a special sitting of Parliament and an opportunity for all of us to say a few words about what we think about him after his departure. It gives me hope, Mr Speaker, that we recognise the human resource, which is a scarce resource on the African Continent. 

A death like this also gives us an opportunity to see the bright side of Uganda when we find ourselves debating like we are doing right now, because there are people who will hate you for contesting against them. There are those who will hate you for chairing a committee that investigated them. There are even those who will hate you for nothing. (Laughter) I want to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for exemplarily standing out -(Applause)- because you could have dodged this sitting if you had a bad heart. But I want to thank you for what gives me hope to see that even if somebody, in the course of executing his duty, stepped on your right leg or your wrong one, you can still come out to identify with them. This is very positive. These are things, which we sometimes take for granted, but I think we should not.

In the same spirit also, I want to thank in absentia, the hon. Sam Engola, the State Minister for Housing who dislodged hon. Odit from his seat for – there he comes – for having run around to ensure that the bill in the hospital was settled; and to ensure that things were going on well. These are things that we sometimes take for granted, but this is priceless, and I am very happy to note this point.

I got to know the hon. John Odit when I was growing up in Lango. In the Church of Uganda, he was very instrumental, and I also had the opportunity to work with him in the Seventh and Eighth Parliaments - we joined together in 2001. 

I want to pay tribute to the hon. John Odit because most times when you see this House, we are almost 400 MPs; but half the time you do not see half of the House full. But hon. John Odit who was known for sitting right here, just a seat behind, was always consistently present in this House. (Applause) He took the business of this House seriously; he took the representation of his people very seriously. And, he actually balanced the two, which is always a challenge to most of us. 

But above all, I want to honour him for his brain power. This side was always energised every time he stood up to weigh in on the issues on the Floor. I also want to pay tribute to his bipartisan way of looking at things most of the time as it has been alluded to by the mover of the motion. I think this is really the way to go because no amount of disagreement from both sides of the aisle should let us be hostile to each other. It should not let us lose our heads and we take each other for enemies, because at the end of the day, the issues that we discuss in this House are about our people. We only disagree on one thing, Mr Speaker, how to do it for our people. But we all intend to do it for our people using different methods of work. So, it is never personal, and it should always be taken as such.

I am a product of Lango College just like the late hon. Odit, and, I was just thinking to myself that in his generation, which obviously is not mine, he made it to the extent that we are here sitting in his honour this afternoon, and in my own generation I made it to where I am. I was just thinking about the children who are in Lango College right now. Are they going to make it to where we are with the standards of education that we have right now? I am just posing a question for us to think about, because in the past, you would study in the village but you would sit exams and compete with the children who are in Kampala schools. Let us think about some of these things and think about how to fix them.

I want to wind up by saying that the hon. Sebuliba Mutumba and myself, we are going to miss hon. John Odit very much because the Archbishop of the Church of Uganda, through the chaplain of this Parliament, tried to organise two pilgrimage trips for MPs to go to Israel and they failed. The third one which co-opted other Members, it was me, hon. Sebuliba Mutumba and the late John Odit who managed to make it to what turned out, at that time in 2009, to be known as Orombi ‘09. 

That was a great time of bonding as colleagues because we are colleagues in this House, but most of the time we do not find time to get to know each other. We do not find time to talk heart to heart. We do not have time to even fellowship. It gave me an opportunity to get to know him even better and above all things to get to know him in the Holy Land where we were visiting for 10 days. I believe my colleague, hon. Sebuliba Mutumba, shares the same amount of grief that I do since the demise of our friend. But I am also happy that he visited the Holy Land. I think that was one of the things he only stood the most for himself. As a person who believed in God, he wanted to 
 visit the Holy Land. I am very happy that he died after he made that pilgrimage, which was very important to him.

I want to weigh down on his interventions as chairman of the Committee on Agriculture. A lot has been said about this. But I would like to highlight one other important intervention which he made in the programme of NAADS. NAADS was designed the way it was, but under his chairmanship, we saw NAADS being “re-born”; we got new NAADS TWICE; the programmes of NAADS were reviewed. At one point, when hon. Hilary Onek was Minister of Agriculture, NAADS was even suspended. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, would you like to wind up? 

MR OTADA: Yes, Mr Speaker. I will wind up in a minute. I would like to thank him for the reforms that he initiated under the agriculture sector, where the bulk of our population is employed. Under accountability in COSASE, a lot has been said. I just want to thank him for that. 

To the family, obviously, we can say many more things about the late, but I want to say that you should stay in the Lord, because you are a family which is anchored in God. I know that for a fact. Just stay in the Lord.  For the children, may you bloom where you have been planted. Right now, you have been planted in a situation where you have lost a father; bloom right there. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that “Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the family, relatives, friends, the people of Erute North and the entire country, upon the loss of this gallant son, and that it takes cognisance of the distinguished service rendered and contribution made by the late hon. John Odit in the political and social arena in Uganda.” 

Honourable members, this House will rise at 5 O’clock. We have about one and a half hours from now. Therefore, we need to regulate the time we speak, before I am constrained to impose a time limit on our speeches. I will try and make it freelance for now until I see areas of abuse of discretion.

3.29
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Every time death strikes, it becomes a new phenomenon in human nature, but it is a constant reminder that it is something that we live with every day; and it is a constant reminder of the Biblical and other verses in the holy books, that death is our route to the Promised Land. 

When it comes, the immediate members of the family lose a loved one, and a breadwinner; and above all, at times they even lose hope. At this moment, I would like to extend my condolences to the members of the immediate family, the members of the constituency which he represented, fellow colleagues in Parliament, and the people of Uganda, that it is unfortunate that we have lost somebody who loved this country dearly. 

Whenever we pay tribute to somebody, I keep asking myself, “Why do we pay tribute after all?” This is something I want every Member of Parliament to keep reflecting on for the time God has given us an opportunity to serve in this House. We pay tribute to somebody here, one, because they have been an honourable Member of Parliament. And being an honourable member comes with responsibilities and expectations that at times we set aside without knowing. How did hon. Odit live while he was a Member of Parliament? This is what I want to talk about because I was privileged to serve two terms of Parliament with him.

Mr Speaker, the Opposition Chief Whip alluded to the fact that there are many people in this world, including Members in this House, who feel that it is sacrilegious for Members on Government side to associate with Members of the Opposition and vice-versa.  

Honourable members, you remember that hon. Odit had to pay a price for accepting to fly out of this country with the President of Uganda. This was something very painful. While we remember his deeds, let us live to emulate what we are voted for in this country.

I have kept asking, especially my colleagues on the Opposition side, “Who pays your salary?” Even those who harangued him at that time, they are themselves facilitated and paid for by Government, although Government has to collect taxes from everybody in this country. 

While we serve as Members of Parliament, let us remember one cardinal responsibility; that we owe a duty to the people we represent; we owe a duty to the people of Uganda; and we owe a duty to this House where we have been called honourable Members of Parliament. Hon. Odit demonstrated this across the aisle. 

Secondly, I would like to talk about his ability to network. Those of you who listened to the captions that were put on the screen to commemorate what he said while he lived. He alluded to one specific aspect; when we had to work with him while he was chairman of COSASE to investigate Bauman House. While I served as the Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources, it became evident that Government could be losing money. However, that investigation did not come directly under my mandate as chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources. So, I had to concur with him to find out whether this would be an area he would be interested in. He gladly accepted and he did a tremendous job for this country. 

How many opportunities do we lose in this House for Members wanting to demonstrate that they are the ones best suited for the work, forgetting the collective effort that can make this House better because of the collective sum? Let this be a constant reminder, progressively. 

As I end, I would like to first of all thank Government for accepting to do what I have just heard here. As a member of the Commission, I had the opportunity to be privy to the stress that the family was going through because of financial difficulties when hon. Odit was in hospital. For this relief that has been demonstrated to the family, I would like to thank Government and pray that at times 

hon. Odit may have paid a price. Stroke is a disease, but it is disease that comes from high blood pressure. The pressures that we go through as Members of Parliament, and as immediate former Members of Parliament ,is collective pressure, for which we need to reflect on how best we could manage it, especially in this very strenuous work that we do as Members of Parlaiment. 

On behalf of the people of Bunyole, I would like to extend my condolences, and I support the motion. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.36
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. On behalf of the Acholi Parliamentary Group, I would like to convey our sincere condolences to the family and to the entire Lango sub-region. 

I worked with the late hon. Odit, but the nature of Parliament does not allow us to understand one another unless you are on the same committee or you travel abroad together. This is what brings you closer to know one another in a completely free environment outside the plenary. In the plenary arrangement, you may know a person but you may not actually understand them unless you are in the same committee or you travel abroad together. 

I travelled to Malawi with hon. Odit and during our trip, we shared a lot and I came to understand him. He told me his history, where he worked, how he worked in the church and his contribution to the church.

The second aspect was when hon. Odit had some misunderstandings with the leadership of the Opposition. He was asked to relinquish the position of the Chairperson of COSASE before his term had ended. Although he accepted not to continue chairing the committee and the vice-chairperson took over, he never handed over to the appointed chairperson until his term ended. When his term ended, I took over from him and I had two handovers; the one from the other gentleman who was chairing the meeting and the official handover by hon. Odit, who gave details on a number of things, among others, was to make a follow up on the Temangalo report with the IGG’s office, which I did. 

Actually, my first assignment was to write to the IGG to make a follow-up of what Parliament had referred to them, although, later, I was told that Parliament had handled the matter. That was the message that I got from the IGG.

I, therefore, discovered that hon. Odit was sober, cool-headed and very principled. But if you did not understand him, you would sometimes think that he was reserved because he did not just react to anything that came. He took his time before he contributed.

Finally, why do we speak on such occasions? We speak on such occasions to console the family. We also speak on such occasions to learn lessons. 

I would like to take this opportunity to thank Government for honouring the late hon. Odit, supporting him during the hard times in hospital and for organising his burial. I would also like to thank Government; a few months ago, we e had other people here like the late Tiberio Okeny, the late Adimola and of course, the late Milton Obote to whom Government gave a State burial. 

I would like to urge Government, that in the spirit by which we speak on such occasions - the reconciliatory tone - we should not only wait to reconcile with the dead or the sick in hospital, but we should reconcile with the living.

Mr Speaker, you introduced what other people call past leaders in the gallery. These are very distinguished and experienced people who may belong to other parties, but their knowledge can still be useful to Uganda. What would be wrong for Government to appoint hon. Okello-Okello, an experienced person with land knowledge, to advise Government on land? (Applause) What would be wrong to appoint Maj. Rurangaranga with vast historical experience, to be a Presidential Advisor on the Political History of Uganda? (Laughter)

We should not always wait to pretend to be reconciling while our leaders continue to suffer before they fall sick. They continue to suffer because they are out of office. They suffer, face difficulties and immediately they fall sick in hospital, we rush and say, “We will pay the bill.” You rush when they are dead and you say – Government must remember that differences of opinion in political parties should not separate us, as a nation. There are people from the opposite side who can contribute to national development even better than some people on the other side, with the commitment that they may have.

Therefore, I would like to urge that we should not wait to reconcile with the sick in hospital and the dead. We should reconcile with the living and remember that there is a section of leaders out there, we should reconcile with them while they can still contribute to the country. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)
   
3.42
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also join my colleagues in conveying condolences to the members of the family, the constituency and the entire House, upon the loss of our friend and colleague.

I met him in the Eighth Parliament when we joined the first multiparty Parliament under the new Constitution, and we worked very well with him, as a number of colleagues have described. 

I found hon. John Odit calm, social, dependable, articulate and knowledgeable. Whenever he rose to speak on the Floor of Parliament, all of us benefitted from his submissions, especially in the areas of agriculture, economics and general issues of development. 

Like some Members have said, even when the House became empty, he was always present, and those of you who watched his debate on the screen this morning, he was always talking when the background was empty. He was always here up to the last hour of the sitting of Parliament. Therefore, we want to thank him for the contribution he made in this House and to the entire country. 

He was also a Member who never exhibited political extremism. Even when he belonged to the UPC Party. He related and worked well with everybody in this House, irrespective of the political party they belonged to. We have a lot of lessons to learn and pick from his life especially as we nurture our multiparty dispensation in this country.

The incident that is being referred to was quite sad; this is when the President - the President usually asks that he wants to travel with some Members of Parliament. When he travelled with the President, he was misunderstood; it was alleged that because he was chairing a committee that was investigating the Temangalo issue, the President would compromise him. 

I think we need to tolerate each other. Does it mean that if I am a member of NRM and I travel with Dr Kiiza Besigye, I will lose direction in terms of ideology? No. (Interjections) Does it mean that if hon. Jack Sabiiti goes to State House and meets the President, he will cease being a member of FDC? No. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, as we build our multiparty politics, let us build the culture of tolerance so that we can relate, and we can disagree ideologically on our political directions, but let us all work together as Ugandans.

Our colleague, hon. Odit has died of a stroke, and like hon. Dombo said, a stroke is usually a consequence of either high blood pressure or any of these non-communicable diseases, which are on the rise. Time and again, we have used this opportunity, when we are paying tribute, to remind and urge Government on the need to make our health services functional because what has killed him - and I am very sure as a doctor- is what will kill most of us, Members of Parliament, several years from now. (Interjections) Of course, all of us are going to die. 

The epidemiological profile of diseases in this country is that these non-communicable diseases, what we call diseases of lifestyle like high blood pressure, heart complications, cancer, kidney failure and respiratory complications are on the rise and you cannot escape them. We must plan for an efficient health service in this country, so that some of these can be detected early in order for treatment to be done. 

The other day I said something about our visit to India with the Rt Hon. Speaker and let me say it again when the Prime Minister is here. While there, the High Commissioner gave us information that investors in India had already met the President and expressed a wish to construct a state-of-the-art facility, which many Ugandans run for in India for investigations and treatment. What they only wanted from Government was the assurance that they would get a piece of land and they invest over $15 million in Uganda to put in place a state-of-the-art facility.
 
But for many years, Government has not made that commitment. Therefore, may I use this opportunity to remind the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that in addition to that private facility, we should also invest in improving services in Mulago Hospital and other health facilities in Uganda. Most of equipment and medicines are not very expensive and the human resource and the skills are present in the country. 

Therefore, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I am directly talking to you; we need to improve the health services in this country to help us detect and manage most of these conditions.

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and may his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Reagan Okumu talked about leaders in the gallery. Let me now introduce Prof. Kakonge, the National Chairman of the Uganda People’s Congress. (Applause) Also, in the gallery, are members of staff from the Uganda People’s Congress Headquarters and other UPC representatives from the districts. Please, join me in welcoming them, as we pay tribute to hon. John Odit. (Applause) 

3.49
MR BENSON OBUA OGWAL (UPC, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. If I sound a little emotional, you will understand because I was very close to the late hon. Odit. The late used to sit just in front of me here. We had very great moments. We also shared very many sad moments. This leaves me with a lot of mixed emotions.

I knew the late hon. Odit before I joined this Parliament. When I came to this Parliament, he became a source of inspiration to very many of us young people who came to the Eighth Parliament. He mentored us and he showed us what to and what not to do. He even counselled us. 

The late hon. Odit was a different kind of person. He was a very kind and humorous person. I shared a lot of intimate moments with him. We often travelled to Lango together in the same vehicle, but we would laugh all the way to and fro. Actually, on one of the travels both of us nearly died. We were travelling in my vehicle and around Luwero at 5 a.m., one of the two lorries ahead of us suddenly overtook and we were terrified. The two lorries came facing us on a narrow road that was under construction. Hon. Odit and I closed our eyes and waited for death. We did not know what my driver did but later, we got to realise that we had passed the two trucks. I still remember that moment. Later, we stopped and prayed for a while on the road. I remember that moment with a lot of emotion. 

The last 10 months were very crucial for most of us, especially the family of the late hon. Odit. When he went down with a stroke on 3 February 2012 and underwent an emergency brain surgery, he never recovered fully. The family has been in such a situation for all this time, including the three months when he was in the intensive care unit with the bills going high in hundreds of thousands per day. By the time of his death, the bill had come close to Shs 200 million. 

For us, friends and former colleagues, there was nothing we could do. We were defeated. That is when we took the courage, despite what anybody would think, when we met the President in Rwakitura to discuss Otuke issues. As part of the UPC team, I suggested to my friends that this was our hope and I told them we needed to see what the President could do. When we agreed, we shared with our friends from the Lango Parliamentary Group and they said if we thought that it was okay, that was the best solution. Fortunately, when we shared this request with the President, he did not hesitate; he decided to pick all the bills.

I would like to use this opportunity to thank the President. Sometimes we say many things but it is in such moments that you get to know the other side of people. The President showed us a very fatherly side of him. When the late passed away, we, members of the Lango Parliamentary Group, decided to send our plea again to the President and we are glad that he accepted, even to bring the body here. 

I think this was done because hon. Odit was a very exceptional human being. He was kind and highly intellectual. He debated with skill. He was humorous and dignified. He was honourable and self-respecting. He did not know how to pick enmity over issues that were not important. In his final moments – I know this because I was quite close – he forgave all those who wronged him in any way. I believe because of forgiving and because of being God-fearing, God must have smiled at him.

I would like to thank the family for standing very firm. It was ten gruelling months, spending 24 hours a day in the hospital. When I look at that young man there, I get speechless because he had to forego his studies at senior 4 and he said, “I will be by my father to the very end.” (Applause) Incidentally, he has been the most courageous amongst the children of the late hon. Odit. He would recount stories and console his mother. That young man is a good leader in the making. (Applause)

We, of the Uganda Peoples Congress, have lost an icon. We may not be able to replace him. He went at a time when we needed him most, at a time when he used his energy to try to rebuild and reconstruct this party that brought independence to this country. He did it with a lot of dignity, without causing unnecessary enmity. He was a very principled man.
 
I can say a lot about the late hon. Odit, but perhaps however much I say, we are all grieving. There might be other opportunities to say more about him but for now, Mr Speaker, I must say that we have lost a great son of Lango, a great son of Uganda, a nationalist and somebody who still had a lot to contribute to this country. 

We thank you all. On behalf of the Uganda People’s Congress, I would like to say that we appreciate your messages of condolences because we are the bereaved family of hon. Odit. Thank you.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the time is limited. So, I am going to impose a time limit now. Can we do three minutes and see how we move? 

3.58
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I remember hon. Odit during my days as a graduate student in the Department of Agricultural Economics and Agro Business Management at Makerere University.  

The first day I met hon. Odit, he was in the company of Christine, a friend of mine, and I asked her, “What does that gentleman do?” She said he was a Member of Parliament. I remember jokingly asking him, “Honourable, what does it take to be a Member of Parliament?” He looked at me and asked, “What is your name?” I told him my name and he said, “It takes extraordinary courage.” That is what I remember so vividly about him. 

Mr Speaker, many times we come to this House to talk but there are very few people who come here to debate. He was one exception, somebody who had his data at hand and spoke with authority, authority you could not challenge unless you had read. That was hon. Odit. 
 
I keep wondering and contemplating about death. I realise one thing that for sure, in life we will never get as many flowers as we get on the day of our death. I can bet here that the biggest number of roses or whatever you get in form of flowers will appear on the day you will never be able to see them. You will receive flowers from the Prime Minister, the Leader of the Opposition and from whomever but in life I doubt that we get these numbers. So, what does that remind us and Government?  What does it take to live in this country? 

Mr Speaker, about 21 days ago I was in Mulago having a baby. I can tell you the state of our hospitals is so nasty that we must celebrate death. In a country where we award trophies to investors who are funeral management service providers, it is very painful. But why do we do that? It is because it is an inevitable part of life.
 
I would like to re-echo what hon. Okumu has said. When do we take time to reconcile with the living? It goes down to the flowers. Why do we receive flowers when we are dead and yet when we are alive, we never really get to get these numbers of flowers? (Member timed out.)

4.03
MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I would like to use this opportunity, on behalf of the Democratic Party, to convey our sincere condolences to the family, to the people of Lango, and indeed to this Parliament and the entire country at the loss of our colleague, the late hon. Odit.
 
I met the late hon. Odit in the Eighth Parliament. He used to sit just behind me. When we came in, he had been a Member of the Seventh Parliament, so when he got to know that we were Members of the Opposition he ushered us into the do’s and don’ts of this House. In fact, I remember debating here one day and he called me to the lobby and advised me that whenever I debate, I should always debate from an informed position and not from either experience or common sense. Indeed, since that day, whenever I debated in this House I would remember that hon. Odit was behind me. So, this is the man we have lost.
 
The late hon. Odit loved his country. When I travelled with him to Sweden - they say that if you want to know somebody, travel with him for at least eight hours - the late hon. Odit was an ambassador for his country. Although he was in the Opposition, he would always defend Uganda. (Applause) In Sweden, we met some Ugandan exiles but hon. Odit defended his country despite belonging to the Uganda People’s Congress and knowing very well how UPC developed this country in terms of schools, infrastructure, roads and hospitals. He would defend this country.  This is the man we have lost.

The late hon. Odit was a strong believer in his faith. In fact, he told me about the things he did for the Anglican Church of Uganda when he was a member of the All Africa Conference of Churches.
 
Hon. Okumu has mentioned that when he travelled with H.E. the President, some people in the Opposition thought that he had been compromised because he was chairing the committee on Temangalo. I remember sitting down with him not only in his office but also in the canteen trying to counsel him. Those of you who never knew the late hon. Odit, that is hon. Odit in that portrait; he used to be a smiling man. 

We have lost a man of integrity. We have lost a man who stood by his word. As the Secretary-General of the Democratic Party, after the elections of 2011 we sat together in Uganda House because he was also the Secretary-General of UPC. Our colleagues in the Opposition had asked us to join them in the shadow Cabinet and we sat down with him and debated. We agreed with the Opposition - (Member timed out.) 

4.08
MR OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, it is sad to note today and very difficult to believe that our brother, hon. Odit, is no more. It is really sad that the person who has served this country with total commitment, love and transparency is no more. 

I stand here on behalf of the people of Lango who have lost a gallant son today. The late hon. Odit served this country and our people with diligence, which made him a very strong pillar of unity in our community. Hon. Odit was a true embodiment of a true Lango man. I would like to give you the true qualities of a Lango person because they were altogether manifested in him. He was calm and a gentleman. He was extremely smart, not only physically but even mentally he was very intelligent. He was a strong believer in God and he initiated very many projects in the diocese of Lango for which we shall always remain grateful. 
   
Mr Speaker, hon. Odit had an impeccable record that is unmatched by anybody in this country. He was a person that you could rely on and a person that you could trust. I can tell you the way he walked was straight - I hope you knew him.  He would walk upright because he was straight. (Laughter) This is what I am telling you. These are the kind of people we need in this country.

Honourable members, I would like to request you to promote love and peace in our country. I would also like to invite you to learn my principle these days, which is to promote friendship. Let us cultivate more friends than enemies. That is what you will leave behind; it is the investment that you can make. Do not carry a lot of baggage in this world. You should go light so that when you go your Father in heaven, you do not travel with a lot of luggage. (Laughter) Do not be branded a thief. Hon. Odit was never a thief. He was never corrupt. He has believed in transparency and he has lived it - (Member timed out)

 4.13
MR HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. One thing that I would like to note is the fact that the late hon. Odit was born on the 9th of September and he died on the 9th of November. The second impression I would like to correct is what was read in the motion that highlighted him as Member of Parliament for Erute North; he was Member of Parliament for Erute South. 

Mr Speaker, I rise to convey my condolences to the family, the people of Lango, Uganda People’s Congress, Parliament of Uganda, the Province of the Church of Uganda, and the people of Uganda upon the demise of the late hon. Odit. I would like to restrict my submission about him to only two areas.
 
One, I shared with him a place in this Parliament. Mr Speaker, while in this Parliament, hon. Odit served his constituency, the people of Uganda and Uganda as a country with distinction and dedication. Hon. Odit was a peace maker. He was a man of integrity. He was knowledgeable. He was an authority on issues of agriculture. Whenever there was a debate in this Parliament within the field of agriculture and he stood, nobody would rise again to dispute whatever submission he had made. He was an authority in this particular subject. 

The second area I would like to share with you is that I went to the same school with him. He spent six years at Lango College where I equally spent six years. In the Eighth Parliament, Lango College was represented by over seven Members of Parliament. There was hon. Otada, hon. Omach, hon. Okot Ogong and I, and then we used to have hon. Odit, hon. Angiro Gutomoi and we now have hon. Gilbert Olanya. Even the late hon. Oromait was an Old Boy of Lango College.
 
I would like to say that the late hon. Odit, in terms of his leadership career, was mentored and groomed at Lango College. For the six years that he spent at that school, it was clear that he was a student leader from Senior 1 to Senior 6. That explains the reason why he had to even become a Member of Parliament and served in this Parliament for 10 years. 

Mr Speaker, it is important to give credit where it is due and I would like to put it on record. I would like to thank Government but particularly H.E. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni for two things; one, for granting that hon. Odit’s body be brought to Parliament. Despite having been a Member of Parliament, it was not automatic that his body would be brought to Parliament. The authority for granting the official burial was done by H.E. the President. So, I thank him for that. (Applause) I would also like to thank him for supporting the family at a very trying moment from February to November while he was in hospital. 

I want to thank the staff and management of the two hospitals, International Hospital Kampala where he was in the intensive care unit, and our National Referral Hospital, Mulago, for all the support rendered to the late hon. Odit. I strongly believe that all the doctors and the nurses and all the staff did their best to save his life. (Member timed out.)
 
4.15
MR BALTAZAR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to pay tribute to the late hon. Odit who represented the people of Erute County South in this Parliament. I would also like to express my condolences to the widow, the children, relatives, friends and the party members of UPC for the loss of a great man. 

I worked with the late hon. Odit in the Seventh Parliament when he was chairman of the Committee on Agriculture for four sessions, from the second to the last year. I worked as his vice-chairman for all those years. As other members have intimated, hon. Odit was a saved man and he never had any shame to profess his faith as a believer in Jesus Christ. He was a gentleman who chaired sessions very well and gave every person the opportunity to speak before finally he took decisions, which were very firm. 

One of the challenges we had in that Committee on Agriculture was when we handled the National Agriculture Research Systems Bill, which had actually come to dismantle NARO. We put up a lot of resistance and we handled the Bill with a lot of professionalism. He, as an agriculturalist, and I as a veterinarian, plus Prof. Ogenga Latigo, successfully resisted any attempts to dismantle NARO. Out of the decisions, with his leadership, the minister then, halfway through the Bill, fled; he actually resigned from his ministerial position and his constituency seat. After that, the late Odit said, “My prayers have been heard.” That is the person we are paying tribute to today.

Mr Speaker, one time he led a delegation of three members - him, hon. Salaamu Musumba and I - to Egypt. Before we left, he tutored us in diplomacy. He said he did not want to take things for granted, so he told us how to behave while there. The few days we were in Egypt, with his calmness the delegations we met could not know what our intention was in Egypt. We were supposed to have met three delegations but at the end we had met even the Deputy Prime Minister. These people were wondering what our intention was, yet we had actually gone to see their agricultural programmes and how they are harnessing the Nile waters. But his calmness was interpreted to mean that we had something else up our sleeves. That was the man we are paying tribute to. 

We shall miss him, as Members have said. Much as he was humble and patient, occasionally he was humorous and would crack a few jokes. You just had to know when to tickle him and you would get his jokes. Mr Speaker, I ask the family to remain strong during this time of grief. May the soul of John rest in eternal peace.

4.19
THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF GENERAL DUTIES (OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Mr Speaker, I convey my condolences to the family, the clan and all Ugandans. I want to explain the meaning of this event of honouring the dead. A tradition has picked up in this Parliament, where a number of dead Ugandans have been honoured here. How do you identify the dead to honour? How does the dead person qualify to be honoured in this Chamber? 

Mr Speaker, identifying people to honour requires a certain level of spirituality; it needs a mind that cuts across, because goodness has no party, no religion, no history or tribe; goodness is goodness because it comes from God. Being able to identify and respect it is a major achievement. I wish to thank this House and indeed those who initiated the idea of honouring the heroes, including our friend, hon. Odit.

The difference between the good dead and the good living is that the good dead can no longer make mistakes. You may be good today, and there are people who are trying to be good and they may be recognised as good, but tomorrow you may wake up when you are bad. The good dead, like hon. John Odit, are above making mistakes. So we must congratulate him for having been a good living and now a good dead.

The good dead in Christianity are called martyrs and saints, and at early stages they are called blessed. The good dead in Uganda are now called heroes. (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is three minutes, honourable members. I am not in charge of the timing; somebody else is. 

4.22
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We shall miss hon. Odit’s humour. We missed him, especially for the last 10 months when he has been bedridden. I thank you, Dorothy and the children, the friends and relatives who have stood by his side, especially for the last 10 months. 

On behalf of the people of Ndorwa West, I want to thank the people of Erute South who sent hon. John Odit to this Parliament to share with us the values that he learnt as a child in Lango. As many people have said, whenever hon. Odit entered this House, you would feel a spirit of bipartisanship moving around. He had that sense and believed that every person has goodness in them and when you bring them together, we can move this country forward. 

He helped many of us, especially when we would have some deadlock in this House. I remember vividly when hon. Odit and hon. Benson Obua worked together with us, especially during the difficult time of the walk-to-work protests. The people who had started it were also stuck and the masses outside could not be controlled. Together with hon. Odit and other colleagues in the Opposition, we sat down and moved a motion to come up with a bi-partisan way of moving forward.

Hon. Odit was full of humour and he was a very good student of the late hon. Okullo Epak, also from Lango, who taught us that when you hit your colleague on the Floor, do not wait for him to respond; after hitting him below the belt, just sneak out. That is what hon. Odit used to do; whenever he hit somebody below the belt, he would move out slowly, hanging around the corridors. 

Again, hon. Okullo Epak taught us that when you think you are defeated on the Floor, do not leave the House; struggle until you come back to normal. That was vividly seen in hon. Odit because whenever you had a debate with him on the issues of agriculture and you defeated him, he would never leave the House until he recovered from the defeat. 

Hon. Odit was an honest man. He would say what he meant and meant what he said. Honourable members, it is important that whatever we say here during debates in front of cameras should be the same thing we say outside the House when the cameras are not focusing on us. (Applause)

Hon. Odit was a personal friend and I get emotional when speaking about him. He spent 10 months in hospital bedridden. The family had hoped that he would stabilise and later be taken to another facility, probably in India, where they would have further investigations done on him. I think, as hon. Baryomunsi said, and as the Minister of Health told us here, there are plans to put up an international hospital here at Mulago so that all Ugandans can be able to access cheap facilities of this nature. By the way, I must say here that even when we go out to seek this medical attention, a lot of the money is spent on air tickets and accommodation. The money actually spent on treatment is very little. So, colleagues, we will be looking forward to the Ministry of Health bringing up this idea and we support it, so that we can have a facility where all of us can access these facilities when we are in time of need. (Member timed out)

4.27
MS JOY ATIM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to pay tribute to the late hon. John Odit. As a woman Member of Parliament, I represented him in Lira District. Allow me to convey my heartfelt condolences to the people of Erute South, the people of Lira District, the people of Lango sub-region, Parliament of Uganda and the country as a whole for the fallen son.

I knew the late John Odit as one of the prominent representatives in the Parliament of Uganda. As members have just said, the late Odit did not come just to speak but he deliberated, and he fully represented the people of Erute South. He fully participated in nation building. We shall miss him.

I also knew him as a member of UPC. I knew John for his humility. He was a gentleman. He was so honest, as honourable members have just said. When asked, the late Odit would not respond immediately; he would think and respond to you appropriately. He would listen and understand. If you wronged him or annoyed him, he would also respond but he would respond with a lot of intelligence, in a manner that if you were not intelligent enough, you would not even interpret what he would say. That is the character of the late Odit.     

Mr Speaker, allow me to thank the family of the late John Odit, especially the widow. I have never seen a woman like her in my life. To attend to a patient for over nine months is not easy. John had bed sores and the wounds were too deep. It was too painful but she endeavoured to attend to him. His bed was neat, the room was very neat, and all the time she would sit at the bedside comforting him. Much as he did not have the senses, she sat by him up to the last moment when he died. I want to congratulate her and I want to say, “thank you so much”. You have done such a great job. I think you had promised John that up to the last minute you would be with him. (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Oyam District.

4.30
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you. Hon. Ayena, you do not represent Oyam District. You represent Oyam County North. Thank you for that. (Laughter)

Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to hon. John Odit. Having listened to the contributions made by many members, I rise to summarise the life of the late hon. John Odit in this way - he was admirably dedicated to God, to the party and to the nation. He worked for the church and for God by carrying out many development projects which speak for themselves. I want to believe that right now as we are here, the late hon. John Odit is with God.
 
The late John Odit represented the constituency where I was born and he did that very effectively. I remember whenever I would go to visit my parents, I would find many people, the voters, more specifically the members of Uganda People’s Congress, talking very proudly that they have one of the best brains in the Parliament of Uganda, that was in the Seventh and the Eighth Parliaments.(Applause) Indeed, he put Erute South, where I was born, on the map of Uganda. 

Many Members have talked of the intelligence of hon. Odit but I would like to go even further and say that as a party, we had a very resourceful person. We had a memory point and we had a reference point as far as UPC was concerned. I remember during the parliamentary and presidential elections, hon. John Odit went with the president of the Uganda People’s Congress to a talk show in Lira town. He articulated issues pertaining to the UPC government in the past very clearly, and indeed we are sure that the history and the past will never be distorted as is sometimes done by some other people.

Mr Speaker, allow me to say that the late hon. Odit coordinated very well with many Members. He believed in unity in diversity. That is why he would listen to everybody, and he was very firm.  He died a party member, even if he had many ups and downs as far as being a member of UPC is concerned. (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I see the children leaving. Let me recognise them. In the public gallery we have pupils from Kyerima Primary School, Kayunga District, represented by hon. Sulaiman Madada and hon. Idah Nantaba. They are here to observe the proceedings of Parliament. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

4.34
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to support the motion to pay tribute to our brother and father, the late hon. Odit. I met hon. Odit as a Member of the Eighth Parliament. He was also a member of the Budget Committee during the two and a half years when I was the chair of the Budget Committee. 

Mr Speaker, I also stand in my capacity as the chairperson of the board of trustees of the Parliamentary Pension Scheme to bring condolences on behalf of the pensioners that are currently unable to join us here to speak for the good things that hon. Odit did for this nation. About five months ago, the family approached us for some assistance as guided by the law, so that he could actually have got a lump sum of money that could have been used to pay for the bills in hospital and also for the loan that was outstanding. The bank was even threatening to throw the family out of their house in Luzira because of this loan. 

Mr Speaker, we wrote to Uganda National Medical Board requesting for a letter, as required by the Pension Schemes Act. Up to date, five months down the road, we have not received anything. The National Medical Board has not been able to help us and give us that letter that would have enabled us to advance some money to the family to take care of the bills and also the outstanding loans that the bank was demanding from them.  

At this point, I want to commend H.E the President for the fatherly heart he has always had and for having helped this family. At that point in time when their father was bedridden and the bank was threatening to throw them out of the hospital, if it were not for H.E the President, I think it would have been double tragedy for this family.

Mr Speaker, when hon. Odit was a Member of the Budget Committee, he was a very honest person. He was bipartisan, a consensus builder, especially when we had issues in the Budget Committee that we could not synchronise. (Member timed out).

4.38
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, PWD): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion introduced by the Prime Minister and seconded by the Opposition Chief Whip. I wish to pass my condolences to the widow, children, relatives, the people of Lango, and the entire province of Church of Uganda for losing this gallant son. 

I came to know hon. John Odit in Parliament. Ever since then, I found in him an illustrious person whom every Member of Parliament desired to associate with. We are paying tribute to the late Odit and everyone who has made their contribution is talking about paying respect to him. Respect can never be snatched or grabbed; the surest way to gain respect is to earn it by conduct. Hon. John Odit deserved the respect which everybody here is talking about. 

He was a man of God. What I heard here was that he served the Church of Uganda diligently, but I wish to inform colleagues in this House that sometime back in 2005, hon. John Odit contacted us, the Muslims in this Parliament, and he said “I want you to come and join the Muslim community in Erute South because we are going to construct a mosque for my constituents”. I am sure that mosque was constructed. It is a different house of God, but that was done under the leadership of hon. John Odit. On behalf of the Muslim Parliamentary Caucus, I wish to extend our condolences to the family of the late John Odit. Words may hide our thoughts, but our actions will reveal them. 

I wish to thank H.E the President for the support that has been given. Our colleagues in the Opposition have stated that the President did extend support to the late John Odit and his family at the hour of need. This is what we must preach and it is what we must do. What Ugandans require is not to belong to any political party or religious affiliation and think that they are the parameters upon which we can build this country. What we need is to cultivate a peaceful environment that will enable us to co-exist peacefully. On this, I agree with hon. Reagan Okumu that we should proceed as Parliament and as a country to ensure that we work together for the betterment and development of our country. (Member timed out)

4.43
MR MOHAMED KAWUMA (DP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to the late hon. Odit. 

I met hon. Odit when I joined the Eighth Parliament and we used to sit together on this bench, right here. During the sessions of Parliament, hon. Odit was very resourceful to those of us who were new Members of Parliament then. He helped to nurture us, guide us and oriented us on how parliamentary business is conducted especially at plenary.

Mr Speaker, I think the right description of a true leader has been made this afternoon in the names of hon. Odit. We, the Members of Parliament and Government, other than the Members of Parliament and other leaders in their respective capacities that have passed on, still owe this state a duty. Hon. Odit played his role and it ended when he passed on. I want to believe that this Government and this Parliament will do whatever deserves to be done to put up these facilities. Thank God that President Museveni appreciated the contribution of hon. Odit and he stepped in; what about other members in the countryside whom the President may not know and who may be in need of such medical services? We should put up those facilities. 

Mr Speaker, when we were elected to the Ninth Parliament, four months later court nullified my elections. It was a very challenging moment for me. Hon. Odit was among the people I contacted and he immediately offered me a forum. I met him when he was still Secretary-General of UPC in his office in Uganda House. He accorded me the support I required during a moment of frustration and disappointment, having won an election that was shortly nullified. Hon. Odit stood very close by me and gave me the support that I required and I made it back to this Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, hon. Odit was well known for his struggle and fight against corruption when he was serving in the respective committees of Parliament in the Seventh and Eighth Parliament. As Muslims, we believe that whatever you contribute while living, and I believe it is the same with other faiths, is what is going to be counted on you for the rest of your time wherever you are going to be. Honourable – (Member timed out)

4.47
REV. JACINTO OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. So much has been said about the late John Odit and I would like now to only make two comments that are very brief.

The holy scriptures state that anyone who marries a good wife finds true treasure. That is according to the Book of Wisdom. I think this patient, tolerant, always cheerful, calm, candid, respectful gentleman, hon. Odit, knew the first value in life, and that is family life. He tells us in his life that if you want to be successful in life, first and foremost the best environment for succeeding in life is to have a good family, a good wife. I think this he knew very well and it is a good lesson for us members.

Mama Dolly has shown to all of us who visited the late and interacted with the family that she is truly a good and dedicated wife who can always hold the family together. For this, I really thank God and thank her and also all the members who stand by her. I thank you so much, Mama Dolly.

When I visited Mama Dolly, the bills were piling and she told me, “MP Father, I will stay with my husband as long as possible, and God willing, until he recovers. I am going to sell the house in Luzira; that house is expensive. We also bought pieces of land but I will sell everything and God will take care of us.” I think this is commendable - a wife who is ready to spend everything and trust in the providence of God. May God bless you and I think most of us here should emulate that in our families.

A lot has been talked about hon. John Odit. He was a politician who had a sense of respect – (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was the honourable Reverend Father Ogwal talking about the good qualities of a wife. (Laughter) I will now have the member for Buliisa County.  

4.51
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): I thank you, Mr Speaker, first of all, for according us this opportunity to pay tribute to a deserving departed senior member. I want to thank Government for the support and bring condolences from Bunyoro Kingdom and the Buliisa community in particular. 

When I met John Odit in Parliament, he took me through memories of his days while interacting with Kinyara Sugar Works where my family member, Yosamu Mugenyi, was seeking for votes and later became the UPC minister for transport. I liked his bi-partisan approach. As I have already stated, I have a UPC background and I joined UPM thanks to the late Zac Kaheru; may his soul rest in peace.  

It is important that we do not demonise those who belong to any party. My family was UPC and my constituency of Buliisa was 99 per cent UPC then, but today it is 99 per cent NRM and tomorrow it can be 99 per cent orange – (Laughter) – or liberal party. For that, we should cultivate a culture of tolerance, and that is why our senior member, the late Odit, deserves the respect that we are giving him.

I remember that in the last Parliament, one of our challenges was on the project in Kalangala. Kalangala was very unpopular and controversial. When we went to Kalangala with the Committee on Agriculture, it is hon. John. Odit and the then Shadow Minister, hon. Betty Kamya Namisango, who came out and said that this was a good nucleus project and people must support it. From the other side, at that time of controversy, where even some people on the NRM side were opposed to the Kalangala project, John Odit stood firm and supported the project. We need that kind of leadership. When people come out not to be populists but to say what is right, you can tell that they are leaders. 

I also want to give testimony to what hon. Bahati said here, that if he hit you below the belt, he would look for you to explain himself. Actually, John Odit one time rose on a point of order against me yet he rarely did that. This was when I touched a sensitive button by saying that IDPs in the North, as we were discussing the PRDP, could possibly be developed into urban centres as long as the land is saved out there. He rose on a point of order. I was trying to explain the importance of service delivery in the IDPs now that there was peace, so that the land can be used for nucleus projects. Indeed, the moment I got out, I found hon. John Odit waiting for me and he said, “Stephen, what is wrong this time? How can you talk about people leaving their land?” I had to explain, and I have been explaining this in the PRDP efforts because I think that if this money being stolen by the PRDP office had been invested into more nucleus projects, it would not have been taken.

So, we are talking about a gentleman who was clear headed. Even if for good intentions he rose on a point of order against me, he had to look for me and I explained to him. So, we remained with that spirit of working together. How many people here have said nasty things against others on the Floor but find time to go and explain, because you may at times – (Member timed out).

4.55
MR SAM ENGOLA (NRM, Erute County South, Lira): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to give my last respects to hon. John Odit. I want to inform this House, first of all, that hon. John Odit was a real mentor to me. Hon. Odit taught me when he was in his vacation from the university while I was in college. Hon. Odit John was my brother-in-law. Dolly is my sister and she is a real loving sister to me. I contested with hon. John Odit and I won and although he lost, we remained friends. 

Today is a sad moment for the people of Erute South. Since last Friday, they have been mourning and they are still mourning the father, brother and advisor to the constituency. It was with great shock when we got the news and we have been with the family and shall continue to be with the family. We are only asking the Members of Parliament and the people of Uganda to come for the burial on Saturday and give all the love that they had for hon. John Odit to the family and the clan. 

I want to thank H.E the President of the Republic of Uganda very much for accepting to bring the body of the late hon. John Odit to Parliament and for giving us all the necessary assistance for the burial. I also thank the honourable members Cecilia Ogwal, Okot Ogong, Obua and all those Members of Parliament from the Lango sub region for the guidance and cooperation they have given to the family and for the help to the people of Lango. I would like to ask you to continue with all the remaining meetings and arrangements to give the late a decent burial.

Mr Speaker, when the late hon. John Odit was in Parliament, I was so close to him. When we contested, we still remained friends. When I won we even became greater friends. He would tell me, “Hon. Sam Engola, I did this and that, please continue from here.” Whenever I accomplished something, I would report to him and say, “Muko, I am done with this” and he would say, “Continue”. 

When he fell sick, we went to Kampala International Hospital with some Members of Parliament from Lango sub region and saw the condition he was in. While there, we met Mr Rurangaranga, the President of UPC and other party members. We had to confront them because they had had big misunderstandings, but we told them to forget about the past and save a life. Fortunately, they agreed to our suggestion. So, I am so grateful to the UPC party management for whatever they did. 

I would like to mainly thank the President of the Republic of Uganda and I want to pray for him. There is no President in this country who will behave the way H.E Yoweri Kaguta Museveni – (Interjections) – No, that is the truth. I want to thank him very much and encourage him to continue behaving the way he did in respect of the help he extended to the family of the late hon. John Odit.

You will recall that a few months ago, the country lost the former Member of Parliament from Masaka, but her body was not brought to Parliament. That shows this is a special case. (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, time is up. I will now allow the hon. Hillary Onek to make his contribution.

4.59
MR HILLARY ONEK (NRM, Lamwo County, Lamwo): Thank you so much. Mr Speaker, the bereaved family and my colleagues, Members of Parliament, today we are again mourning another great Ugandan. He was a gentleman and a man who loved this country so much that with matters to do with the betterment of our country, he would always put them above self. He was a great statesman and very honest especially in politics. You know that most often such honest politicians always suffer political intrigue. In that regard, allow me pay my tribute to this great leader laying before us now. I would like to express deep sympathy to the family too. 

I worked with the late when I was the Minister of Agriculture. We were clearly from different political parties. He was from the UPC while I was from NRM but between 2006 and 2009, the two of us worked very closely. He was my chief advisor, I must confess. I being a civil engineer, I did not know anything about agriculture. So, he helped me to understand a lot of things in the agriculture sector. He also helped us to revise the programmes of NAADS. I was working with him on the restoration of agricultural mechanisation by the time I was moved from that ministry to the Ministry of Energy and Minerals. 

I worked with him very well when he was still alive. I do not agree with what my brother, hon. Reagan Okumu, said about the failure to recognise the qualities of the Opposition leaders when they are still alive. I fully recognise, and I am sure the President and Government recognised, the good qualities of the late. Of course, we cannot cooperate when it comes to walk-to-work campaigns, but when it comes to national development, we are always together.

I really do not have much to say. This is big loss to the country. I would like to wish that all leaders in this country emulate such values in leadership. That is how our country will be peaceful and united. I pray for the family and may his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will now use my discretion to allow the Leader of the Opposition to contribute but in only two minutes.

5.02
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker, I will plead with you for a few more minutes. Allow me convey my condolences to the family, the widow, children and the clan at large.

I first met the late hon. John Odit in 2001 when we all came to the Seventh Parliament. At that time he was older than all of us and he was our advisor. I can associate him to many issues, one of them being the sale of former UCB. He was one of those who were against that sale and all of you may be in the know of that. One time I led a team of chairpersons to China. That team comprised of him, hon. Kasirivu Atwooki and I. I can tell you that despite the fact that he was older than me, the team leader, he showed a lot of the respect.

Mr Speaker, we talked about the sale of the late’s property to meet bills incurred while he was still in hospital. Yes, the Prime Minister said Government is taking care of the burial expenses, but I notice that he has not talked about the sold property. I am talking about this because I am concerned about where the family will now go.

Two, how does State House get involved in paying medical bills when we have the medical board? We should not destroy systems, because we need them for us to operate. When a person is sick and admitted to Gulu Hospital, for example, but it is not possible to treat that person from there and they probably have to travel to India, that person must know where to get resources. We should not to be at the mercy of the President. That is why we have a lot of supplementaries for State House; it is all about diverting budgets to the wrong destinations. 

The medial board should operate. Anybody who is sick, no matter whether that person is admitted to Mparo Health Centre in Rwamucucu, where I come from, or some other health centre, that person must know what is due to him. It should not be about catching the eye of the President. All people of Uganda pay taxes and according to the Constitution, they are all entitled to a good healthcare system. If that is the case, then the state should provide and not the President because he does not sell those cows – (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable Leader of the Opposition. Honourable members, we had agreed that the House would rise at 5 O’clock. It is now past 5 O’clock. The motion is that Parliament resolves to collectively convey its deep condolences to the family, relatives, friends, the people of Erute South and the entire country upon the loss of a gallant Ugandan; and that it takes cognisance of the distinguished services rendered and contribution made by the late hon. John Odit in the political and social arena of Uganda. I now put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a message from a Uganda People’s Congress elder, Nicholas Onegi Pamiga, and  the another one from the Parliamentarians Co-operative Savings and Credit Society Ltd who are sending to the family Shs 1 million for burial expenses. It is signed by hon. Kasamba Matthias, chairperson of the Parliamentarians Co-operative Savings and Credit Society Ltd. (Applause) I will pass all these messages to the family. 

The National Anthem 

The East African Community Anthem

(Exit of the late John Odit.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much for being here. I am constrained by time; otherwise, we would have allowed this debate to go on. The time allotted was up to 5 O’clock and those who have not been able to speak, I apologise. You should have been given the opportunity to speak but the time was not sufficient for us to deal with this. 

The ordinary sitting of Parliament was adjourned to tomorrow, Thursday, at 10 O’clock. As I communicated earlier, the funeral service for the late hon. John Odit will be tomorrow at All Saints Cathedral at 10 O’clock. So, that sitting will not be possible because Members will be attending the service. Parliament for tomorrow will, therefore, start at 2 O’clock. Please, take note. That brings us to the conclusion of today’s special sitting. This special sitting is adjourned. 

(The House rose at 5.16 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 15 November 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
