

Tuesday, 6 November 2018

Parliament met at 2.02 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:

    1. Ms Naome Kibaaju

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, you are a Member of Parliament. I welcome you to this Parliament and congratulate the people who sent you here. I would like to also congratulate you for having made it. (Applause) 

In this place, we do things for the people of this country; nothing less, nothing more. If it does not affect the people of this country, it is not our concern. If it is about our people, that is our responsibility. To help you do that, I give you a book that you have just sworn to uphold - the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda; to guide you because the laws that we pass here must conform to the four corners of what is provided there. 

I also give you a copy of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to help you process businesses in the House. You cannot do much here. We can only do a lot here by using these Rules of Procedure to regulate our conduct and to guide us on how to present business before the House. That is how you help your people raise their issues. 

Therefore, you are welcome. You joined your peers to do the business of this country. (Applause) 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I welcome you back from recess. I see you all look bright and ready to proceed with the business of the House. That means the one month’s break did a lot of good to you. So, thank you for finishing the recess and welcome back to Parliament and let us start on the business of the House.

I wish to warmly welcome you to this sitting and to congratulate you for beginning the first sitting of the second meeting of the third session of the Tenth Parliament. 

Honourable members, join me in welcoming the newly directly elected Member of Parliament for Sheema North Constituency, hon. Naome Kabaaju, who has just taken oath. You are very welcome.

Honourable members, on a sad note, this country has indeed lost some of its very dear citizens. First, death occurred of the former Attorney-General, hon. Peter Nyombi. The former Attorney-General Peter Nyombi died on 7 October 2018 at the age of 64. He succumbed to hypertension and heart failure at SAS Clinic in Kampala. 

The fallen lawyer was a brother to Prof. John Musisi Senyonyi, the Vice Chancellor of Uganda Christian University and also Ambassador Henry Mayega, who is our Ambassador in China. Hon. Nyombi served as the Government main legal advisor for nearly four years from May 2011 to March 2015.

Secondly, the country has lost another distinguished personality, hon. Sarah Nyendwoha Ntiro, who was a renowned women rights icon.

Hon. Ntiro is believed to be the first woman university graduate in East and Central Africa. She died at the age of 92 when she was on her way to Mengo Hospital.

In the late 1950s when it emerged that Uganda would be granted her independence by the British colonialists, Nyendwoha is said to have started civic education sessions in Hoima to discuss democracy and elections.

The late Ntiro was instrumental in making sure that women earn salaries equal to those earned by men. In 1955, she was a teacher at Gayaza High School having graduated from Oxford University with a Bachelor in History a year before. When the colonial Government tried to pay her less than her male counterparts, with the same academic qualifications, she rejected the salary and decided to teach without pay. 

It is reported that the wife of the then Governor heard of Ntiro’s protest and intervened. The issue was pursued and she was permitted to receive a salary equal to that of men, setting a precedence that has stood the most of the last 60 years. All women and men teachers or otherwise now receive same pay, courtesy of hon. Ntiro.

For three years, hon. Ntiro served in the Uganda Legislative Council from 1958 to 1961, during which she tabled a Private Member’s Bill on the Registration of Marriages. She was also engaged in women organisations including the Uganda Women’s Council and YWCA Uganda.

Besides serving in the Ministry of Education and Sports as Secretary to the Teaching Service Commission, Dr Nyendwoha also worked as a teacher at King’s College Buddo. Later, under Idi Amin’s Regime, she joined Makerere University to serve in the Office of University Secretary. 

At that time, Makerere also saw her work as Clerk to the University Council and also Director of the East African Posts and Telecommunication Corporation. This icon was buried on Friday, 23 October 2018 at Kiganda in Hoima District.

On 11 October 2018, a tragedy befell Tsuume Parish, Bukalasi Sub County in Bududa District when mudslides hit a number of villages following a heavy down pour. More than 41 bodies were retrieved from the mass of earth that flattened the entire Naposhi Trading Centre including Tsuume Junior School.

It was reported that two markets including Naposhi on the slopes of Mount Elgon were completely destroyed while River Tsuume in Bukalasi Sub County in the landslide burst its banks washing away everything into the large Manafwa River, killing at least 40 residents.

We thank the President for the instant quick intervention in exploring all available options to stop further occurrences of these disasters.

On behalf of Parliament, I wish to convey our heartfelt condolences and sympathies and we pray for the souls of the departed ones to rest in eternal peace.

Honourable members, let us rise to honour those mentioned and other Ugandans whom I have not been able to mention for a moment of silence.

 (Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On a good note, honourable members, I congratulate all the Members who have received blessings in one way or another by adding members to their families, graduations, weddings and so many of those social activities that make families feel better.

Honourable members, join me to congratulate the Right Honourable Speaker and the Uganda delegation that attended the 139th Inter Parliamentary Union Assembly (IPU) in Geneva from 12th to 19th October this year, for successfully opposing plans of introducing the lesbian, gay, bi-sexual and transgender agenda during the IPU. (Applause) A substantive motion will be moved at an appropriate time and we will have a full discussion on this matter.

Honourable members, as we begin this session, I urge Members to work together across political divides to see that we fulfil the expectations of our people. Reflecting on the previous session, I noted that Parliament passed only the following Bills:

    1. The Mental Health Bill, 2014
    2. The Excise Duty (Amendment  No.2) Bill, 2018
    3. The Supplementary Appropriations Bill, 2017 
    4. The Supplementary Appropriation (No.2) Bill, 2017.

That was it. As you can see, a substantial Bill that is related to policy is only one and that is the Mental Health Bill, 2014. The other three are financial Bills. That is all we had for the whole meeting of Parliament.

This has fallen way below the expected output for the session and we have left some of these Bills unhandled.

We have these Bills that are in committees:
 
    1. The Marriage and Divorce Bill, 2009
    2. The Indigenous Rights Enforcement Bill, 2015
    3. The Human Rights Enforcement Bill, 2015.

Can we have some order even from the - are you opposing the Human Rights Bill? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then please keep your peace.
    4. The Law Revision (Penalties on Criminal Matters) Miscellaneous (Amendment) Bill,2015
    5. The Kampala Capital City Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2015
    6. The Uganda Forestry Association Bill, 2010
    7. The Minimum Wage Bill, 2015
    8. The Sexual Offences Bill, 2015
    9. The Data Protection and Privacy Bill, 2015
    10. The Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2016
    11. The Civil Aviation Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2017
    12. The Uganda Wildlife Bill,  2017

Honourable members, we always talk about wildlife and human conflict and this is a law that should have helped us but it is still sitting in the committee.

I am delighted to inform you that the committee report on the National Environment Bill, 2017 is here. Congratulations! Madam Clerk, would you put this matter for tomorrow’s discussion and we deal with it expeditiously. 

14. 	The Security Interest in Movable Properties Bill, 2018, 
15. 	The Tax Procedure Code Amendment Bill, 2018 was referred by the President on the 22 May 2018, 
16. 	The Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018 
17. 	The Roads Bill, 2018, 
18. 	The East African Export Import Bank Agreement Implementation Bill, 2018.

As you are already aware, this session is dedicated to business from committees inform of oversight reports, reports arising out of petitions referred to committees and debate on matters that could have come arising from visits that Members conducted in foreign trips.

However, I have been advised that most of these reports are not ready due to various reasons. Honourable members, especially committee chairpersons, please, be reminded that you are charged with the duty of ensuring that all this business is processed and presented to plenary and must be debated and adopted. Without that, we will not be doing business.

Honourable members, please, take note that the following business is ready; the National Environment Bill, 2017 is ready and we will be handling it tomorrow.

The National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill, 2017, which was retuned by the President a long time ago and it is still here and we hope to finish it. It is on the Order Paper today but I am now told that we are not ready to proceed with it until Thursday.

The Sugar Bill, 2016 is ready and we will proceed with it. 
We had started on the Investment Code Bill, 2017. I do not know what has happened to the minister. I hope we are now ready to finalise with it.

At the time the House broke off for recess, many Members had raised some important issues to which Government was supposed to respond and I have selected two of them.

At an appropriate time, the ministers responsible will be given opportunity to provide answers. These include hon. Moses Kasibante, Member for Rubaga who sought an explanation from the minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for the suspicious fencing off of an estimated 30 acres of land at Entebbe belonging to the National Animal Genetic Resource Centre (NAGRIC) and the anxiety it has caused to the employees of NAGRIC. The House directed the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to respond to this matter and this should be quick and also a status report given on what has happened to that land.

The second issue was raised by hon. Elijah Okupa over the absence of a legal and regulatory framework for mobile money. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Matia Kasaija undertook to table within one month the payment system procedures code that would regulate among others, the mobile money system.

I have seen a letter from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development making some statements that there is no gap at the moment because the laws that are in place can somehow regulate the situation but we want a comprehensive law that covers this sector properly.

Honourable members, on the Order Paper today, we have item No.4, which is not ready until Thursday. Clerk, take note that this matter comes on Thursday and this applies to item No.5, which was debated and sent back for further consultation. The committee will be ready to present also on Thursday. 

Apparently, some citizen’s right has been affected by the withdrawal of something that had been given to them by the Government. He is entitled to some compensation. It will also be handled on Thursday.

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from Sheema North who are here to witness the swearing in of hon. Kibaaju and observe the proceedings of the House.

In the distinguished strangers’ gallery this afternoon, we have hon. Yorokamu Katwiremu, former Member of Parliament for Sheema. He is here to observe our proceedings and enjoy what he used to do in this House.

This afternoon, we also have a delegation from the Guild Cabinet of Health Tutors College Mulago who are here to observe the proceedings. 

We also have students’ guild leaders of Kyambogo University, who are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. Thank you. (Applause)

Clerk is reminded that the National Environment Bill will come tomorrow.

Honourable members, the representative leaders of this House have been invited for a joint meeting on matters that affect the business of the House. That meeting was supposed to start at 3:00 p.m. This House will be sitting for another 15 minutes and adjourn till tomorrow.

Allow me to go and represent you where I have been called so that your interests are also taken care of. You can trust me to do that well. (Applause)

Can I have the Member for Bunyole West.

MR ATIKU: Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of procedure arising from your communication about the passing on of our former colleagues and we stood up to observe a moment of silence.

However, you did not guide us on whether there are motions that will be coming for us to pay tribute as we have been doing because the CVs of our former late colleagues are long and a formal motion from Government would be useful, for us to be able to eulogise them. I seek your guidance on this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. I am delighted that I have performed my job very well, to alert you that there was an important person. You are to assess that a motion could be required and then prepare it.

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You have just guided us and said that the last session performed below average and that our performance was not commensurate with what was expected of us. This may go down on members of Parliament but most of these Bills are Government Bills and as you have just read a number of them, very few or none is a private member’s Bill.

In most cases, Parliament and the House is willing to work but ministers are not available and things do not go the way we want as Parliament. Mr Speaker, could you prevail over these ministers so that they ease the work of Parliament and we deliver to this country what we have been sent for, rather than having this dread on us?

Is it procedurally right for them to have these Bills and sit with them for several months and years without presenting them to Parliament to discuss? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these Bills are with Parliament. I cannot anticipate what is coming from the other side because I do not even know them. These ones that I have read are in Parliament. 

If there is an issue with the ministers responding to consultations with the committees responsible for processing the Bills, that should not be an issue. A committee does not need a response from a minister to process a Bill; it is the property of Parliament. With or without the minister, prepare your report and come back to Parliament. You do not have to wait for a minister. The minister has already presented the Bill; what is your problem with him or her? Just bring the report and finish. (Applause) 

If you have written a report and you need some explanations from the minister and he has not shown up, take a decision in the committee, come back to the House and we proceed. Ignore the minister appropriately, if he or she is not responding and proceed.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Yesterday, as watched Bukedde Television, it was reported that pupils from two schools missed their examinations. One of the schools is in Butambala District where the shadow Minister for Internal Affairs comes from and the other is in Iganga.

These pupils missed their examinations because their teachers swindled the money. I saw that 70 per cent of the pupils were girls. Mr Speaker, I was touched because you said that it is the work of this Parliament that touches Ugandans. That is why I pray that Government, through the Minister of Education and Sports and the Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB), gives these pupils examinations so that they do not miss a whole year. (Applause)

Secondly, these culprits should be brought to book because when a peasant works for seven years and their child does not sit for the examinations, the girl will go for early marriage. 

In addition, whether these pupils are from private schools or not, they sit national examinations. Why can’t Government take over and register all Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE) candidates so that nobody misses? Thank you.

2.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my brother for raising this issue. It is true that there is a problem but this has been widely in private schools. It is very unfortunate that some of our pupils got to know this problem on the very day of the examinations. 

However, for the schools that have had this problem and we got to know in time, we intervened as a ministry and we were able to help the children. Of course, it is a big moral problem with the head teachers and school administrators but we are doing our best, as a ministry. We are trying to come up with a remedy to that problem. 

When children register, we provide a number such that they can be able to check using their phones to see whether or not their names have been registered. The problem is that many of our pupils do not know this but we are going to intensify our mobilisation –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it was on television yesterday, according to the Member from Butambala and this also affected children from Iganga. That is just a sample that came over the television. What are you going to do about these ones?

MS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, it is unfortunate I cannot commit that we are going to give them an examination today, tomorrow or the other day. We need to get back as a ministry and discuss this to see what we can do. It is very difficult for me to commit the ministry right now. Otherwise, it is not something that you can think over right now or overnight. 

Mr Speaker, we appreciate that many of these children went to the centres where they thought they would be sitting examinations and found out that they had not been registered. It is something that was abrupt. We got to know about it but we are going to discuss -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please update the House on Thursday at 2 O’clock on what you will have done about this matter.

MS SENINDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We shall come back with information.

2.39
MR JOHNSON SSENYONGA MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Mr Speaker, the matter I raise today arises from the neglect by Government to open up boundaries for forests. As I speak, there are over 180 families from Mukono South; that is Kabanga and other areas that have had their plantations cut down. 

I was on the Floor of Parliament and requested the Prime Minister, who promised that they are going to open up all forests boundaries. Many neighbours do not know their boundaries so at the end of the day, sometimes even the forestry department has gone beyond where they are supposed to stop. These people were not given chance to harvest their crops. 

I pray that:

    1. The Government quickly opens up forest boundaries within those areas so that we can know where they stop.
    2. They meet with the individuals occupying the land and give them time to harvest their plantations. 

The problem is that these people come within a day – I was lucky that the District Police Commander (DPC) for Mukono helped me to stop the soldiers who had already cut down the plantations of almost 100 families. How can they be assisted?

2.41
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Muyanja, who has raised this important issue. 

Re-opening of Government forest reserve boundaries is a continuous programme. People have invaded forest reserves because this is where we still have fertile soils. In the forest reserves, it is planting season throughout the year. Even where people are given notices to vacate, they continue planting every day. As such, there will never be a time when you do not have crops ready for planting in a forest reserve. 

I would like to request that we work out a programme with the District Forest Officers because they know the boundaries in their districts. I speak from experience because I had a similar problem in Kiboga where the districts know because there are marks but people continue invading; looking for fertile soils all the time. The ministry needs more money to reopen Government forest boundaries at a go. 

However, the information I have from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, is that they have been reopening these boundaries continuously. Therefore, I take it upon myself to request the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to take Mukono as a priority because we already have a conflict there, as well as other problematic areas so that we use the few resources we have in the ministry to handle these problems without escalating the conflict. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, there is a motion that has been on the Order Paper for a long time now and it is on business to follow; item 17. It reads, “Motion for a resolution of Parliament on the decision taken by Cabinet to de-gazette and gazette forests.” Could you activate this motion so that probably the minister can use this opportunity to make the requisition that you are making to Parliament? 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, the genesis of this motion was that there are numerous urban councils – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I am just saying, can we debate this motion? We know the genesis. Now, can we debate it and take decisions that might help the ministry in dealing with other forests? 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: We can do that, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. 

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising arose from the presence of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in the House. On Thursday, 3 May 2018, this House passed a resolution for appropriation of the Supplementary Expenditure Nos. 1 and 2 for the Financial Year 2017/2018. One of the items in that schedule was payment worth Shs 10 billion to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development for land in Mutungo to a one Dr Muhammad Kasasa. 

However, this matter is contentious and I would like to report to the House that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development misled the House in passing this particular Vote because this matter is in court. There was no way Parliament could have passed the Shs 7 billion, aware that in 2006, Shs 2.4 billion on the same land was paid illegally by the same ministry. There are injunctions and caveats on this same land and the Solicitor-General advised against payment on this land until the court matter is resolved. 

I would like to seek reason why the minister is hell-bent on paying public funds on a matter before court, over which he has been advised not to pay. Does the minister or other people have interest in having this money paid illegally at the peril of public funds? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, we took those decisions based on available information. Honourable minister, was there something you knew that you did not let us know?  

2.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Indeed, if he had brought this information at the time when we were making that decision, probably it would have been different. However, if the matter is in court and court has advised us not to pay, we will not do so. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have they paid or not? 

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, they actually paid Shs 2.4 billion over the same land and the Shs 7 billion is extra payment. In fact, the honourable minister cannot feign ignorance of knowledge over this matter. 

In 2011, the Auditor-General wrote advising that public funds be recovered because they were illegally paid. If the minister says that he is not aware of this matter then I am a bit shocked. In fact he had a duty to Parliament to bring that supplementary with concrete information. It was misleading to Parliament to bring that request, well aware that these matters are before court. In fact, there is no verified agreement by the Solicitor-General over this procurement.

Mr Speaker, the minister is aware that the Solicitor-General wrote saying that the land has caveats and instructed the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development not to make that payment but they went ahead and paid. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we appropriated the supplementary budget towards the request of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. After the appropriation, we release the resources, if they are available, to the ministries. At the time of payment - I know that it would be wrong to make any payment if court has advised against it - therefore, I will have to check whether there is any payment beyond the Shs 2.4 billion and then report back to this House tomorrow afternoon. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much. Honourable members, in my communication, I acknowledged the challenges we have gone through and I welcome you back. However, a Member has drawn my attention to the fact that some Members have not been well and I have not been able to say, “We thank God for their recovery.” I should do that now, particularly hon. Reagan Okumu, who had a severe back problem. His doctor said he should be more active so that – (Laughter) - he should be running around and exercising and he is now okay.

Honourable members, given that we are not able to proceed with this sitting, can I propose that we start the sitting tomorrow in the morning at 11 o’clock? This is because we have two Bills to handle. Can the committees postpone meetings for one morning and we deal with one Bill tomorrow morning? Can we meet tomorrow at 11.00a.m.? Let us meet tomorrow at 11.00a.m., finish one Bill and then in the afternoon, we deal with another one. 

The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 11 o’clock. 

(The House rose at 2.51p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 7 November 2018 at 11.00 a.m.) 

