

Monday, 6 November 2017

Parliament met at 2.04 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this special sitting. The purpose of this sitting is already known to Members. It is one of those days that we sit and mourn our own. It is a sad moment; we have lost a sitting Member of Parliament. I thank you for coming. 

(Entrance of the late hon. William Beijukye)

National Anthem

East African Anthem

Laying of wreaths

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. WILLIAM BEIJUKYE ZINKURATIIRE, MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT FOR RUHAAMA COUNTY, NTUNGAMO DISTRICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, before you move the motion, let me make some recognitions. I have a condolence message from Ankole Region Parliamentary Group, signed by hon. Itungo, the chairman. We shall pass on this condolence message to the family. They have enclosed Shs 4,260,000, which the honourable member will directly hand over to the family, but the condolence message is here.

In the VIP gallery, we have the hon. Mary Mugyenyi and hon. Paul Musamali, Members-elect of the East African Legislative Assembly. I will be making further recognitions as we go along.

2.26
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Mr Speaker, I stand here to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. William Beijukye Zinkuratiire, Member of Parliament for Ruhaama County, Ntungamo District. I move this motion on behalf of Government, under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS Parliament of Uganda notes, with deep sorrow, the untimely demise of hon. William Beijukye Zinkuratiire, a Member of Parliament, which occurred on Friday, 3 November 2017 at Nsambya Hospital, Kampala;

AND WHEREAS hon. William Beijukye Zinkuratiire has been the Member of Parliament representing the people of Ruhaama County in Ntungamo District in this Parliament;

RECOGNIZING that hon. William Beijukye Zinkuratiire served on the Parliamentary Committee on Public Accounts and the Committee on Presidential Affairs;

APPRECIATING that hon. William Beijukye Zinkuratiire has been a diligent legislator who has served Uganda with dedication and patriotism;

NOW, THEREFORE, this Parliament does resolve as follows:

1. 	That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, the people of Ruhaama County in Ntungamo District, and the entire country upon the demise of hon. William Beijukye Zinkuratiire.

2. 	That it takes cognisance of the distinguished service rendered and contribution made by hon. William Beijukye Zinkuratiire to Uganda.

3. 	That this Parliament collectively prays to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved and grant our departed colleague and friend, hon. William Beijukye Zinkuratiire, eternal peace.”

The motion is moved by the Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of East African Affairs, Mr Kirunda Kivejinja.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by members for Kiboga, Oyam, Isingiro, Kinkizi East, Agago, Buhweju and Nwoya. The motion is properly seconded. Would you like to speak to your motion and give the justification?

MR KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: This is the justification for the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. William Beijukye Zinkuratiire.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, the country woke up in the wee hours of Saturday, grieving with anguish yet again after the sudden loss of hon. Beijukye, which occurred at Nsambya Hospital on the night of Friday, 3 November 2017.

Hon. William Beijukye Zinkuratiire was born on 8 September 1971 to John and Beatrice Zinkuratiire in Kakukuru Village, Ntungamo District, where his father migrated to from Mparo, Kabale in 1956. 

He attended Rwera Primary School, where he sat for his Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE) and thereafter, joined Rwenkiniro Modern Senior Secondary School, where he attained the Uganda Certificate of Education (O’ level). Thereafter, he attended Kyamate Senior Secondary in Ntungamo for his A’ level. Hon. Beijukye attended the National College of Business Studies, Nakawa, for his diploma in business studies and later joined TEAM University, where he graduated with a bachelor’s degree in business administration.

Between 2000 and 2014, hon. Beijukye worked as the Director, Finance and Administration, at Parambot Breweries Limited. In 2015, he joined politics and was elected Member of Parliament for Ruhaama County, Ntungamo, in the Tenth Parliament.

Social Life 

Mr Speaker and colleagues, hon. Beijukye left a mark on all projects that he ventured into. He positively contributed to the development of our country through various projects such as Parambot Breweries, which was his brain child.

Hon. Beijukye was an ecumenical support of the Catholic Church. He contributed towards the development of a number of religious projects such as the roofing of the Catholic Church in Rwera Parish and he also donated the land on which the Anglican Church in Kakukuru sits today.

The late hon. Beijukye was a man full of humility, honesty and integrity. He was non-confrontational and loved making peace. He loved his God and amidst his busy schedule, he would find time to intercede with his creator.

Cause of death 

The late hon. Beijukye lost his life to hepatitis B on Friday night at Nsambya Hospital. 

Mr Speaker, the late is survived by a widow, Mrs Allen Beijukye, and four children - three boys and a girl. He leaves behind a legacy that will be honoured. We extend our deep condolences and sympathy to the bereaved family, the people of Ruhaama and the country for the loss.

This motion is moved by the Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for East African Community Affairs on 6 November 2017. I beg to justify.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Right honourable. Can we have the seconder of the motion.

2.37
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Independent Members of Parliament and on my own behalf, I rise to second this motion to pay tribute to our fallen colleague, hon. William Beijukye. As clearly stated, he was born in 1971 and at the time of his death, he was 46 years old. 

Mr Speaker, the people of Ruhaama County, those in Ntungamo District and all the citizens of Uganda have lost a gallant son, a real hero by the names of hon. William Beijukye. The late died at a time when we needed him most. At 46 years of age and being his first time in Parliament, there was still a lot we expected out of him.

Mr Speaker, before I continue to pay tribute, allow me to first thank God for his life. As the giver of life, we thank God for the life that He gave to the late as an excellent accountant, a father and a legislator during his time on earth. God is the giver and He is the one who takes away. We know that the late has gone to the right place and at the right time, we will all meet again.

Mr Speaker, as it was clearly stated by the mover of the motion, hon. Beijukye was a man from a very humble background, if you looked at his education history. However, despite the odds, he was able to excel in accounting where, for over 14 years, he was a leader in this field before joining politics.

While in this Parliament, I had the opportunity to interact with the late hon. Beijukye and we shared very light moments in the parliamentary canteen. I also remember last year on Independence Day, I met him at hon. Kabafunzaki’s house when he had just come back from India. We had good moments as we enjoyed bushera. The late was a very jolly man. 

From my very close interaction with hon. Beijukye, both within and outside Parliament, the late was a personable man. He was very amiable and a peace lover, as was indicated by the mover of the motion –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, for purposes of the record, what is bushera? (Laughter)

MR EDWARD OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Bushera means millet porridge. I think judicial recognition or public notice should be given to that name; maybe we need to appeal to the Queen for that. 

Mr Speaker, we have lost a great legislator and the people of Ruhaama have lost a great man. As a first timer in the Tenth Parliament, I feel the pain of the people of Ruhaama and Ntungamo and Ugandans in general. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to address the bereaved family who are here. We can only imagine the pain that they are going through. I can only imagine, as a father of young children, what it feels like. His children would have loved to see his leadership and support in all ways but God has taken his life away. My message to the family is that God is the one who gives and takes away and as believers, at some point we will all get together and continue with the life that we had here on earth.

I would like to appeal to colleagues in Parliament to emulate the good attributes that our colleague showed us while he served in Parliament. He was a humble man, a peacemaker and a man who struggled against all odds to make things happen. I think that he has left a big vacuum that we need to fill and it is a very difficult task for us as the Tenth Parliament.

Honourable colleagues, given what has claimed the life of our brother, it is my humble appeal and that of the Independent Members of Parliament that we should fast track the Health Insurance Bill. In cases where an individual has to struggle on his own - You know what it means to travel to India three times and I can imagine the financial implications that this has had on the family and on Parliament as a whole. Therefore, I think that his death should open doors and give us the wisdom and conviction to move very fast and try to make sure that this Bill is supported and passed in Parliament, in memory of our fallen brother who struggled very hard and whom we lost at a time when we badly needed him. 

To members of the public, we would like to thank you for the support you gave him before he became a Member of Parliament and for the support you gave him that enabled him to win the 2016 parliamentary elections. In a special way, we would also like to thank you for sparing time and giving him support during the difficult times when he was struggling with this ailment. I imagine when he went to India and at his deathbed at Nsambya Hospital and I would like to thank all those people that we may not know that took time to support him in any way possible. 

Mr Speaker, our prayer is that other than the Health Insurance Bill, which we should work on as a Parliament, within Ntungamo or anywhere possible let us have a road named after him so that we keep his memory alive. 

Apart from that, our prayer is that this Parliament and all people of goodwill ensure that these young children do not drop out of school. As it has been stated, he is survived by three boys and one girl and these are very young children, as I understand. As Parliament, as a community and as Ugandans, we should rally together to support these children. If we fail at the university level, that is another thing, but they should not fail because of fees up until the time of the university, at which point in time other options can be explored. 

Mr Speaker, as I stated earlier, we have lost a brother, a very humble man. We are left with a vacuum that is very difficult to fill and I pray to the Almighty God to bless his soul and give us wisdom and strength to take on the challenge that we are facing. I beg to move. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member for Agago, for seconding the motion. 

Honourable members, this is a tribute motion following the demise of hon. William Beijukye Zinkuratiire, Member of Parliament for Ruhaama County in Ntungamo District. I propose this question for your debate: 

That Parliament resolves as follows: 

    1. That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, the people of Ruhaama County in Ntungamo District and the entire country upon the demise of hon. William Beijukye Zinkuratiire. 
    2. That it takes cognisance of the distinguished service rendered and the contribution made by hon. Beijukye in Uganda. 
    3. That this Parliament collectively prays to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved and grant our departed colleague and friend, hon. Beijukye, eternal peace. 

That is the motion for your debate and the debate should start now. 

Honourable members, immediately after our motion, the body will be transported to Ntungamo for burial tomorrow. Therefore, I have been requested that we try - If possible, let us rise by 4 o’clock, which gives us only about an hour, so as to allow the family and Members that are travelling to leave and be in time because Ntungamo is not very near this place. 

However, before I open the debate, let me recognise in the gallery this afternoon staff from the Journals Department of the Parliament of Ghana: Ms Olivia Asante, Assistant Clerk; and Mr Emmanuel Akrofitibo, Assistant Clerk. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House and also to see how we do business here so that they can see how to improve on their own systems. You are very welcome. Please, join me in welcoming the two staff from the Ghanaian Parliament. (Applause) 

We have a condolence message from the Government Chief Whip and some money has been enclosed. I am advised that this has already been received by the members of the Ankole Parliamentary Group. The honourable member for Kajara County has the money and it is Shs 1 million. It should be given to the family together with the condolence message. Debate starts now. 

2.50
MS DOROTHY AZAIRWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to talk about my honourable Member of Parliament, the late hon. William Beijukye, from Ruhaama County in Ntungamo District. 

The person I am going to talk about has been a very close friend of mine since 1994. We met at Kampala Secondary School during our A’ levels. Hon. William Beijukye came from a humble family and he paid school fees for himself. He would even study half day so as to raise his school fees. When we were in senior six, he could not afford the school fees for Kampala Secondary School at the time and so he decided to register for his exams at Kyamate Secondary school. That is how he managed to get a certificate from that school. However, we studied together at Kampala Secondary School Western Wing, which still exists in Kampala, Kisenyi. 

Hon. William Beijukye was a loving and hardworking man. He started his business while he was still young at Rubaale. He would sell onions to the people that were travelling along that route - you know it is a very good place for selling onions. He had been a businessman since childhood. 

Hon. William Beijukye was very creative and innovative. We have lost a great man at 46 years old. As you have already heard, he was one of the directors of Parambot Breweries which produces a local brew called Moonberg. He used to drive and distribute it in western Uganda including Hoima, Masindi, my own district of Kamwenge, and Mbarara, looking for money. 

Hon. William Beijukye was a very passionate person who contributed school fees to many of his relatives and friends. I know that the people who will go to Ntungamo tomorrow for the burial will see the students he supported up to university level. 

Hon. William Beijukye was very knowledgeable and when he joined politics, he told me that he could not go to any other committee apart from two committees. He told me that since he had experience in finance, he wanted to go to the Public Accounts Committee and at the same time, because of the good prevailing conditions in this country that have been brought by NRM, he wanted to go the Committee on Presidential Affairs, which he supported fully. 

The other week, when he was very sick, I got a message to this effect and I went to check on him at his home in Namungoona. We had already been given money to go and do consultative work by the time I went there. He was very strong and he told me that he was going to consult. I even found his political assistants making programmes. 

However, I saw that he was very weak. I said, “Honourable, can’t you let other people go and consult on your behalf because I can see that you are weak?” He replied that he was very supportive of the Government and that had it not been for the NRM, he would not be a Member of Parliament. “I have to go and consult my people and I know that the people of Ruhaama are going to support me so that this Government and the President of this country continue.”

I called his wife to share with her. At the time, he was on life support. He had bought a respirator so that it would support him in case he failed to breathe. Nonetheless, he would courageously say that he was very strong and would go to work.

I also shared with his wife, Allen, that her husband seemed weak. I asked her to tell his political assistant to let him rest since politics was not ending soon. She said that the doctors had advised her to always let him share with his friends. I also told the Woman Member of Parliament for Ntungamo, hon. Rwakimari, that it would be better for hon. Beijukye to be relocated from his home to a place more private. This would control the visitors and also allow him rest.

We discovered that hon. Beijukye was suffering from hepatitis B after we joined Parliament. He paid for his treatment in India. I would like to thank the Government because when we brought it to the attention of the Speaker of Parliament that hon. Beijukye had used a lot of his money for his treatment in India and was unable to go back for review, Parliament supported him. I would like to thank Parliament for the support given to our brother when he was down with hepatitis B.

Hon. Beijukye was so courageous. Being a businessman, from the money that was given to him to buy a vehicle – he had so many vehicles at home - he decided to buy two coasters to support tourism in the country and they are still operational. He was very creative and innovative that even when he was sick, he planned.

Hon. Beijukye had a storeyed building at Namungoona and it housed a supermarket. He wanted to start poultry farming on the last storey and he kept wondering how he would manage. However, he changed his mind. He partitioned that level and rented it out to students of the nearby Metropolitan University. He was so creative. We have lost a tremendously innovative and creative man. 

We have tried our level best to ensure that we improve our health sector. However, I request Government to look for money to ensure that all Ugandans are vaccinated against this dangerous disease. You can try to treat malaria or any other disease but hepatitis B is more dangerous than HIV. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker. May the soul of hon. Beijukye rest in peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we now know that we have only one hour; let us use the time properly so that we can share it out well before I impose some limitations.

2.59
MR HERBERT KABAFUNZAKI (NRM, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is a very difficult moment for me to speak at a time like this when I have lost a cousin, a friend, a colleague and a patriotic citizen of this country. 

The late hon. William Beijukye, whose parents hailed from Mparo, Rukiga District, was a down-to-earth gentleman. He was very developmental and kind hearted. He was driven by hard work and fairness to all. 

I knew William from childhood, long before we both had political ambitions. We later found ourselves in business. He was a trusted businessman, who had the community at heart. William always wanted to make a contribution to development in order to empower the youth. Even in his business, he employed more than 30 youth. It was no surprise that he later opted to join Parliament as he intended to push for roads that would foster development and fight unemployment.

We always shared the little we had as brothers and even during his sickness, he was full of hope. The Lord has chosen to call him at a very prime age and I believe that he is in heaven. He has given the mantle to me and all of you, Members of Parliament, to carry on his legacy. Fellow mourners, let us keep the candle burning by making a lasting contribution to the wellbeing of the youth of this country like William has done. 

To the young family that William has left, I pray that you become strong and I trust that the Lord will surely not leave you alone. To his mother, we know that William has been your anchor; I will leave you with John 16:22 which reads, “So with you: Now is your time of grief, but I will see you again and you will rejoice and no one will take away your joy.” May his soul rest in eternity.

3.02
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is so sad that we have lost William at this time. At the beginning of the Tenth Parliament, it took us time to get to know who William was. I was trying to find out about the strong man that replaced the First Lady. It was not until His Grace the Archbishop called us for a meeting at his residence that I met William for the first time. He had just come back from treatment in India. 

Within that very short time, I learnt what kind of human being William was. Within 30 minutes, we had laughed our heads off - he was a very humorous person. I concluded that you should not take someone for granted because of their humility. It is then that I realised why the people of Ruhaama elected him.

William was down to earth that if you met him, you would not easily tell the kind of person he was. He was very committed and very intelligent. 

Mr Speaker, the country has lost a character that we will take time to replace. It is unfortunate that we have lost him to a disease that we have always been talking about – hepatitis B. It took long for this country or for Government to recognise that we need hepatitis B vaccination not only for children but also for the adults. As I speak, we still find challenges convincing adults to be vaccinated. 

In my district, I remember Government rolled out vaccination to everybody but sensitisation has not been taken seriously. There was a time they did mass vaccinations but people were left traumatised. They would call people to rallies and begin testing and those found positive would be told to go to a health centre, without counselling. Many marriages broke up and some people even committed suicide because of ignorance. 

If hepatitis can take a Member of Parliament, then it is not a simple thing. I, therefore, request the Ministry of Health to put that bit of - It is actually sad that they are soon going to stop vaccination in our area. Recently, during our consultations, we had planned for vaccination of about 300 people but the challenge was that the testing kits were not given to the outpost, which meant that people had to first go and test. Therefore, people are still finding difficulty in testing. The vaccines are there but the testing has not been rolled out. 

I, therefore, request the Ministry of Health to fill that gap so that we save Ugandans from death. At least let other diseases claim them but not one that is within the powers of Government to control. William, may your soul rest in eternal peace.

3.06
LT COL (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (NRM, Isingiro County North, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues.  I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the late hon. William Zinkuratiire. 

Mr Speaker, I got to know William through two brothers of mine, hon. Rukutana and hon. Fred Mwesigye. I found him a very pleasant and developmental fellow, full of purpose. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank your office and Government for always coming out to support Members especially in times of need when their health fails. Certainly, he has not died because of want of attention; I think Government has done what should have been done. You, Mr Speaker, have done everything possible to save his life but it has not been possible. Like Timothy says in the Bible, he has fought a good fight and he has finished the race.  

Mr Speaker, I worry about two things. Whenever something happens, we should reflect and see where the problem is. What worries me is that diseases, which had been cured and stamped out of this country by this Government, are coming back. We have polio reoccurring. The other day we had measles. This time round, we have hepatitis. 

Colleagues, you are aware that Uganda has been a very peaceful country and Ugandans are very accommodative. Due to our tradition and attitude, we have allowed refugees to settle here and when these refugees come, they bring us new diseases. You will notice that the outbreaks are always localised where we have a concentrated constitution of refugees. I think it is important to reflect to make sure that all refugees who come here are vaccinated against diseases we have kicked out of the country. 

The second thing that worries me are these empty seats. As Members of Parliament, when we lose a colleague and we are neighbours and relatives, we need to associate with our colleagues in times of happiness and sorrow. Mr Speaker, I think we will find time for this. However, it is not something very simple and it worries me, as a person who has been in this Parliament for quite some time.

Finally, I pray that the Almighty God gives his family the wisdom to know what is right and what is wrong and gives them the courage to withstand this loss. As you heard, Mr Speaker, the late hon. Beijukye was almost man-made. He has been hardworking and we pray that his family gets courage to continue. May his soul rest in perfect peace. I thank you. 

3.11
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Janet Museveni Kataaha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin by thanking God for the life of hon. Beijukye and for the work God had already used him to do in his short life. 

He has been a good servant to his people. He served all of them equally. He did not practice any sectarianism of tribe or religion. He served Ruhaama honourably because he was an honest man of a dependable and honourable character. It is a tragedy that his life was cut short before he could put much of his plans in place. 

Uganda has lost a dependable and promising leader. We mourn his premature departure and certainly, the people of Ruhaama and all of us who worked with him and knew him will miss him for a very long time. 

I would like to say that his young family - his wife and children who are very young - should always remember that they have nothing to be ashamed of. He has left them a legacy of an honourable and dependable rare character.

I am thankful to God that I managed to get here in time because I was in Ruhaama. I was able to go and see his family that is in the rural area, but obviously his body was not there yet and his family was not there. Therefore, I wanted so much to come and bid him farewell here because I may not be able to go back for his funeral. However, Ruhaama mourns him and we will miss him. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. You may take this time to lay your wreath. 

(Laying of a wreath)

3.15
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. To the family of the late hon. William Beijukye, it is really a sad moment for Ruhaama, Ntungamo and Uganda as a nation. We were lucky to have hon. Beijukye as the Member of Parliament for Ruhaama. Hon. Beijukye had very rare traits. He has been a mobiliser for Ntungamo Parliamentary Forum and he did all this work when he was actually sick.

Hon. Beijukye had a natural smile. Even when he was in pain, you could not really see that he was in pain. He gave us hope and it is true that most of us went for hepatitis B vaccination because of hon. Beijukye.

When he got sick – of course, he did not realise it – he thought it was ulcers and he treated ulcers. The day he got the bad news, he had gone to see the doctor very late at about 10.00 p.m. and I went with him. When the doctor did not come in time, he told me to leave because he knew I had some other things to do. However, he gave me the results immediately through a phone call after realising that he had hepatitis B. I kept close. I would go there at least once a week. 

At a certain point, he asked me, “Have you checked for hepatitis B? Are you immunised already?” I said, “No”. To me, it was like there was still time. At a certain point, when he discovered that I did not mind about immunisation, he commanded me; he told me, “You must go and check and get immunised.” I had to follow the command and I got immunised. 

We have lost a hero. You remember Bongoley Lutaaya talked about his HIV/AIDS condition. To us, the friends who were close to hon. Beijukye, he would even show us how he was operated on and tell us that we have to be extremely careful. 

Hon. Beijukye was a dependable friend. If he loved you or if you were a friend, you were indeed a friend; whether he had the time or not, when you needed him, he would appear. That is the person we have lost. In Ruhaama, they know him by the name “Zinku”. The children who cannot speak very well were lucky to have that short name and they called him “Zinku”. That shows you that even the children who have not learnt how to speak actually wanted to associate with hon. Beijukye. 

I am telling you that you have been very brave to talk about hon. Beijukye. I know that for all of you, Members of Parliament who have interacted with him, inside yourselves you see that gap that he has left and I really thank God that you have been brave to talk about this fallen colleague. What we have to do as Members of Parliament is to go out and preach the gospel against hepatitis B. Let us make it a point to tell our constituents to test and get immunised. I do not want to talk about asking the Government to assist us because the Government knows. 

May God rest his soul in peace.

3.21
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Ntungamo Municipality and the Public Accounts Committee, I would like to extend our sincere condolences to the family of hon. Zinkuratiire. 

I had the opportunity to work with hon. Zinkuratiire in the Public Accounts Committee. He was a very humble and simple soul. He would go out of his way to explain every other time why he had not attended any sitting or why he was late, until one time I shared with the chairperson that maybe we need to tell him not to keep explaining himself because we all appreciated his wellbeing. He was really very kind in spirit, heart and action and also very embracing. 

When I got the call that he had departed, it was sad because I kept thinking, “how many of us are as humorous or as simple-hearted as this man?” It left me thinking that for all of us, especially leaders, our cardinal virtue of all virtues is humility. That is what people would say about him in Ntungamo. In every village where he campaigned and in every church where he went, everyone would tell you he was a very humble man and he embraced everyone.

Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate the family and the people of Ruhaama, particularly the Ruhaama Development Platform led by engineer Jackson, the brothers led by Henry, and the rest of the siblings. They have really gone out of their way since they got this news that he had passed on. They have come together and you would see them involved in church and every other activity to see that our colleague gets a decent send-off.

Humility is one cardinal virtue which reminds all of us that we are only mortal and perishable. That is why when I see our colleague here, I am reminded about what he would probably tell all of us, that it is it important to embrace each other; it is important to tolerate one another; it is important even as leaders to be transparent and not to be corrupt. We must accommodate each other as leaders, as human beings and as a nation. Even as leaders, when things get controversial, we should still remain together as one people and one nation. (Applause) That is what hon. Beijukye would tell us, I am sure. Even as leaders, when time comes, we are reminded that we should retire and we do so. It is more of remembering, and he would tell all of us that togetherness is more important than thinking about our individual or personal interests. 

Mr Speaker, to me, this is a message he has left for us and for all Ugandans. I pray that as we send him off, we keep remembering as leaders that we should remain responsible just like he was, not only to our electorate that we represent but also to our country at large.

Once again, I would like to extend my deepest sincere sympathies to the Public Accounts Committee, Ntungamo Municipality and the family. May hon. Beijukye rest in peace.

3.26
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, PWD Representative, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I wish to extend my sincere condolences to the widow, children, the family, and the people of Ruhaama and Ntungamo District in general for the loss of hon. Beijukye, who has had a short stint in this House.

I wish to support the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, hon. Kirunda Kivejinja. As colleagues in this Parliament, we have seen that hon. Beijukye has died at a tender age of 43, hence death has denied him the opportunity to exploit his potential. Hon. Beijukye was a member of the Public Accounts Committee. We had been exchanging some deliberations on the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) and the Public Accounts Committee, which are both accountability committees. Indeed, hon. Beijukye was an illustrious Member of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, some few months back, Parliament organised medical examinations and health camps were held here in Parliament. There were free examinations for both communicable and non-communicable diseases including hepatitis. The death of hon. Beijukye reminds us that there should be a follow up by all of us. Those of us that have been examined and been found free of this disease should be vaccinated and those found with the disease should seek treatment. 

Yesterday, I attended the burial of hon. Issa Kikungwe, a former Member of Parliament, in Nabbingo. During that burial, Dr Mayambala, one of the senior neurosurgeons, who works in Mengo Hospital, told the congregation at the funeral that we have enough neurosurgeons in this country. He also informed us that they had carried out 34 surgeries of which 33 were successful and only hon. Issa Kikungwe’s was the unfortunate case that was not successful. 

However, what I would like to draw Members’ attention to is that there is need to carry out fact-finding missions to our health facilities to ensure that we have machinery that will help treat very serious diseases for which we seek medical attention abroad in places like India and yet they can be handled here. It is absolutely imperative that we do this because we are the appropriators of the budget. If we carry out a fact-finding mission, we can always improve on service delivery in this country. 

As I end my contribution, I convey my condolences to the family of the late hon. Beijukye. May your soul rest in eternal peace.

3.31
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for according me the opportunity to pay tribute to our fallen friend, hon. Beijukye.

I first met the late hon. Beijukye when we first went to Kyankwanzi for a retreat. During that retreat, I shared a seat with him and we discussed a number of issues. He told me the story of his life right from his childhood up to the time when he was elected Member of Parliament. I also told him my story.

Mr Speaker, hon. Beijukye was friendly to all of us. He was hardworking. When we realised that he had hepatitis B, I shared with him my experience because I had a brother who also succumbed to hepatitis B. My brother passed away on 31 December 2016. However, when hon. Beijukye came back from India after the operation, he told me he would be okay. He even showed me the scar and I was convinced that our brother would be with us. It is indeed a sad moment and we are going to miss him.

I would like to appeal to the Government to carry out mass vaccinations for all Ugandans as it has been done in Lango sub-region. Mr Speaker, in Nakasongola District, and even in other districts where vaccination has not taken place, out of the 100 voluntarily tested people, the prevalence rate was 10 per cent. Something must be done to save the lives of Ugandans.

Lastly, I would like to convey my condolences to the bereaved family, Parliament of Uganda and all Ugandans. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.34
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to convey my condolences to the family, to the people of Ruhaama who were represented by the fallen colleague, to Members of Parliament and the entire country. I rise to support the motion. 

It is sad that we have lost one of our colleagues. I served as a parliamentary commissioner and one of the most difficult decisions we had to make when discussing the budget was how many Members of Parliament were anticipated to die in that financial year, well knowing that you could be one of them. I recall we used to budget for five Members. I asked one of the current parliamentary commissioners and I was told that this year, they budgeted for six Members. I hope this is the last Member to die this year and for the rest of the term. However, this is a sad reminder that all of us shall go this way. Therefore, we should remain prepared all the time. 

Mr Speaker, yesterday we went for the church service in Kitala Church of Uganda, where we heard moving testimonies about the life, time and character of the late William including from his small children, who described him as a very good parent. We all shed tears in the church. I got to know him, like most Members of Parliament, when he came to Parliament. He was a fine man in all ways. 

Mr Speaker, there are Ugandans who are misusing technology. There are people who have been posting through social media that hon. Beijukye was poisoned. How callous can we be to go to that extent? I had the opportunity to discuss his condition with him because the symptoms of his disease became overt after he won his parliamentary seat. Like we heard from the previous speakers, he had a hepatitis B infection, which is a known disease. This is a viral disease and it is life-threatening. 

We have had debates in this House about hepatitis B and we have been largely focusing on the northern and eastern parts of the country. This is because the figures we got from West Nile, Lango, Acholi, Karamoja and Teso show prevalence rates in double digits, ranging from 18 to 20 per cent. 

We do not have figures for the rest of the country. However, I recall that when we were in the Ministry of Health - it is good the Minister of Health is here - we decided that the blood samples for one of the surveys done in 2011 should be re-examined to get more accurate prevalence rates for the whole country. Apparently, the problem is bigger than we have been estimating. We have made provisions in this House to buy vaccines and drugs to manage this condition. Maybe, we now need to rethink and ensure that the services are rolled out in the whole country. 

I carried out a medical outreach programme in Kanungu and one of the tests we did was for hepatitis B. The prevalence rate we estimated was appreciably high. Therefore, it is a big problem in the country. We need to do more sensitisation and education of Ugandans. Hepatitis B is transmitted the same way HIV is transmitted and it is even more life threatening. 

Hon. Zinkuratiire got this infection and I think for the first phase, it was in an acute stage, where it does not show symptoms and signs. Usually, up to 90 per cent of adults who get infected do not progress into a severe stage of the disease. It is only 10 per cent who progress into the chronic stage, which comes with symptoms. It was unfortunate that he was among the few who progressed. In the case of children, it is the reverse; up to 90 per cent progress into the severe stage. 

From the report we got yesterday in church from those who were closely monitoring his condition, and as I had also discussed with him, his condition had progressed. Hepatitis causes inflammation and damage of the liver. Therefore, his liver got severely damaged - it usually forms scars. His condition even progressed to cancer of the liver and he was operated on in India, as we have heard. Unfortunately, by the time the operation was done, the cancer had spread and affected the lungs. Actually, what caused his death was the collapse of the lungs due to the spread of the cancer.

Therefore, as Parliament and as a country, we need to intensify our efforts and campaign against hepatitis B and other illnesses. Fortunately, unlike HIV and other fatal diseases, the vaccine for hepatitis B is available. I think most of the Members have been going for vaccination. We need to mount a campaign in the entire country for people to be tested. Once you are negative, you can receive the vaccine. It is given in three doses: at 0 time, one month and six months. The challenge is that most people take two doses and forget the third.

Let me also say that for the children, since 2002 Government introduced the hepatitis B vaccine. It is part of the routine immunisation that children get. That means all the children who are 15 years and below have been sufficiently protected through the national programme. Therefore, the risk is now much higher among us, the adults. We should join hands with the Ministry of Health and the entire country to mount this campaign. 

Lastly, let me once again comfort the widow and the children. We shall continue to include you in our prayers. We pray that the good Lord comforts you as you go through this trying moment. May William’s soul rest in eternal peace.

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. To the family of our friend, William, I would like to bring our deep condolences from the people of Ndorwa West, Kabale District and my family. 

In a special way, Mr Speaker, I represented you yesterday at the funeral service and we heard from his wife about what she went through while in India and all this time when our friend was not feeling well. They went to India four times and at one stage, a medical doctor said, “Madam, we told you there is no hope here; why have you come back?” It was very emotional. 

I would like, in a special way, to thank you, Allen, for the support you gave our friend over this time. I also thank the mother, Beatrice, who was also at church. We listened to the testimonies of the children and as somebody who lost both parents at the age of three years and has never seen a picture of my mother, I was extremely touched when one of them said, “Daddy was working hard to pay for our school fees and now he is gone.” However, I would like to comfort you that the God who is the father of the widows and orphans will take care of your family. 

William was very hopeful. Even when he knew that he was going to live for a very short time, he remained hopeful. He even came to this House well aware that he would not live for more than six months because the doctors had told him so. 

He was a courageous man and he loved his people of Ruhaama. I remember a few months ago, I was there to support Beatrice and him. He was not there and people had learnt that he was sick and they did not expect anything from him, but he still sent his contribution at the fundraising. Therefore, we would like to thank William for what he was able to achieve in a short time.

I sat in that church and what came to my mind were the words of the psalmist, which say, “Teach us to number our days, that we may gain a heart of wisdom.” Learning how to number our days, friends, is knowing that we are here for a season and also that we need to use this little time we have here on earth very meaningfully. 

Sometimes we spend our time on things that are not very helpful to ourselves and the country, like the hatred that we get involved in. I know some colleagues here who cannot greet each other. Imagine, wasting the little time you have here hating each other. Look to your left hand side, Mr Speaker - It is not necessary. Let us use the little time we have here on earth doing things that can contribute to ourselves and our country.

While at church, the Deputy Attorney-General, hon. Rukutana, testified and encouraged people. We would like to continue encouraging and telling everybody that the only way we can pay tribute to our friend is by making sure that we fight this disease.

The good news is that this is a preventable disease; there is a vaccine. As Government, we will have to sit down and make this a priority. I am told we need more than Shs 200 billion to roll out the testing kits. This is something we need to sit down as Government and Parliament and agree on.

However, what hon. Baryomunsi said is very important, and hon. Beijukye once said it here. He came to this House and encouraged all of us to go and test. Let us go and test. The procedure hon. Baryomunsi has elaborated is very important. Hon. Rukutana amused us at church when he said he went and tested and they said the next vaccine is given after two days and another after two weeks when actually it is zero, one month and six months. However, he has since corrected that version. I hope that even when you go to test and you are vaccinated, you will complete the dose. After one month, when one has to wait for another six months, you can easily forget. However, let us tell people in our constituencies to go and test as we sit down to look for funds to make sure that this preventable disease is stopped.

We are grateful to hon. William Beijukye; for the little time he was here, he made an impact on the people of Ruhaama and our country. In fact, he became a hero in fighting the disease that killed him. Thank you and God bless your soul.

3.48
MR HERBERT KINOBERE (Independent, Kibuku County, Kibuku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, it is sad that we have lost a colleague. 

I sit on the Committee on Health and before Parliament went for recess, we interacted with Mr Kamabare who heads the National Medical Stores. I asked him when he intends to give out the stock of hepatitis B vaccines that they had in the National Medical Stores. He said that it was Parliament that was making his life hard because he had over 10 million doses of hepatitis B vaccines and the districts that used to make a lot of noise no longer go for the vaccines. He went on to say that the stock he had will expire in 2018. How many months do we have left before 2018? We have one month to go.  

We have said that we are moving in phases, but the vaccines are expiring. Next year, we shall read in the newspapers, “Hepatitis B vaccines expire”. Mr Speaker, since the Minister of Health is here, seated right in front of me, I would like to request her to say something. Hon. William Beijukye is gone, but the messages we have are for us and the public. Let the minister say something because the public is eager to hear about this. If an honourable Member of Parliament has died from hepatitis B, what about a commoner? I request that the minister says something on this issue. 

Honourable colleague, we shall miss you. May your soul rest in peace.

3.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My condolences to the young family of hon. William Beijukye. It is very unfortunate that he has died from a preventable disease, and it is unfortunate that after he was overwhelmingly voted for by his people, he has left them after one year. I pray that the Lord gives the widow and other family members comfort to overcome this grief.

Hepatitis B has been an issue that we have been talking about for some time. It is very unfortunate that we are not able to provide vaccines to the entire population as would be required, but it is for obvious reasons, which everybody here knows about. We are constrained in terms of resources and that is why we have been moving in a phased manner, beginning with districts with the highest burden.

We did a survey and the results were released. This means that we have corrected what we had been talking about. Hon. Baryomunsi was still quoting the old figures of 2005. The results of the last survey were released early this year. The regions with the highest prevalence still remain the Acholi and Lango subregions, with 4.6 per cent. This is followed by the Karamoja and Teso regions with 4.4 per cent, and West Nile with 3.8 per cent.

In all these areas, we have provided vaccines and the exercise has been going on. However, we have had challenges with the health workers. When we have the HIV/AIDS and other programmes, we pay the health workers for social mobilisation and allowances because these are funded programmes. They wanted the same campaign mode for the hepatitis B campaign and yet funding was limited. 

This is where we had the challenge. We stocked the vaccines but the consumption or the use of these vaccines has not been going at the rate that we all expected. About one month ago, we held meetings with all leaders and Members of Parliament from these regions that I mentioned. I assured them that if by December they do not use their stock of vaccines, we are going to move them to other deserving districts rather than having the vaccines go to waste in their stores. That was the agreement we made. We have given them up to December to pull up their socks to ensure that they reach out to the entire population. 

However, we also received funding for this financial year and the next region with the highest prevalence, after the ones I mentioned, is Busoga with 2.7 per cent, and we shall focus on that region. We have already written to the district leaders and very soon we shall start vaccination in all the districts in Busoga subregion. Members of Parliament from this region, please be informed and help us in mobilising the population. 

We cannot keep giving allowances to health workers for everything because we are constrained. Therefore, Members of Parliament, help us. When you reach out to the population, mobilise them. The kits are available although we had challenges with funding. 

Honourable Member of Parliament for Nwoya, this was the issue last financial year. There were no test kits because the funding was not adequate. However, National Medical Stores had its own demands, which the finance ministry was able to meet. After fulfilling their demands, the test kits together with the vaccines are now available.

Mr Speaker, that is the information I wanted to provide. Once again, my condolences to the people of Ruhaama. My colleagues, the Members of Parliament from Tororo who are not here, also asked me pass on their condolences. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, it is 4.00 p.m. and we agreed that we would stop at this time. 

I was going to request for communication because yesterday, I received a phone call from the President-General of the Democratic Party, informing me of the demise of hon. Issa Kikungwe. He had served together with some of us in the Seventh Parliament and was a member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

I was looking for an opportune time when our colleague’s body is out of this House and then we can get a moment to rise in honour of the late hon. Kikungwe. We cannot do that when we have another body in the Chamber, but we will do that in his honour when the body leaves the Chamber.

Honourable members, we have come to the close of this and – Yes, you have a point of procedure?        

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened to you and do appreciate your guidance to this House. However, it is our prayer that maybe in these circumstances we accord another time –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was going to say that, honourable member. I wish you could just listen. To raise a procedural point in this kind of situation is unusual. That is why I said let me get the appropriate time to give a proper communication on this issue.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the time is now for me to put the question to this motion to conclude this debate and release the family. I would like to thank you for being here and giving tribute. I apologise that not all of you who were already on my list were able to speak. However, the Members who spoke did that on our behalf. Please, find time and go tomorrow to Ntungamo to bid our good colleague and friend farewell. 

I now put the question to the motion that Parliament resolves as follows:

1. 	That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, the people of Ruhaama County in Ntungamo District and the entire country upon the demise of hon. William Beijukye Zinkuratiire.

2. 	That it takes cognisance of the distinguished services rendered and contribution made by the late hon. William Beijukye to Uganda.

3. 	That this Parliament collectively prays to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved and grant our departed colleague and friend, the late hon. Beijukye, eternal peace. I put the question to that motion.


(Question put and agreed to.)

East African Anthem

National Anthem

(Exit of the late hon. William Beijukye)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thank you again for being here. You were away doing some work but this occurred and you are here. I thank God for making it possible for you to come and be here in these numbers. This is much appreciated. 

The life of the late hon. Beijukye, who has just left this Chamber, is testimony to a lot of lives in this country. It simply states that do not despise the days of humble beginnings and do not forget them. It also demonstrates that there is a huge change in our systems in this country, that you do not have to be remembered by who your father was in order to get anywhere.

Things have changed because from nowhere, you can now become somebody. It has happened to many people in this House; a few years back, nobody even knew who they were yet in the past, people needed to know who your father or great grandfather was in order for you to be entitled to one or two things. That has changed and we should celebrate this. 

This is what hon. Beijukye’s life demonstrates to us. From nowhere and from nothing, he became somebody in a system that recognises the potential of people, a system intentionally created by the people. (Applause) We should be able to celebrate this. 

Honourable members, as I said earlier, death occurred of the hon. Issa Kikungwe. He served with us in the Seventh Parliament and he was a member of a committee that I chaired - the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. We also had the difficult task in dealing with some constitutional issues and many other issues. He passed on yesterday and according to his faith, he was buried immediately. 

This House will find an opportunity to move a tribute motion like we have done for many other honourable members who have passed on in situations where we were not able to bring their bodies to this House. Usually, tribute motions are prepared and brought later in such situations. Therefore, at an appropriate time, a motion will be brought to this House for us to pay tribute to the late hon. Issa Kikungwe. 

You know when he left Parliament, he contested to become the Lord Mayor of Kampala and he tried to do many other things. However, he was not able to move beyond yesterday because God called him, and we will find time to honour his life.

Thank you, again, for being here today and paying tribute to our fallen colleague. May his soul rest in eternal peace and may God grant you the grace to go and continue doing what you are doing for the betterment of our country and of the lives of the people of this country. God bless you. This special sitting is adjourned. 

(The House rose at rose at 4.07 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 
