Wednesday, 5 November 2014

Parliament met at 3.08 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like you to join me in welcoming guests in the Public Gallery – the Students Guild from Uganda Martyrs University. They are represented by hon. Kiyingi Bbosa and hon. Sarah Nakawunde of Mpigi District. You are welcome.

Honourable members, I have been studying the register of the second meeting and there are members who have not been attending this House consistently and without leave of the Speaker. So, today, I want to submit the following members to the disciplinary committee: Hon. Kaddu Mukasa Ssozi, Mityana County South who has been continuously absent without leave of the Speaker and hon. Issa Kikungwe, Kyadondo County South, who has also been absent without leave of the Speaker. I will submit their names to the disciplinary committee for their action.

I also want to remind the Members that the registers are not for decoration. You must sign those registers. If this information, which I have, gets into the public domain, some Members may suffer. There are those who sit here and they don’t sign, but I see them. Then there are those who don’t sign at all and also don’t come. I am urging you, Members, to register otherwise you may be endangered by absence of your signatures in the register book.

There are some students who have come; I want to get the names of their schools then I will let you know.

LAYING OF PAPERS

DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENTS’ FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2013 TOGETHER WITH THE 
REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

3.13
MS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay the following District Local Governments’ financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2013 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General.

        I) Namutumba District Local Government
        II) Arua District Local Government
        III) Mitooma District Local Government
        IV) Luuka District Local Government
        V) Tororo District Local Government
        VI) Sironko District Local Government
        VII) Pallisa District Local Government
        VIII) Mayuge District Local Government
        IX) Yumbe District Local Government
        X) Adjumani District Local Government
        XI) Buyende District Local Government
        XII) Maracha District Local Government
        XIII) Bukwo District Local Government
        XIV) Jinja District Local Government
        XV) Nepak District Local Government
        XVI) Mbarara District Local Government
        XVII) Soroti District Local Government
        XVIII) Ntungamo District Local Government
        XIX) Rukungiri District Local Government
        XX) Koboko District Local Government

Allow me further, Madam Speaker, to lay the reports and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2013 for the following:

    I) The National Drug Authority
    II) The Uganda Tourism Board
    III) The Uganda Land Commission
    IV) Uganda National Cultural Centre
    V) Uganda Export Promotion Board
    VI) Electricity Regulatory Authority
    VII) Post Bank Uganda Limited
    VIII) The Uganda National Roads Authority
    IX) The Uganda Revenue Authority
    X) The National Planning Authority
    XI) The National Medical Stores
    XII) Bank of Uganda Credit Reference Bureau Disposition Fund 
    XIII) The Uganda Bureau of Statistics
    XIV) The Hotel and Tourism Training Institute 
    XV) The Uganda Property Holdings Limited
    XVI) The National Social Security Fund
    XVII) The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority
    XVIII) The Joint Clinical research Centre
    XIX) The Uganda Bureau of Statistics [support to firm data generation project]
    XX) The Uganda Bureau of Statistics [support to the Uganda panel survey project]
    XXI) The National Water and Sewerage Corporation 
    XXII) The National Water and Sewerage Corporation [Kampala Sanitation Programme Phase I]
    XXIII) The New Vision Printing And Publishing Company Limited
    XXIV) The Capital Markets Authority. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. Items 3(1) to (20) are sent to the Committee on Local Governments Accounts for perusal and report back. Items 3(b) 1 to 24 are sent to the Committee on Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises for perusal and report back. Thank you very much.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, yesterday we discussed something relating to the manner in which the Prime Minister’s time should be handled. There was some disquiet about what we were planning but if you really want serious answers, you should give advance notice to the Prime Minister so that he does his research and gives you an answer which you can take back to the constituency. But if it is for the Gallery, yes you can speak for the Gallery and go home with no answers; that is up to you. 

Let me read what is done in the House of Commons: “Question time is an opportunity for the MPs and members of the House to question Government about many issues. Questions are asked at the start of business. The Prime Minister answers questions from MPs in the commons every Wednesday for half an hour from midday. The session normally starts with a routine question from an MP about the Prime Minister’s engagement. This is known as the open question and means that the MP can ask any supplementary question on each subject. Each government department answers questions according to a rota called the Order of Oral Questions but that is for the other general questions.

Most MPs will table the same questions about engagements and if they do, only their names will appear on the question book or the order paper. After the first engagement question has been asked, any other MPs who have tabled the same questions are simply asked to ask untabled supplementary questions. This means in theory that the Prime Minister will not know what questions will be asked of him. However, the Prime Minister will be extensively briefed by government departments in anticipation of the likely subjects that he could be asked about.”

So, it is important that a general indication is given: maybe if Members have questions on defence, then they tell the Prime Minister that there will be issues about Sudan so that he can have a general idea to know what is happening.

In theory, the practice of asking questions to the Prime Minister and the immediate responses given could be construed as an on the spot activity on the part of the Prime Minister. Whereas the practice is considered so, the Prime Minister does get detailed briefings; adequate notices of questions are usually sent to the Prime Minister with a view of obtaining evidence-based responses.

For purposes of obtaining satisfactory responses to questions and given the need to enforce the accountability from Government, it is our considered opinion that adequate notices are sent to the Prime Minister to help prepare replies to these questions. So that is what is happening. It is good to give a general indication but it is up to you.

Anyway, I do know that there are some questions which Members wanted to raise yesterday: there was one from hon. Baryomunsi about the tea estate; there was another from hon. Ongom on Hepatitis and there was another one. Let us start with those who gave notice yesterday so that we take 45 minutes but what he cannot answer today, he will postpone.

3.22
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I trust that the Prime Minister will be able to answer the questions on the spot. I come from a tea growing area of Kanungu and we have three tea factories. Currently, there is a problem where the international prices for tea have come down and this has affected the industry here in Uganda. I have received information from various factory managers including Kayonza in Kanungu and there are two private factories belonging to Mr James Musinguzi Garuga. But I also received information from factories in the greater Bushenyi in Igara and also factories from Toro area that they are failing to operate because of this international crisis. Most of these factories have actually laid off the workers and some of the workers are stranded. They have also cut the price of tea and therefore the farmers are not getting much from the tea business and they are also saying that by December, they are going to close these factories. This is going to be a big challenge for our economies in the various communities.

I want to ask the Prime Minister whether Government is aware of this crisis and what strategic intervention Government is preparing to undertake to save the tea industry. That is my specific question to the Prime Minister.

3.24
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There has been some debate about the question of the Prime Minister’s Question Time. I will just make a couple of comments before I answer hon. Baryomunsi’s specific question on tea.

I agree with you, Madam Speaker, that the Prime Minister’s Question Time is an opportunity for government policy on various issues to come out clearly to the people of Uganda through their Members of Parliament and hence the point of Government being able to do some work on certain specific questions so that authoritative information to the MPs is given.

Of course it is true that sometimes there will be supplementary issues or very urgent issues that may require spontaneous responses and there is no problem about that. So there is no one box that all the answers are here. I think we have a wide spectrum of how some of these issues should be handled. Some need intense preparation, some need quick answers and we, on the Government side, are ready to do both.

I do not share the views of my respected friend, Ken-Lukyamuzi, that this is an opportunity to test the IQ; no. The primary purpose is information to the people and the honourable Members of Parliament.

I think the point made by hon. Baryomunsi is a very important point but I can say generally that if the prices of tea go down, it is not just the individual farmers that are affected; it is the whole industry and the country because tea is one of the main export crops that the country has and in fact Government has been investing heavily to ensure that more and more people are brought on board to grow tea. So if the prices have gone down, the country is very concerned. I will do some more work on this very point but I can say that Government will do all it can to ensure that we support the tea farmers, the seedlings producers so that this important export crop does not collapse because of most probably a temporary drop in the prices of tea.

3.27
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On 13 October 2014, we received letters from the Office of the Prime Minister indicating to Members of Parliament from the regions that were affected by war that there will be distribution and fulfilment of some presidential pledges to specific districts. For instance, in my district, we were supposed to receive those items on 30 October 2014. Madam Speaker, the question I would like to raise to the Prime Minister is: first of all, people are so disgruntled over the way the items were distributed. In Otuke specifically, we had one old woman who received 100 bags of cement and someone else received one motorcycle. Are those the only presidential pledges that we have in the district, given the fact that we all know the history of the area as far as the effects of war are concerned?  

My specific question to the Prime Minister is: are these the last items in regard to presidential pledges that the Office of the Prime Minister is going to distribute to those districts? And on top of that, if in case the Prime Minister answers in the affirmative - (Laughter) - are these the only and the last items that are going to be distributed to these areas, Rt Hon. Prime Minister? And if you are going to distribute next time, what criteria will you use to distribute these items because really people are disgruntled? Thank you.  


3.29
DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Colleagues know very well that Government responded in a strong manner following the conflict that we had with the Lord’s Resistance Army. After the defeat of the Lord’s Resistance Army, Government had a PRDP programme and through that programme, Government has mobilised a lot of support internally; much of this has been presidential pledges and others have been development partners. All these combined have been used to help the people in the affected districts, and they are many in the north and in eastern Uganda, to ensure that they are brought to average life like any other Ugandans in the areas that were not disturbed.  

Actually, this programme I think has now rolled over once or twice but the objective being to help the people in the affected areas to be able to have a normal life like the rest of the country. This programme has essentially been successful. It has involved scholarships, distribution of cows, building houses for chiefs, road construction, schools and the like. So, if in Otuke, only cement was received, this can only be just part of the on-going long government programme of bringing the affected districts into harmony with the rest of the country and that cannot be the only items that are meant for Otuke. More items, I am sure, will be made available not only to Otuke but all the affected districts of Uganda.  

THE SPEAKER: Members, please just ask; don’t go to submissions, arguments and justifications. Just ask: “Is the Prime Minister aware of a, b, c, d…” that is what should be asked.  

3:31
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question is about health centre IIs. This has been a problem here and we have discussed it but there are two problems: One, it is not clear how health services can now reach people because many areas still have long distances to cover before they can access the existing facilities. My question is, what is the guide on how the population will access health facilities when the health centres II are now being abolished?  

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, health centres II are not being abolished; the policy by Government was that we should stop expansion and building more health centres II because they were very expensive to run in terms of manpower and in terms of equipment. The focus therefore was put on health centres III. Health centres II, wherever they are, are now more or less used as immunisation centres to enable the children get access to vaccines. But really focus is on health centres III and IV because those are within the budget limit and they are affordable. And in fact, the priority of Government now is to ensure that health centres III and IV are properly equipped and also properly staffed. Then if those are properly done and more resources are available, the question of health centres II being expanded or being equipped or being staffed will be considered.  

3:33
MS VICTORIA BUSINGE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is no control on mushrooming tea factories - specifically in my region, Kabarole is the main tea grower but very many Indians are coming, buying land, establishing factories and the supply of tea to these factories is inadequate. So, is there no control? Maybe the Prime Minister should guide the House because originally, there were three factories and they were doing very well producing quality tea but now every Tom, Dick and Harry comes to establish a factory and the materials to supply the factories are not enough. That is one of the problems.  

DR RUGUNDA: I am very happy, Madam Speaker, that the problem of Kabarole is too many tea factories because the problem elsewhere is actually no factories. So, Kabarole should take advantage of this and ensure that the current programme that Government has of distributing tea seedlings is taken advantage of so that more and more people can be brought on board to grow tea so that these factories can optimally function and in fact, even be expanded because we would like to expand the total output and export of tea. So, to Kabarole, that is a blessing in disguise; take advantage of it. Thank you.   

3:35
MR JOHN OKOT (NRM, AGAGO COUNTY, AGAGO): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question is about the Community Agricultural and Infrastructure Project (CAAIP). First, who supervises this contractor who is implementing the CAAIP in various districts? And besides, who issues certificates of completion of works before payment is made?
  
Another question beside that –(Interjections)- may you allow him to listen first before you –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you should address me. Don’t harass the Prime Minister.  

MR JOHN OKOT: Thank you so much. The next question is, what criteria do you use to select those contractors who are doing a lot of shoddy work and besides they don’t listen even to the district local leaders? Thank you.  

DR RUGUNDA: The programme is under the Ministry of Local Government and the local people are in charge of the programme and it is actually a programme that helps districts build capacity to be able to manage their own affairs. And honourable members should give it maximum support.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we proceed, I want you to join me in welcoming two sets of school children. We have children from Nakyesa Muslim Primary School in Kayunga represented by hon. Madada and hon. Nantaba. You are welcome. 

There are also children from Kamuli District - I don’t know where they are seated -(Laughter)- oh yes, those children are from Kamuli District. They are the winners of a spelling competition which was run since June this year. So, I decided to give them a treat by bringing them to Kampala. (Laughter) So, we have four from Kamuli Mixed Happy Hours Primary School; five from Starlight Primary School, four from Kamuli Boys Boarding School, four from Trinity Junior School, one is from St Thereza Girls School, two from Wisdom Junior School and they are accompanied by the proprietors of Kamuli Broadcasting Services to inform the Basoga that the children were here. (Laughter)

3.38
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity and for the good work you are doing. To the Prime Minister, he should be aware that there have been other Prime Ministers before in this country and as of yesterday, pupils of Agago were doing PLE exams while sitting on the floor. What is the Prime Minister planning to do in terms of prosecution of the district leaders that did not make school tables available for pupils sitting for PLE?

Secondly, is there a possibility of affirmative action for those young pupils in Acholi who did PLE on the floor while others in Shimoni are doing PLE at comfortable tables? And what plans do you have to ensure that in future everywhere in Uganda at least every primary pupil sits on a desk while doing national examinations?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I am fully aware that Uganda has had a number of illustrious Prime Ministers before. I am aware that conditions in our secondary and primary schools are different; mainly schools that are based in urban areas in general are better off than those that are in rural areas. You are aware that many of our schools used to be in fact under trees. I am very happy that because of a very robust programme by Government to expand primary education, now many schools have covered their good building and they are in good shape. 
It is true some of them may not have adequate furniture but the programme of Government is to ensure that every school in the country is under good structures and has got good furniture. I do believe that schools in your constituency will also be clear beneficiaries of this programme of Government. 

On the question of affirmative action, Madam Speaker, I have already said that Government has had a large programme of PRDP to build not only schools but also roads and other infrastructure in order to ensure that the areas that are disadvantaged or that were affected by war are helped to come up. I do believe that your area will not be discriminated.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I know that Government is doing all those programmes the Prime Minister is saying but this problem could be generic to specific districts. I was expecting the Prime Minister to even make a statement in relation to reprimanding the DEO because the funds are there, the NGOs are there but someone is negligent at the grassroots level. I want the Prime Minister to address his mind.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I am very happy that my brother is raising this point but who is Government? It is not just the Frontbench here; you are part of Government when it comes to making sure that things go right in your respective districts. Please do your job.

3.42
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am drawing the attention of the Prime Minister to Article 246 of the Constitution and he has no excuse not to know the content of the Constitution. Is the Prime Minister aware that under Article 246(2) of the Constitution any area of the country where the issue of traditional leaders has not been resolved can invoke an appropriate provision of the Traditional Leaders Act and state to acquire what it requires? If so, why is Government curtailing opportunities of revising the Obugabe in Ankole?

Secondly, is the Prime Minister aware that as we speak right now, we have no explanation as to whether the reinstatement of Obunyala and Obwamba has been done in accordance with the law? Tell us the truth.

DR RUGUNDA: Well, Madam Speaker, my brother Ken-Lukyamuzi knows very well that Article 246 has been operationalized in a significant number of areas in Uganda. But it is also true that there are other areas where that Article has not been found necessary to operationalize. So, in Ankole, if there is a significant dispute over the issue, we know there has been some debate but if there is significant contention, Government will come in and ensure that the constitutional provisions are followed. 

Now with regard to Bundibunyo and these other areas around the Rwenzori Mountain, it is true a number of institutions have come up mainly the Obusinga and the Obudingiya and those have been instituted in accordance with Article 246 of the Constitution.

3.45
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, how many major hospitals has the NRM Government constructed in the past 28 years? If any, mention them? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Well, Madam Speaker, the National Resistance Movement has made significant impact on the country in general and the health sector in particular. As I speak, Kampala which used to have only one government hospital has within the last few years had three additional hospitals - Kiruddu in Makindye Division, Kawempe in Kawempe Division and Naguru just across in Nakawa.

Madam Speaker, it is true that a number of health centres have been improved and upgraded to the level of a hospital. Actually, now health centres IV are called health centres but they have doctors, theatres and operations take place in those areas and the country is awash with health centres IV built by the National Resistance Movement Government.

As I conclude, it would be good for my brother to know that the National Referral Hospital at Mulago is now partially closed because of a major restructuring so that it becomes an ultra-modern hospital and let me say that all the dilapidated hospitals, so far about 20 of them, are under or are about to start major renovations and rehabilitation.

3.48
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Is the Prime Minister aware of the effects of the rain that is affecting the country, with the example of what recently happened in Ntoroko where children who were doing examinations were relocated, slept hungry and did exams under the effect of the rain on the infrastructure? The roads are impassable - what is the Government doing to prepare for the effect of food shortage, infrastructure and the children who sat for exams late, hungry and psychologically dislocated? What is the Government doing about it?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I am fully aware of what my sister, Beatrice, has reported. Let me take this opportunity to personally thank you, Madam Speaker, because even when you were out of the country, you called to alert us about the problem in Ntoroko. I am happy to say that Government acted and the action involved the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness, Musa Ecweru, visiting the area. His Excellency the President asked the Vice-President of Uganda to go to the same area to study the situation and comfort the population. I thank the Uganda Police because they were able to use their limited facilities to ensure that these children were supported to sit their exams. 

I also salute the Ministry of Education for responding very promptly and making sure that these children of ours did not miss exams because of the floods that had affected their community. So, the floods were met by a united response by the people of Uganda; from the President, the Speaker of Parliament, the Ministry of Education and the local population in the affected areas and ultimately, the country overcame the problem.

3.50
MR 	JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, this House resolved and made recommendations on the basis of the ad hoc committee investigating the energy sector a few months ago. Government was supposed to report back a few weeks ago. May we be pleased to receive a progress report when Government will be reporting back on the implementation of that ad hoc report recommendations? 

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, hon. Oboth, for that question. It is true, following your report, Government did promise to respond but it is going to do so under what we have already told the Speaker in our last meeting. We have had two meetings so far, with her. We did indicate that it is the plan of Government to bring a treasury memorandum to explain, account and respond to what Members of Parliament have raised to resolutions that have been passed and also to respond on promises and pledges that Government has made to this August House. So, we will be coming soon with a Treasury Memorandum and this will take into account answers for your question. Thank you.



3.52
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, NAADS has been disbanded and we are aware that some soldiers have been trained to fill up that gap. However, they are not yet in the field and many people, especially in our constituencies, keep asking us issues with regard to NAADS. They have not seen them on the ground to do what NAADS people have been doing. My question is: when are they being deployed? When are they starting their work and when do we expect them in the constituencies or in the districts to undertake their responsibilities and roles?


DR RUGUNDA: Thank you for that issue of NAADS because it affects literally the whole country. The officers were dispatched. If they have not reached in some of the districts, Government is going to follow up to ensure that this is done. If there are any logistical issues that have not been sorted out, Government will assist to ensure that they are done so that the wanainchi can be supported in their efforts to produce more.

5.54
MS BRENDA NABUKENYA (DP, Woman Representative, Luwero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Of recent, we were travelling to Karamoja as the Committee on Government Assurances and we stopped in Katakwi because of the rains. So, I want to ask the Prime Minister, is Karamoja part of Uganda because the road from Soroti that links Karamoja to several districts is not tarmacked. I want to know, when are you going to tarmac this road because you can’t access it when it rains? And the ferry that links Kumi to Katakwi, when is it going to be in place because it could be another way you could access the rest of the parts when it is raining?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the roads in Karamoja in general are victims of violent floods in the area but the Ministry of Works is actively doing its work to ensure the roads are passable. And as you very well know, the road on the other side from Moroto to Nakapiripirit is under construction. Incidentally, this morning, Cabinet passed a loan request for more money to tarmac roads in Karamoja. So, Karamoja is very much part of Uganda and every effort is being made to ensure that it benefits from development like any other part of Uganda.

3.56
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, on Monday night, in my attempt to come and be here for business yesterday, together with over 50 other vehicles between Butiaba and Buliisa, we were stuck on the Butiaba-Buliisa Road. We spent a night there and that is why I could not make it here yesterday. But the Butiaba-Buliisa Road is one of the oldest roads in this country connecting us to West Nile. It was connecting Masindi Port to Namasagali; it was taking people to Congo and even those navigating to Sudan, through Nimule. They were promised that the Kaiso-Tonya Road for refinery was actually meant to go to Buliisa, where most of the oil wells are, anyway. But the contractor is winding up this week and no work is being done in Buliisa. The oil companies are paying very high costs on recoverable costs taking away what would be our profits because for the last six years, we confirmed that most oil is in Buliisa. We are not fast-tracking the Buliisa roads but others. When are we getting this very important road, not only for oil and gas, but for our neighbours in West Nile? It could even connect to the border and also for the other livelihoods beyond oil, including tourism, fisheries and agriculture?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the Butiaba-Buliisa Road is one of the Albertine roads that are due to be done and tarmacking this road is expected to start by mid next year.

3.58
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. From 30th October to the 1st of this month, I lost seven people in my constituency. The first one was a pregnant woman who had twins and we were rushing her to Tokora, a health centre IV, and unfortunately because of the bad road, we were stuck in Nakale and we were able to rescue only one twin. The second one was on 13th October; there was no blood in Nabilatuk Health Centre. When we rushed the kid to Moroto, which is about 85 kilometres away, we found there was no blood and we proceeded to Matany. Unfortunately, we lost that one as well and the others followed. 

Essentially, Karamoja is divided into three zones: the northern, the central and the southern. The south comprises of Amudak and Nakapiripirit at a population of about half a million. The distance between them is over a 120 kilometres. Is the Prime Minister aware that half a million people in this country are not adequately served by a district hospital or at least a referral hospital and what plans are in place to rescue the people of Amudat and Nakapiripirit with respect to the hospitals since I can see - 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, please; you want to know what plans they have. Prime Minister, please answer.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the plan of Government is to eventually have a hospital in every district. The budget has not allowed us to do it immediately. It is a phased programme and the area my brother is talking about in Karamoja will definitely not be left out in this government programme. It will get a district hospital.

On the question of blood, there is a shortage of blood bank facilities. So, Government has embarked on building regional blood banks and gradually it will go to district blood banks. This will make blood more easily available to the patients in the country. It is a process going on.

4.00
MS EVERLINE TETE (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to ask the Prime Minister whether he is aware that there is a road called Kapchorwa-Swam Road, which is in a pathetic situation. What plan does Government have to tarmac this road? When is the Minister of Finance bringing the loan to this august House to be approved? 

The other question like my colleague said is: is Bukwo part of Uganda? 

DR RUGUNDA: Yes, Madam Speaker, Kapchorwa-Swam road is an old road that Government has been intending to construct for quite some time. We now have money from the ADB to upgrade that road to tarmac status. Work is again expected in the course of next year.

4.01
MS EVELYNE KAABULE: (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. In 2012, I remember we had a saga with the LCs’ bicycles. Up to now, a number of districts have not received their bicycles, including Luuka District. Can I know when districts’ bicycles will be distributed because we are getting to the end of the term? This also concerns the LCs’ salaries; my district received less than Shs 120,000. Can you tell me why and when they will receive the balance?

DR RUGUNDA: That is an important question affecting the wanainchi - LCs. Fifty two districts have so far received their bicycles and when more resources are got, the remaining districts will be covered. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: The second one of the salary of the local council? Rt Hon. Prime Minister, she wanted to know why the LCs were paid less money than what was expected.

DR RUGUNDA: Honourable, I do not have the right answer. We are going to find out and we will let the House know.

4.03
MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The question I want to pose to the Prime Minister is in regards to the outbreak of Hepatitis B in my district and in the parts of Teso, Kumi, Bukedea, Ngora and Serere. I presented a matter of national importance here. I am happy the Prime Minister today was the Minister of Health then and the Minister of Health gave an assurance that the issue of Hepatitis B in Ngora was going to be addressed as a matter of urgency. Today, as I speak, more people are dying in those mentioned districts and nothing is being done on the ground. I want to know from the Prime Minister what it is that those people need to do to deserve the attention of Government in delivering health services.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I do agree with the honourable member that Hepatitis B is a problem. In fact this year, we did have a big national day in Adjumani to sharpen the awareness of people about this problem. We would have already embarked on vaccination of the people; however the cost of the vaccine is too high. We are focusing on health education and preventive measures and my colleagues should do everything possible to reinforce the health workers so that the population can protect themselves through preventive measures while resources for vaccines which are now too expensive will eventually be got.

4.05
MR SULAIMAN BALYEJJUSA: (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Prime Minister, in May 2013, the President of the Republic of Uganda commissioned Kagulu Rock which is located in Buyende District in my constituency of Budiope East, as a tourism destination facility. After commissioning that rock, he also went on to outline areas of interventions that Government was going to undertake to further promote tourism in that area. One of them was extension of electricity. As I speak now, tourists continue to flock to visit but the power has not yet arrived. May I know how soon this electricity is coming to that constituency?

DR RUGUNDA: Government has a programme, Madam Speaker, of fulfilling presidential pledges. Since it was a presidential pledge, this must be part of that programme. We can crosscheck the details to know when the project will be done.

4.06
MR IDDI ISABIRYE: (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, Busoga sub-region is the only sub-region in the country that does not have any special programme. May I know when Government is planning to give this sub-region a special programme that aims at eradicating poverty? Thank you.

MR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, this august House passed a motion to make Busoga a special region and Government is working on the programme and when that time comes, we expect hon. Katuntu and other Members of Parliament who are from Busoga to fully participate in it. As to when, one needs to check the details with the ministries concerned but the Prime Minister’s office can give specific dates because it is a multi-ministerial programme. We can check and give you the exact timing and time table of implementation.

4.08
MR JACK WAMAI-WAMANGA (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Can the Prime Minister clarify to this House and the country at large on the diplomatic status of Kananathan? Is he the High Commissioner of Sri Lanka to Uganda or is he the Honorary Consul of Sri Lanka to Uganda?
Now if he is a High Commissioner, why is he engaged in full time business? You know that very well, honourable Prime Minister, because you represented this country in New York. Now, if he is an honorary consul, why does he drive a CD registered vehicle? 

DR RUGUNDA: I think Mr Kananathan, from the information I have is, an honorary consul. However, if he is driving a vehicle with CD numbers, which he is not supposed to do, we can ask the responsible Minister of Foreign Affairs to follow up the matter.

4.09
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I thank you. I would like to know whether the Prime Minister is aware that the former Prime Minister, Amama Mbabazi is being persecuted by the Government. They stopped him from attending functions in Luwero; they stopped him from going to Namboole and to Masaka. If the Prime Minister is aware about this persecution, what is he doing to prevail and make sure that the former Prime Minister is not harassed and humiliated? (Applause)

DR RUGUNDA: Well, I do not have reliable information that my brother, hon. Amama Mbabazi, is being persecuted by Government. If there are issues that colleagues might have specifically pin-pointing to that situation, Government would be interested in looking at them.

Let me tell you, Madam Speaker and honourable members, that Uganda is a free country and anybody in the Country should be treated without any prejudice and Ndugu Amama Mbabazi, an honourable Member of Parliament, cannot be and should not be in any way exclusively targeted. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. The 45 minutes are over. Honourable members and Prime Minister, I just wanted to follow up on the issue of hepatitis. Hon. Ongom is not here, she wanted to raise it. The situation is quite serious. 

In the recent recruitment in the police force and I think the army, some people in this country were excluded - not only in Teso but also from Lango - because they had hepatitis. So, opportunities are important for employment but now I think we need to do something about it.

4.13
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Madam Speaker, there are some issues that I would like to clarify with the Prime Minister – 

THE SPEAKER: But you did not indicate that you wanted to. I saw the people who were standing.

MR OGUTTU: But Madam Speaker, I indicated I wanted to raise an issue -

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC FINANCE BILL, 2012

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last time we had received the report which had been handled by three of our committees and we asked you to go and study the report, internalise it and come back for the next phase. So now we are ready for the debate on the Public Finance Bill. 

4.14
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, this Public Finance Bill, 2012 is a very important Bill in that this House needs to give it the necessary attention. I, therefore, want to thank you for the time that you have given it. I would like to remind colleagues of a very serious issue in this Bill and I also want to thank the committees that got involved and the Minister of Finance and the people that were in. 

The issues which have remained contentious are: 

One, it is the Public Finance and Accountability Bill but in the Bill, the issue which has not come out strongly is sanction on accounting officers.

I would like to request my brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the chairperson of the Committee on Local Government and all members of the Public Accounts committee to look at this Bill and you will find that the Bill is naked in regard to sanctions of accounting officers when it comes to abuse of public resources.

The Auditor-General has been categorical in regards to nugatory expenditure, excess expenditure, loss of public funds, money which is spent through inflating costs - but the Bill is naked. So, it is our responsibility now to dress the Bill and ensure that any accounting officer who has been implicated by the Auditor-General, the IGG or the PPDA in violation of the Procurement Act or any other law of Uganda does not retain office, is not approved to remain the accounting officer for the following year.

If we do that for this country, colleagues, our children, your wives, my wife, your husbands, your sisters and brothers will cherish you as the Ninth Parliament that will have made history. It is very important.

Recently, when we were passing the budget, we also discovered that we have a lacuna as regards to excess expenditure. Technical people in Government have been borrowing money from commercial banks and spending it and we have a lacuna regarding how to treat it. We treat it as a loss and in the Bill, there is a provision where the Minister will come to Parliament to declare it as a loss. 

The law is very clear; the Constitution is very clear. This is the moment for us colleagues to make provisions that any accounting officer or any technical person who engages in financial management operation in total violation of the Constitution is suspended and dismissed from office.

The Bill provides that any person whose actions lead to the loss of public resource is fined to a tune of just Shs 10 million. Last week, I heard the chairperson of the Public Accounts committee, hon. Alice Alaso, querying the Secretary to the Treasury for loss of more than Shs 6 billion and the Secretary to Treasury was saying that the matter is being investigated, that the public officials are earning Shs 1 million and he cannot recover the money for disciplinary action. This is a serious issue and this is the moment, colleagues that we need to tighten the belt so that such accounting officers and Secretaries to the Treasury should vacate office. Uganda, a country of 40 million people, has so many people who are capable. So we need to put that provision.

In this Bill, the Ministry of Finance is defined as also being in charge of our treasury. As you are aware, colleagues, there is abuse of our treasury. This is the moment when the minister who is in charge of our treasury should be held personally accountable for any action that goes on in our treasury. For example, we have the case of Katosi Road and the bicycles, cases which turn to investigations. Up to now, some of our voters have not received bicycles in the villages and we are going to lose elections because the LCs did not receive the bicycles as a result of negligence and abuse by officials. 

In this Bill, there is what we call instruments. Some of these companies issue bonds using very low insurance companies such that you cannot even cash the bonds. This is the case of the bicycles and Katosi Road. This is the moment for us to tighten and put a very tough provision that anybody involved in transactions in Uganda should give us a guarantee that we can redeem. Any guarantee that cannot be redeemed is worthless. 

So, colleagues, we need to read and put a provision. Let me give you an example in the case of Katosi road. Some of these officials issue contracts they know will be cancelled. Mark you, when the contract is cancelled, it is re-advertised and the cost may go up three times in terms of assembling of equipment and the condition of the road might get worse. So I want us to propose a measure within this law that we go for the culprits instead of punishing the local people and ourselves. 

Another very important issue, Madam Speaker, to which you have been acclaimed as the celebrated Speaker of the Uganda Parliament, is the issue of the Budget office. This Bill proposes repealing the Budget Act. It is something that has caused the promotion of tourism in this country. So many Members of Parliament from around the world have travelled to Uganda Parliament because of the innovations in the Budget office and the Budget Act and this has led to revenue. The Minister of Finance may not be aware of this because she is not in charge of tourism but if you look at the number of guests to Parliament and what they are coming to do - just check the PR office. They come to learn more about the Administration of Parliament Act and the Budget Act. 

Now when you repeal it, Madam Speaker, while you are in the Chair, I do not know what we will do and how we shall present ourselves to the international community and to the guests who come here. Do we tell them that we have killed the baby that we gave birth to and whom they have copied? This is something that we should not accept. 

They have tried to integrate it here by saying that they are giving it more flesh but even if they integrate it, there are errors in the Budget Act and we need to amend it ourselves and make it strong. This is because regarding this Bill that will become an Act, it is only the minister that can amend Schedules with the approval of Cabinet as well as issue statutory instruments. It is not going to be the Parliamentary Commission headed by the Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, will you have the power to amend the Schedule or issue statutory instruments that may be necessary for the implementation of the Budget Act if we integrate it? I find that a serious lacuna and it contravenes the spirit of separation of powers between the Executive, Parliament and the Judiciary. 

In conclusion, there are other issues that some of us will handle when we go to committee stage. The Bill also tries to throw away local government and to us, local government is a centre of development. The Bill does not talk about public debts in totality. Colleagues, we are likely to mortgage this country beyond the lives of our grandchildren. We therefore need to put a limit or ceiling that Government shall not commit to borrow beyond a given percentage of our GDP. 

This is the moment and we can do it. Otherwise some people will mortgage this country knowing that they are about to be called by God. I am telling you that this is a very serious matter. They have harvested enough and invested in stocks in Europe so that even their great grandchildren will live harmoniously. 

I will give an example of Ghana, which borrowed so much that now their budget is only financing salaries and interest payments. The oil is also being stolen from the sea. If you go to any mine in this country, not even the Members of Parliament are allowed to see the quantity of the minerals being removed. Instead, the technical people wait for a report from the investor that we have taken a half of a tonne or a quarter of a tonne.

Last week, the Leader of the Opposition went to the gold mine in Busia but he was not allowed to see anything. He was only given a report that this is what we have mined from this place and it was based on the report that the investor gives and upon which taxes are paid. So that is the situation. If we borrow because we have oil and minerals, which are stolen - I want to make a proposal that we must put a limit above which Government shall not borrow in relation to our GDP. I thank you very much. (Hon. Sebunya rose_)

THE SPEAKER: I thought this is your report.

MR SEBUNYA: Yes, but I just want to give information.

THE SPEAKER: But he has finished.

4.24
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Committee on Finance for doing justice to a very important amalgamated and consolidated law, which attempts to bring together the Public Finance Act, the revenue sharing of oil and even repeal the Budget Act. 

However, I am a bit perplexed that such an important report has taken such a long time to be debated and I hope that Members of Parliament will rise to the occasion because the matters therein are so important to this country at this point in time when we are talking of a single treasury account; when we are integrating oil revenues in the budget and when the country is about to do front loading of about $ 35 billion in terms of export guarantee, loans, the standard gauge railway construction and the roads and airports we want to construct. This is nothing but an export guarantee because those who are giving us the money know that we are going to get some oil revenue and that we are going to have a mineral boom. 

So, we need to be very careful when we are mortgaging this country and we need to do it by choice. It is not bad to borrow but what is important is what are you borrowing for, at what cost and do you have returns on the investments? Therefore, I expect that while we are discussing this, we should be very clear. 

We are happy with the contingency fund, which operationalises what was already put in the Constitution. We would want to be sure that this time round, the challenges of budget indiscipline and supplementaries will be no more. This is because if we again have a new form of a supplementary in the form of a contingency fund, that will not be budget discipline or the spirit of what this law is intended to cure.

In addition, we have been here dealing with estimates and we run the first quarter of the year on Vote-on-Account. I think this has been laborious and also against the spirit of budgeting in the first place. This is because if you have a Vote-on-Account when you are actually supposed to have spent according to the budget, it means that you have lost 25 percent of your budget in time and therefore, it is almost duplication. 

The issues I raised earlier are very important issues of oil and gas revenue sharing and financing the National Oil Company, which the upstream law of oil did not envisage. This is because these laws have been brought in piecemeal form. You may recall that when the first law of prospecting was brought, I made a request on why we should not get all these laws simultaneously or omnibus so that we understand what upstream and downstream is. Two years after making the upstream legislation, we now have a downstream legislation and you may not resonate or remember what you did two years ago. 

So I think we need experts and the government side to help us internalise these likely gaps to give the country a bigger picture and I hope it was not deliberate to do this work in a scattered manner. For example, there are issues of mixing contingency funds with other challenges like disaster funds. These matters are not fully concluded and I hope we shall find time to deal with them. 

I hope that at the committee stage, we are going to put a lot of effort on the certificate of clearance of National Planning Authority (NPA). This is because considering the kind of money we are going to talk about, if we do not empower NPA and follow the Vision 2040 we talk about and if we do not use the NDP II and align the budget to the NDP, this country could easily get problems. 

We would not want our ceiling to choke like what has happened to Angola and you have also recently heard what has happened to Ghana. Therefore, issues of macro-economic stability become paramount in the next phase of looking at this. 

As earlier put, regarding the question of how we intend to frontload, we must do it by choice. It should not be that some contractor has gone to China, negotiated for Karuma then he comes and pushes for Karuma. We should have an integrated inter-sectorial approach. What do you want to do for transport? Is it roads or water transport? Would you want the Uganda Airlines back? This is so that when we are seeking money or a bilateral agreement from Exim Bank in China, which I support, we do not go piecemeal; today we have gone for Isimba, tomorrow we are for Karuma then we go back for standard gauge - in the process, this country does not get a deal. It becomes as though it is the dealers who want the contracts who are pushing the agenda and not the government. 

Other countries like Angola have got a bilateral integrated $ 12 billion from China but not in the way we are going about it where you go for 200 today and tomorrow you go back for 400. It is laborious with many trips to China and we are getting higher terms which are largely commercial because we are not negotiating a big deal. So we really need to review how much we are engaging China and other economies that have money like Russia and Korea in a bilateral manner. 

Our bilateral borrowing has become private sector led in that it is the contractor who wants the deal who comes and pushes it to Cabinet then others follow. How I wish that we would first look at what we want to borrow in the NDP II? If we want $35 billion from this country, let us go and shop around all these countries and we shall get better and more concessional terms. However what is happening currently is that a contractor who is ready for Isimba moves to Cabinet. A contractor who is ready for Karuma is in Cabinet. Tomorrow you will even hear somebody - 

We are going to miss out on reviving the national carrier because the private sector is already negotiating on using the money for recoverable costs for air transport in Uganda to lease private planes instead of Ugandan owned planes. So we really need to put a lot of effort in all these areas because the borrowing you are talking of will affect all these other areas.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, I hope that when we get to committee stage, we shall actually look at many more of these areas and be able to tell where we want to take this country with this frontloading, which I support but I think we should consider the government plan first and then the so-called contractors’ interest last. I thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Are there any further contributions? Honourable members, it seems that Members would be happier to go to committee stage. I put the question that the Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PUBLIC FINANCE BILL, 2012

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question on clause 1.

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, we propose to delete sub-clause (2) of clause 1. The justification is that this supervision has hitherto been abused. 

Clause 1, if I may read, is on commencement: “This Act shall come into force on the date the minister may, by statutory instrument, appoint.

“(2) The minister may appoint different dates of commencement for different provisions of this Act.”

So the committee has proposed that sub-clause (2) be deleted.

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, I do not agree with the position of the committee. There are some aspects of the Bill, which will require implementation on different dates. For instance, if you take into consideration the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility, it is supposed to be announced when there is a new government. So it can only be operationalised after an election. Therefore, you cannot now say that this should come at the same time when we are having the commencement of section 1(1) and that is why we are requesting that section 1(2) remains as it is.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, I am personally opposed to not only deleting clause 1(2) as it is but the entire clause 1 based on experience. Before laws are brought here, Government comes with a certificate of financial implications.

Two, we make laws for a purpose. Recently, we passed the Contracts Act and for two years, it was not brought into force because we had delegated our rights to the minister to make a statutory instrument for it to come into force. So especially in our Committee on Legal Affairs, the whole idea of delegating our responsibility to the minister to provide for the commencement date is abusing the essence of us making the law. 

My proposed amendment is that, that particular clause should state that the Act shall come into force on the date of gazetting so that there is no business of allowing the minister to first sit for two years to make a statutory instrument for the law to be implemented.

So my amendment, Madam Chairperson, is that clause 1(1) should be amended to say that the Act shall come into force on the date of gazettement and then clause 1(2) be deleted.  

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The mandate to make laws is vested with Parliament. I would like to know from the minister why Parliament would pass a law when it does not know when this law will come into effect and we just leave it at your own discretion. 

It is our responsibility to pass an Act of Parliament but to pass a law with uncertainty when we do not know when the law that we shall pass will come into effect and we just leave it at the discretion of the minister is like we are absconding from our own responsibility. We need to pass a law and know that when we pass it, it is going to be in effect tomorrow or on the date that it is gazetted. We have gone through a process and we are handing over this legislative process to the Executive to determine when the law should come into effect. I just want anybody to explain to me the logic. 

MR ODOI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I heard objections from the honourable minister and heard the justification for his objection. I do not want to sound impolite by describing it as lame although that would be the appropriate description for his objection.

Madam Chairperson, by the time Government brings a piece of legislation to Parliament, you are prepared to implement and give it effect. If you are not prepared to give it effect, you just do not bring it. You need that piece of legislation by the time you ask us to waste a lot of time to pass it and that is why it is good practice to provide that every piece of legislation that we pass comes into effect upon assent by the President and gazetting. That is good international practice.

Now the honourable minister for whom I have a lot of respect says that parts of this legislation will only come into effect when a new government comes into force. That is a given because if the provision is that it will come into effect or be operationalised when a new government is in place, it does not necessarily mean that we have to permit the minister to appoint a specific date for that – [MR SEBUNYA: “Can I give information?”]- I will take the information.

MR SEBUNYA: Thank you. The only information that I wanted to give is that in this Bill is proposed a Charter of Fiscal Responsibility, which is a five-year programme. If you say this law takes effect, that means that even that Charter of Fiscal Responsibility, which shall be prepared in 2015 after the elections, is deemed to be in place. 

That is why I think they are saying that this Act shall come into force when such provisions can be operationalised by the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility.

MR ODOI: I have listened attentively to my chairperson and he is not making any point that is different from what I am saying. The law can take effect at a time when the President assents to it and it is gazetted. It is just common sense that when you are interpreting the section that provides for the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility, you take into consideration the fact that it is supposed to be a five-year Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. You do not interpret that particular section devoid of knowledge that it is actually supposed to be a five-year charter. You do not close your eyes to the circumstances surrounding the operation of the charter.

Madam Chairperson, I would support the position that we state that this law should take effect upon the assent by the President and gazetting.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not know why we are arguing so much. If you look at clause 6(5), it states as follows, “The minister shall, within one month of the commencement of the first session of Parliament, submit to Parliament the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility.” There cannot be a first session of this Parliament. It has to be in the next Parliament and that is automatic.  

MR NIWAGABA: With that particular clause, even the minister does not have to make a statutory instrument that says that this shall commence like this because the clause already says that it happens within one month from the commencement of the first session of Parliament. So the law has already provided the time frame.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can we go with the chairperson’s proposal? Do we delete clause 1? Yes, hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you. Yesterday, when the Secretary to the Treasury was before the Public Accounts Committee, he said that we are delaying the law and that was his complaint and I think that the law should be enacted immediately.

I am not disputing my chairperson but a Charter of Fiscal Responsibility deals with medium and long term – it is like the other five-year investment book. You can even do it today but it is segmented that every year you will implement the following and so that should not be the reason.

But having said that, I am first of all worried about the time in which we shall handle the issue of the Budget Act being amended or repealed by this law. I wanted to first understand at what time because the way we are moving is as if we have agreed that we should repeal the Budget Act. [HON. MEMBERS: “No.”]

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. Isn’t there a specific provision on that one?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the beginning says, “Repealing the Budget Act” and many of the items we are going to discuss are on the Budget Act. You will discover that they are mixed –(Interjections)- yes, the honourable has even brought it out more clearly. So, you will find that you are amending something and in effect you are dealing with the Budget Act.

Having raised that, I think I will need guidance from you, Madam Chairperson, on that one. But I think that the law should come into force as soon as we pass it and it is gazetted. There is no need for us to get worried and the Minister for Finance should not be given leverage because he can decide to say that this section of collection of taxes should be paid in 2018 and yet we needed the money yesterday. So, we should pass it as soon as it comes into force.
I would want to ask you, Madam Chairperson, at what time shall we be repealing the Budget Act?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we normally go to the objects and title last after we have handled the entire Bill. So, there is no way that, that matter will escape and I think that Members are very alert on that one. Can we move for that amendment on clause 1?

MR OMACH: While I agree with the amendment to clause 1(1), on the second one that members are proposing to delete - for instance, if you take the issue of the establishment of the Petroleum Fund, this is not expected to come immediately unless you are saying that once this is gazetted then any others which should be implemented at a much later stage be handled through the regulations that will come. 

Otherwise, our purpose of putting sub-section (2) was to ensure that some of these are accommodated at a later stage. But I agree with the amendment to clause 1(1). 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is the one that you have talked about on Petroleum?

MR OMACH: That is part 7, pages 50 and 51 going forward. Clause 52: “Establishment of the Petroleum Fund 
(1) There is established a fund to be known as the Petroleum Fund. 

(2) The Petroleum Fund shall consist of…” and the details are given. 

“(3) The minister shall be responsible for the overall management of the Petroleum Fund and shall oversee…” (Interruption) 

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, I think the honourable minister is confusing two terms: commencement of the law and operationalisation of the law. The law can commence from the date of assent and gazettement, but particular provisions may not operate because the situation that would allow the law to operate has not yet occurred. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, I have here the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Act. I do not think that we have a lacuna as regards the Petroleum Fund because there is the Petroleum Authority and the fund of the authority; all this is covered in here. By the way, even if you do not include it, there is another law which takes care of it. 

Besides that, you know this Parliament has been burnt on this issue of commencement date. Hon. Omach, you remember the Traffic and Road Safety Act when we gave hon. Nasasira the power; he could only dream and authorise certain provisions to apply as he deemed fit. Madam Chairperson, you remember this. Therefore, this practise has become too archaic and should not be promoted by a celebrated Minister of State for Finance like you, hon. Omach.

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, most obliged.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 (2) be deleted. 
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now can we have a proposed amendment on assent and gazettement? Can someone speak to it quickly?

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that clause 1 (1) be amended to read as follows: “This Act shall come into force upon assent by the President and gazettement of the same.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 sub clause (1) be amended as proposed.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I agree with hon. Niwagaba’s submission but it is trite knowledge that the date of commencement is always provided as part of the text of the published Act. Once they put the date there, that is the date of commencement. 

Now, you do not have to put the date of assent in the law because once the President assents to the law under the Acts of Parliament Act, it becomes law and it becomes enforceable upon its publication in the gazette or on such other day as provided in the text of the Bill or Act. So we do not need to say it, although I agree with you, because the Interpretation Act already covers that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what are you proposing? Are you proposing that we delete the entire clause 1? 

MR RUHINDI: Yes; the whole of clause 1 goes and there will be a date of commencement as part of the Act. Yes, that is common sense.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I want to seek clarification from the learned Attorney-General as he is a well experienced draftsperson. 

Is it not necessary anymore to have commencement clauses in our legislation, - is that what you were saying - or is it in this particular one, because it is a given? Should we not refer to when the law shall be deemed to have commenced in this same Bill here? Maybe something could have changed in this one. Since it is about finance, maybe we are trying to cut costs.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I heard the Attorney-General say that it is common knowledge, and the initial draft of the Bill also on page 6 provides for commencement; why wasn’t this knowledge common at the drafting stage? Didn’t you provide this common knowledge to the Ministry of Finance so that it would help in putting this information together?

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, the duty to draft legislation in Uganda under the Public Service Standing Orders is with the First Parliamentary Counsel. More often than not, it is not always possible for the Attorney-General to look at all legislation that comes to Parliament or goes to Cabinet. Sometimes it is very difficult. 

In my opinion, the submission made by those who are saying that giving powers to the minister to appoint dates for commencement of legislation is sometimes not appropriate. This is because a law is to empower those responsible for enforcing the law. It may not be possible to enforce all the provisions of the Act at the same time when the Act comes into force. However, those enforcing the law will have gotten the mandate to enforce the provisions as and when either the resources allow or as and when it is possible. So it is not always good to give that delegated legislation.

Secondly, look at your past legislation; when a Bill is being published, just below the long title, there is date of assent. I am looking at the Public Finance and Accountability Act, for example, which I think you all have because I carried mine. Just below the long title, there is date of assent. That is the date on which the President assents. You then have the date of commencement, which will be the date of publication. In this case, I think they say “see section 1 (2)” because I think there was another arrangement being made. 

What am I trying to submit? I am trying to say that you do not have to put this as a substantive provision of the Act because they are actually spelt out just below the long title.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I am just thinking aloud and this might be in the minds of some members.  Recently, when we were passing the Finance Bill and Income Tax Bill, we put commencement dates because of finance implications and the revenue aspect. So you need to clarify the relationship between the commencement date we fixed on 1st July in the Finance Bill and the Income Tax Bill we passed recently and then this other one.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, what harm is there if write the commencement, date of assent or gazettement? What is the problem? Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 1(1) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, I will propose that we skip clause 2, the interpretation clause, and then go to clause 3.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, clause 2 is the purpose of the Act. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, clause 2(e) mentions, reporting, accounting and internal audit. It should be, “and internal controls”. Internal audit is a small component in internal control. It should be, “(e) reporting…and internal controls”. Remove “framework”.

Paragraph (f) mentions the legal and regulatory of petroleum revenue. I think this is under the petroleum law, so I do not think it should be here. Those are the amendments I want to propose. Delete (f).

MR KASULE: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Madam Chairperson, I would agree with him on audit control framework. However, the legal and regulatory framework for collection, allocation and management of petroleum revenue is part and parcel of this Bill. So I think (f) is necessary.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Look at clause 51; it is provided for under clause 51.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, hon. Nandala-Mafabi has a point; maybe we may have to stand over this clause until we conclude clause 51. This is because Government needs to come out on how we want public limited liability companies to operate in a private sector-led economy. Do you want to continue tying their hands and yet you want them to compete and make profits? 

There is a policy issue here and this is going to arise when they are handling the pension sector. I want you to reflect on when we liberalised the telecom industry and allowed MTN to come in while tying the hands of UTL. That is why it is dead. So we need to stand over this clause because we need to sort out that issue as there is a policy issue that Government needs to clear.

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, I agree with the amendment proposed under 2(e) but I do not agree that we should stand over 2(f). As you have rightly stated, this is fully covered from section 7, clause 51 going forward. We do not have any contradictions as far as policies are concerned. So I would agree with the proposal to amend (e) to read, “…and internal controls” and then delete “audit framework”.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, I have been whispering to my neighbour from Bugisu here and I think we have built consensus that we drop his proposal to amend (f). This is because if you read the whole clause 2, it says, “The purpose of this Act is to provide for public financial management in Uganda by establishing-…” - and (f) simply says, “the legal and regulatory framework for the collection, allocation and management of petroleum revenue.” It is a worthy object of the Bill that we should allow to stay. So I am reporting that my neighbour has conceded that we leave (f) in the Bill.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I also wanted to implore my honourable colleague that we stay that amendment because as of now, we do not have any legal framework for managing petroleum revenue in this country. We passed all the other laws but we do not have the revenue management framework, unless we think that we have to make a separate law. As of now, this is the only opportunity that we have to create the framework for handling petroleum revenue. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I agree with hon. Odoi-Oywelowo and I concede on that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, we only focus on 2(e).

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, 2(e) should say, “…and internal controls”.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, on 2(e), first of all the accounting system is supposed to be designed in such a way that there are internal controls and during internal audit, we test the extent to which there is compliance with those controls. The internal audit framework therefore needs to remain as it is because it will take the controls embedded in the system. So I would rather that it remains as it is.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am worried; I thought my brother studied auditing. Internal audit is part of internal controls. Please, do not disappoint me. I still feel bad about it. We are saying accounting systems and when you talk about accounting systems, what are the other ones? They are called internal controls; so internal audit is a small -

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, I think we are mixing things up. Surely, the purpose of internal controls is specific. The audit tests the degree of compliance and it is a function distinct on its own. Here, for purposes of this Act, for public financial management, we need to have an elaborate accounting system installed and how they are reported upon and then the internal audit tests the compliance. So, if we just say “internal controls”, what happens to the embedded interlocking control mechanism in the accounting system itself?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, what is internal audit? You undertake internal audit because you want to find out if the controls you put in place are functioning. Is that right? So, now the minister is coming to report on the reporting and accounting systems - the systems he or she is applying. She will also report on the internal controls in place, and the internal audit you are talking about is embedded in internal controls. Hon. Mulongo, just listen to me and accept what I am saying because I am talking from an international perspective.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2(e) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think there are issues that we need look at in clause 3. You realise that we have local governments and these are as a result of a number of policies that we have passed as Parliament; therefore, most of the operations are based at local government level. Now, to exclude local governments from this Bill would be disastrous. 

One of the objects of the Bill is to define the role of accounting officers and we know that we have accounting officers at the district level - the CAOs. It is therefore very imperative that we do not leave out local governments in this Bill, for purposes of having good coordination right from Central Government down to the lower levels of government. Actually, the budgeting process is also handled at the local government level, so it would be improper to leave out local governments. I, therefore, feel that they should be included in this Bill.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, I would invite members to look at clause 4 on page 10, at the definition of “public money” and “public officer”. Also, look at the title of the Bill itself, “Public Finance Bill”. Who actually handles the biggest chunk of public finance if it is not the local governments? 

Now, if you bring this particular clause as it is, it will bring an escape route for most of those who steal public resources. So the best thing is to do away with this particular clause and delete it entirely because it is irrelevant. As far as the clauses are concerned, they are in respect of public finance so whoever is handling public finance must know that the Act applies to him or her. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if you are not aware of how money is being stolen, it leaves the centre, goes to the districts then comes back to the centre. That is how it moves. What they are trying to bring here would make local governments unable to open accounts without the authority of the Accountant-General. The reason is so that they open accounts so that they can do anything with those monies. So Madam Chairperson, the earlier we deleted clause 3, the better for us.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chairperson, I want clarification from the honourable Minister of Finance. As you were putting this provision in the Bill, did you have any other law, which actually catered for local governments? This is because like colleagues have said, over 90 per cent of the resources managed by local governments are actually public finances. So, which other law did you envisage to cater for local governments?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, what was your rationale for this provision?

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, with guidance from the Attorney-General, under clause 31 we make specific reference to the bank accounts management. Of course, there is the Local Government Act, which also prescribes how they deal with financial matters. So under clause 31 we are specifically saying, “(1) The Secretary to the Treasury shall prescribe the framework within which votes shall conduct the banking activities of the votes and the cash management of the votes.

(2) A public or official bank account shall not be opened without the written authority of the Accountant-General.

(3) Subsection (2) shall not apply to a local government.” 

Under clause 32, on page 34, it says, “Authority to raise loans. (1) Subject to the Constitution, the authority to raise money by loan and to issue guarantees for and on behalf of the Government shall vest solely in the Minister and no other person, public corporation, state enterprise or local government council shall, without the prior approval of the Minister, raise any loan, issue any guarantee, or take any other action which may in any way either directly or indirectly result in a liability being incurred by the Government.” 

These are two areas where there is direct reference to the local governments. However, Madam Chairperson, we have the Local Government Act, which deals with management of funds, and as I said earlier, if there is need maybe I will request the Attorney-General to give further guidance.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, this provision in clause 32 actually allows the local government council to raise funds provided they get approval of the minister. That is what he is saying, that they are only subjected to the minister’s approval and that is all.

MS ALUM: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. After looking at the clauses the minister has read, when you look at clause 48, you still see the accounting officer at the local government level appearing within clause 48 (1): “…an accounting officer of a local government shall, within two months after the end of each financial year, prepare and submit to the Auditor-General…” 

This means that we have local government accounting officers dealing in most of the public funds. Remember, we are yet to finally pass the Public Private Partnership Bill in which there was a proposal for the local governments to be included. If in this Bill now we say that we delete the local governments completely, I do not think we shall be moving in the right direction. I really urge the minister that we let clause 3 be completely deleted so that local government accounting officers are also catered for under this Bill. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I think that the honourable minister, in providing this clause, actually defeats the whole spirit of the Public Finance Act. If you are going to create exceptions of people and officers who are actually handling public finance, then it means you are not interested in the spirit of regulating public finance. You very well know that local governments handle public finances and with the same breath you are saying, let it not apply to them. I think it is a terrible provision.

Madam Chairperson, from the public accounts perspective, almost every day we are confronted with a situation where the Accountant-General is complaining about numerous bank accounts, which they are not aware of and which they do not monitor but which contain public finances. Would it not be in the interest of the minister, who is the steward of the taxpayers’ money, to have a mechanism in the law that allows the Accountant-General and a legal framework to regulate local governments that receive the bulk of the money?

Lastly, and maybe the Attorney-General will help me, is this the normal way of cross-referencing in terms of the various laws? If there are two laws that apply to a situation, do you cross-reference like this, by creating blanket exclusion, or is there a smarter way in which you cause the two laws to apply to the situation without necessarily saying this particular law does not apply by establishing legal discrimination on people with the same characteristics? Is this the way you do it? 

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, when hon. Alaso came in, I was concluding. I said that I have tried to mention two areas where there are exceptions. Clause 3 says, “This Act shall not apply to local governments except as provided in this Act.” There are various areas where these provisions are contained and I had given two areas. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, on second thoughts, I think there is no problem with this because it is saying that it will apply in the areas which have been provided; for instance, the local governments will not have to deal with the fiscal charter and they will not have to establish a petroleum fund. I think there is no problem.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, we are going to change the budget calendar and when you change the budget calendar, it also affects local governments because we give them 90 per cent of the budget. So, even regarding the issue of the fiscal charter, some of the development programmes are happening in the local governments and some of the accounting officers in local governments are appointed by the Secretary to the Treasury. 

So, Madam Chairperson, that clause is really redundant. Let us pass the law and sections that are applicable to local governments shall apply. Those which are not applicable to local governments shall be in abeyance. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But that is what the provision is saying.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, the problem with stating it there is that certain sections may be relevant to local governments but we may forget to mention them and that is our concern. Inside the law, we may say this shall apply to local governments and here we keep quiet.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chairperson, I think adding this provision as it is does not add value and I do not think we shall lose anything by deleting it. From the explanation of the minister, the law will only be applicable to the local governments where local governments are mentioned. But when you look at an example of clause 17 on budget execution by accounting officers, in (1) it says, “An accounting officer shall, based on the annual cash flow plan issued by the Secretary to the Treasury under section 13, plan and manage the activities as indicated in the policy statement of the vote.”

Going by what the minister is saying, this provision does not, in anyway, relate to local governments and that will be a problem. I think we should just delete that provision and then the whole law will apply to public finances whether in the central or local government. Otherwise the minister should tell us what mischief he is trying to cure by excluding local governments in the way he is putting it.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, there are a few issues. One, if we are dealing with public finance, are we trying to say that we legislate local governments out because they are local and not public? Two, are we going to amend other available definitions, which define local governments as part of Government? 

As hon. Chris Baryomunsi is saying, what is the fear? We are talking about public finance - that is the old one under section 8. We are talking about the appointment of accounting officers, we are talking about public funds; are we going to have another meaning accorded to the word “public funds” in the local governments? 

Madam Chairperson, this is difficult to understand and maybe it is quite complicated. If they made it simpler for some of our minds, we would appreciate it just like the Minister of Finance has appreciated it. Where there is government, it is public, and that is my understanding. There are no funds to local governments, which are not public funds. This law is about managing public finances. So, Attorney-General, it is quite complicated for my mind to see that we are legislating local governments out. I just need that help. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, on the face of it, as you have put it, clause 3 is an innocent provision, which simply says, “This Act shall not apply to local governments except as provided in this Act.” 

Let me say this, and I stand to be redeemed in the courts of law at a later stage; there are Acts of general application, which this one seems to be. There are specific legislations for sectoral areas like the Local Government Act. The cardinal principle in the interpretation of law is that where there is a specific Act on a particular subject matter, you apply it; you do not resort to the general one. Where the two conflict, for instance, you apply the specific one. 

In view of that, there will be absolutely no problem in deleting clause 3 because the two will act in tandem. Where there is a specific matter to do with local governments, you apply the Local Government Act. Where there is silence, you apply this one.

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, the Attorney-General has spoken. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 3 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, deleted.

Clause 5

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, clause 5 is under the heading, “Part II- Microeconomic and Fiscal Policies”. The committee proposes to rephrase clause 5 to read as follows: 

“(5) Principles for development of fiscal policy
(1) The objective of the Government when setting fiscal objectives within the macroeconomic framework shall be to ensure macroeconomic stability and economic growth having regard to the National Development Plans. 

(2) The fiscal objectives shall be based on the following principles-
(a) Sufficiency in revenue mobilisation to finance government programmes.

(b) Maintenance of prudent and sustainable levels of public debt.

(c) Ensuring that the fiscal balance, when calculated without petroleum revenues, is maintained at a sustainable level over the medium term.

(d) Management of revenues from petroleum resources and other finite natural resources for the benefit of current and future generations.

(e) Management of fiscal risks in a prudent manner.

(f) Consistency of the Medium Term Framework Paper to the National Development Plan. 

(g) Efficiency, effectiveness and value for money in expenditure.

(3) For purposes of this section, the Minister shall set measurable fiscal objectives for the fiscal principles in subsection (2)(a) to (e) in the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility and the annual Budget Framework Paper.”

The justification is that there is need to set principles, which shall form the basis for the development of the fiscal objectives within the macroeconomic framework. So we are separating principles from objectives. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed by the chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, we intend to rephrase clause 6 to read as follows: 

“6. Charter of Fiscal Responsibility
(1) Not later than three months after the first sitting of Parliament after a general election, the Minister shall submit to Parliament for approval-

(a) a Charter of Fiscal Responsibility which shall provide- 
(i) a statement indicating the measurable objectives for fiscal policy for a period of not less than the next three financial years, which are consistent with the principles set out in section 5;

(ii) an explanation of the methodology to be used to measure the performance of Government against the fiscal policy objectives required in subsection (1)(a)(i);

(iii) a list of the sources of data to be used to report developments against the fiscal objectives included in subsection (1)(a)(i); and 

(iv) a demonstration of how the fiscal objectives set out under subsection (1)(a)(i) are consistent with principles set out in section 5 of this Act using the macroeconomic and fiscal data, assumptions, and projections provided in the economic and fiscal update referred to in (1)(b); and 

(b) an economic and fiscal update which shall be in accordance, using the requirements of section 6.

(2) The Minister shall publish the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility and the Economic and Fiscal Update not later than three months after approval by Parliament.

(3) The Minister may, using the fiscal Responsibility principles, update the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility.

(4) The Minister shall present to Parliament the updated Charter of Fiscal Responsibility to Parliament.

(5) Parliament shall examine, and may approve, the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility.

(6) The Minister shall, within one week after approval by Parliament, publish the updated Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. 

(7) The Charter shall be in a format shown in Schedule 2.”

The justification: redraft for clarity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chair, there are some grammatical mistakes; I do not know whether the draft’s people will handle that. Sub clause (4) for instance, says “…shall present to Parliament the updated Charter of Responsibility to Parliament”. I think “Parliament” is used to too many times. I do not know whether it cannot be improved.

MR KASULE: I hope the people who were extracting this shall help us to at least remove the repetitions.

DR BYAROMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. This is a Bill from the Ministry of Finance and the minister was requesting that within one month of commencement of the first session of Parliament, she would be able to submit the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. After parliamentary approval, within one month she will publish the same charter. The committee is, however, being generous by giving three months. 

Can the chairperson justify why he is changing from one month to three months when the minister is saying within one month, he would be able to do this? Why are you are saying that it will take three months?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the Fiscal Charter of Responsibility must be known to members as it is the backbone which makes Government accountable for what it would do for this state - the resources they would collect, how they would manage them and the equitability when they share it. In fact, more or less, it is implementing that part of the Constitution, which refers to equitability and even taking care of those places that are underdeveloped when we are drawing the budget. Basically, that is what it is. 

On what hon. Baryomunsi has raised, there is a contradiction; the chairman is raising three months but he is also talking of a three-year plan while the minister is talking of five years. You must harmonise the three years and the five years. 

The other point is the one month and the three months. Basically, the minister should come and lay down what they intend to do in five years when they have come to power. This would detail the expected development plans. That is the reason why they merged it to five years. You cannot wait for three months while the Government is planning; in one month, they should be able to lay down their plans because that is what they have been campaigning for, and that should be stated categorically. In that context, Mr Chairman, you may try to harmonise this by going back to one month and five years. 

In that context, I also want to raise another issue. The moment they lay down the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility, they must commit themselves. It would not be coming here for mere words and they run away. We should also put a proviso, which I want to bring under sub clause (3); that is when I want to move an additional amendment in order to make sure that what they tell the people of Uganda is a serious issue and not a matter of talking and you go away. 

Madam Chairperson, I do not know if you want me to raise my additional amendments now or to deal with the chairman’s amendments first. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Chair, can you tell us why you have abandoned the minister’s proposal of one month?

MR KASULE: We have harmonised the amendment with the ministry. I think we are being practical because after setting up government, in one month you cannot produce or come out with this document. That is why we said the economic and fiscal updates should be presented not later than three months. They can do it in one month or two months but not later than three months; that is the maximum they can use to organise themselves. 

“A statement indicating the measurable objectives of fiscal policy for a period of not less than the next three financial years…” That is in the medium term, because we are talking about a statement indicating measurable objectives; something can change within the five years. So, we have amended it to three years.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I need some clarification, chairman. You talked about the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility and you said not later than three months after the general elections. Did I get you properly? Madam Chairperson, are we not legislating in anticipation? Actually, you cannot ascertain whether the government in power shall be in power after the general elections. Now we are already setting the programmes, yet each government that comes into power comes on the strength of its manifesto - what it intends to do and what it does not intend to do. 

We are laying down a comprehensive planning model and we want any successive government to fall within that. I do not know how well thought-out it was, but certainly, once you talk about a government, it is prudent that that government manages its affairs properly on the strength of which it was voted into power. 

Now, are we coming up with a blueprint? I do not know how feasible this will be in view of certain changes. There have to be changes; they may be suppressed now but certainly, there will be changes in Government. Are we competent now to sit here and come up with a straightjacket law within which any future Government will work? That government may not be agreeable to the way things are being done? 

Governments come into power on the strength of  weaknesses within the current system, the promises they are giving to Ugandans and the approach they will use in the governance of the country. Won’t this be putting stringent conditions and which, anyway, would be over looked and rendered redundant by any government that will come into power? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the rationale for clause 6? Can the minister give us the rationale because the members want to understand how this will be effected?

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility is an undertaking by government indicating what is going to be done over a period of five years. All this is given to Parliament, giving the direction that the Government is going to take, including the various development activities. 

Of course, every government is required to produce its own charter based on its contract with the people. So, we will not see any contradiction; we are not putting this in anticipation. This is because we really need to have fiscal discipline and as far as I am concerned, I think that this is a fair explanation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I have understood the rationale for the charter but I want to know why you are giving the minister three months to publish after parliamentary approval. I thought once approved, it should go out.

MR KASULE: The rationale of giving the three months is that after the election, it takes a bit of time for Parliament to come on board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, I am talking about after approval by Parliament.

MR KASULE: After approval by Parliament it is one week.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Am I reading something else, because mine says three months? Maybe I am reading something old. (Laughter)

MR EKANYA: The Charter of Fiscal Responsibility, to me - You know, colleagues, we are changing the budget cycle and we are moving away from the vote on account. The other day, we were having an issue on passing the taxation and appropriation. The timeframe imbedded here is to ensure that by 1st July, we have passed the budget and the budget is implemented in totality. Therefore, the issue of one month is very cardinal because after one month, there is the Budget Framework Paper and there is the issue of taxes and so forth.

Chairperson of the finance committee, if you start varying without being specific, we are going to face a problem by concluding the budget process by 1st July because fiscal responsibility is about taxation and revenue. Even for a government in the Opposition like FDC, if President Museveni quits power I am ready and capable of presenting a Charter of Fiscal Responsibility because we have a system that we are using to look for votes. It does not require the Government to change because the technical people are the same –(Interjections) - the good ones who are not thieves. (Laughter)- Yes, the thieves will have to go.

Some of this information is also public. While we are campaigning, we are saying, “This is going to be our tax regime”. Since we know that the law requires that one month after elections a Parliament is sworn, Government is formed, the charter must be presented, we shall be working behind the curtains preparing. That is how modern governments work. (Interruption)

MR KASULE: Hon. Ekanya, I know you are coming into government and I know you are anticipating leading government, but what we have said for the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility is that it can be brought not later than three months. So if you are so efficient, within one month you may lay your Charter of Fiscal Responsibility before Parliament and after Parliament has passed it, within one week it can be published, according to sub clause (6). So, there is no conflict.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, you have always complained here about policy statements coming late and now we are going to give 90 days. We shall have no means to create sanctions because we would have put a maximum of three months. If they have not elapsed, then there should be another action; you need to read the law in totality. That is why the strict timeframe of one month was avoided. 

Mr Chairman, you need to look at the law; there are dates and timelines. It is Parliament that is going to be stampeded. So, I want to request you, Mr Chairman, to reconsider your position and we stick to what is in the law. Our technical people are competent. 

Also, Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose some amendments on the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. Colleagues, you may not know, people are talking about oil revenue but the resources from the minerals in this country are more than the resources from the oil revenue. We need to separate this account.

Madam Chair, in Busoga alone, where there is no government programme, the biggest deposit of minerals, which can last for 200 million years, has been discovered in Mayuge; in Mayuge, which is your area. (Laughter)

So, I want to propose that when you are presenting fiscal balance, calculated without petroleum revenue, you also separate revenue from minerals so that we can monitor this sector seriously. Honourable minister, I thank you for your indulgence.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which sub clause is that? 

MR EKANYA: It is the clause on Charter of Fiscal Responsibility, sub clause (3)(b). We are only saying, “ensuring that the fiscal balance, calculated without petroleum revenues, is maintained at a sustainable level…” 

I would like to add, “ensuring that the fiscal balance, calculated without petroleum revenues and mineral revenues…”. Inside here, we shall then create a special fund where this mineral revenue is also managed separately.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chair, I think the honourable minister is trying to act prudently in his proposal, while the proposal by the committee is taking a soft stand, trying to create some laziness. We should maintain the proposal by the minister that one month is sufficient.

We want a government that is predictable to the masses, so we should not say, “not less than”. If he says one month, he knows he has competent staff. We are going into the era of IT; they already have a template. We have read ministerial policy statements before with changed figures; they feed in figures and change a few things. They are not going to change the entire charter. So, I think the one month period is sufficient.

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, the reason we later agreed with the committee to move it to three months is because after the elections, Parliament will set up its various committees and the Charter of Fiscal Responsibilities needs to be scrutinised by a committee of Parliament in order for it to be approved. So, we thought that within three months would be more realistic than what we had hitherto thought of - one month. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, to begin with, I think the committee is making some mistakes. First of all, they are talking of not later than three months and now he is saying not less than three years. When you elect a government, it is for five years. So, if you take three years, it will overlap into another government. So, we need to harmonise this; three plus three is six, and the term of Parliament and government is five years. That is why I want to agree with the Minister of Finance on their proposal of a five-year plan plus one month. Committees of Parliament have no reason to delay; they are always formed in time. 

It will be again incumbent upon us as Parliament to make a decision. If we delay, the Minister will have no problem and he will come and lay it on the Table within one month. If you are waiting for the committees to be formed, they will be formed but it will be Parliament which would have delayed but not the Minister of Finance. So, on that one, we should maintain the minister’s position. 

There is another issue which I want to raise. Maybe, we deal with that first before we can go to the next one.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are now debating on whether it should be one, two or three months and maybe without a scientific basis for this debate. I would suggest, as a middle position, that we retain the one month and provide for an extension of another month in case they fail, but the extension should be granted by Parliament. They can come and give reasons and we extend by another month. I think that is the middle way.  Otherwise, we do not have a scientific basis to settle for thirty or forty or ninety days; we do not have that. 

THE SPEAKER: I think “not less than three months” is also okay; it can be one, two or two and a half months so long as it is not three months.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, the problem is that if you are talking of not later than three months, even the technocrats will know that they have ninety days; they will be coming here on the 89th day. That is what happens often anyway; they come at the end. 

I would think the reason why we are reforming this law is to provide for a quicker budget system. We do not have to again enact clauses that might not facilitate that budget system.
 
MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. After due consideration, we agree with the foregoing contribution to retain it at one month with an option to extend for another month with the approval of Parliament. Thank you – (Interjections) - which sub-clause was that one?

THE SPEAKER: It was clause 6 (3)(b).

MS KIWANUKA: Madam Chair, I would suggest in sub-clause (3)(b), we just include “other finite natural resources” as we done in (c). This is in order to take care of the hard minerals. We can put in “other finite natural resources” as have done in (c). 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, can you comment on the three years vis-à-vis the five - the ones proposed by the committee?

MS KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, I am juggling with three documents; which sub-clause?

THE SPEAKER: It is clause 6(2)(a). It refers to a period of not less than five years but the Committee is suggesting three. What do you say about that?

MS KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, as envisaged, the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility comes straight after the elections, and it is a five-year cycle. That is why we have recommended five years, to cover the whole administrative period.

MR KASULE: Madam Chair, I just want to add some information to the Minister’s. We have re-drafted, as I read, and it is now (1)(a)(i), and it reads: “a statement indicating the measurable objectives for fiscal policy for a period not less than the next three financial years, which are consistent with the principles set out in section 5.” 

The Charter of Fiscal Responsibility is five years, but within it, indicating measurable objectives - They cannot be sure; these are indicators - measurable objectives for three years, which can change within the five years.

MR KATUNTU: I think the chairman needs to clarify to us the issue raised by hon. Nandala-Mafabi about over-lapping, so that we start planning for the next government and committing it. That is the question I would like you to clarify on.

MR KASULE: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi said that when a government comes into power - whichever government – it will set out a Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. There is no way they can over-lap into the next government, because the next government will also be planning. 

When the next government comes into power, it will just use the framework to give their objectives for the next five years. There is no way they would over-lap. Much as the activities will over-lap, they will begin on a fresh sheet and they will just use the Charter of Fiscal Responsibilities as a framework – (Interjections) 

MR EKANYA: Colleagues, the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility is about the tax system and revenue. We shall be looking at it annually and making changes because of inflation, disaster and so forth. So, there will be deviation, amendment or variation. 

Madam Chair, you had a point; on this document which the chairman seems to be using - chairman, it seems you have so many documents but from the you read, you said, “(2) The Government shall publish the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility and the Economic and Fiscal Update not less than three months after the approval by Parliament”. I think that is what, Madam Chair, you were talking about. That is in (2).

MR KASULE: In the re-drafted clause, we are saying in (2), under the headnote of “the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility, “The Government shall publish the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility and the Economic and Fiscal Update not less than three months after approval by Parliament.” 

So, Parliament will approve it and then the Government is supposed to publish it not less than three months later. So after Parliament has updated this, then they are given three months. However, if Parliament wants, we can say, “One month after approval by Parliament”. I the minister conceded on that matter.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question, that clause 6 be amended -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I have another amendment.

THE SPEAKER: On which one specifically?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: On clause 6(3) – “The Charter of Fiscal Responsibility shall be based on the following principles…” I do not think it shall be “based on the following principles”. It should state that the Government shall comply with it. I think I want to rephrase clause 6(3). 

It says that “The Charter of Fiscal Responsibility shall be based on the following principles…”  It should not now be based on the principles; it is now the Government to take charge because you will have dealt with the charter already. So we are saying, “The Government shall comply with the following fiscal responsibilities in respect of public finance”.

That is where I what to start from, because we have agreed that there is a Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. Now, having laid down the charter, the Government which is in power must follow the principles. That is what I propose.

I am saying that we re-draft sub clause (3) to read as follows: “The Government shall comply with the following fiscal responsibility principles in all aspects of public finance management: 
(a) there shall be openness and accountability, including public participation in financial matters…” The reason for this is that these are public finance matters.

“(b) The public finance management system shall promote an equitable society, and in particular-
(i) the burden of taxation shall be shared fairly;
(ii) revenue raised nationally shall be shared equitably;
(iii) expenditure shall promote the equitable development of the country, including by making special provision for marginalised groups and areas.

(c) The burdens and benefits of the use of resources and public borrowing shall be shared equitably between present and future generations…” This is to avoid borrowing money to disturb the future generation.
“(d) Public money shall be used in a prudent and responsible way; and 
(e) Financial management shall be responsible, and fiscal reporting shall be clear.” I propose.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you proposing a new addition or you are substituting?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is an addition. The reason is because the chairperson of the committee has shifted sub clause (3). If you look at clause 5, which we have just passed, most of the items under clause 6(3) have been moved to clause 5. 

Madam Chairperson, if you look at the amendment we passed in clause 5(2), it says, “The fiscal objectives shall be based on the following principles…” If you look through them, they include, maintenance of prudent and sustainable levels of public debt management; ensuring fiscal balance when calculated without petroleum, etc. 

Note that the chairman has shifted what was in clause 6(3) here to clause 5. What I am saying is that instead of us maintaining it here, we need to provide for how best the Government should be managing the fiscal responsibility.

MR KASULE: Madam Chair, I propose that we first pass what we proposed as a committee and then if he has any amendments, he reads all of them to them such that we can comprehend them. This is the first time I am hearing of them. We separated principles from objectives and he is saying that since we have put them in principles, we should also put them in objectives. 

Why don’t we first pass what has been amended by the committee as stated in the report and then he adds the other issue of equity, before we go to clause 7 where we shall deviate from the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have heard the proposals by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. What you have proposed is that we introduce a new section after clause 6.

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, what the hon. Nandala-Mafabi is raising is quite fundamental and we would need him to submit it to us so that we can be able to look at it in more detail – (Interjections) – Yes, we can stand over a clause. This is a very important Bill. Yes, it is necessary. 

He has read a number of things which we did not receive prior to this; he is just giving them now. So we accept them, but we will look at them first. So we will stand over this clause while he submits. However, we agree with the position that the committee has submitted because we had already looked at it. That is my plea, Madam Chairperson.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, I am in possession of the committee report and proposals contained therein. Some of the proposals, which the committee chairperson is giving, are from another document –(Interruption)

MR KASULE: This document is a working document, which is just mapping the amendments. It is the Bill but with the mapping of the amendments. So, that is why it looks different, in red, but it is the same document.

MR EKANYA: Hon. Omach, you seem to want to throw stones in the forest. The chairman and I had agreed - because the Speaker had given us this latitude - that when you are handling a Bill, you bring up anything so that we can move forward. Now when you bring up a new thing that hon. Nandala-Mafabi should first submit and yet we had agreed with the chairman and did mapping, harmonised, brought in amendments - This Bill has stayed with us since 2012 and new issues are coming up. So, we thought that in that good spirit, we would move on. But if now you are demanding members to bring their amendments to you, it is not in good spirit.

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, let me clarify again. When we finish with what has been proposed by the committee, then let hon. Nandala-Mafabi possibly raise each of these one by one so that we can internalise and respond to them accordingly. What he has read is really a litany and I could not write them down at the speed at which he was reading them -(Interjections)- I have a soft disk not a hard one.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, when we were here in the NRC, we used to submit written amendments so that members were able to look at them. Now, I heard many of the things he said but I do not remember them. So why don’t we suggest that you put them in writing but we reserve space for you to bring an additional clause. The clerk could assist you.

Let us deal with clause 6 (1) as amended and reserve space for a new clause to be introduced by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 6 be amended as proposed – (Interjections) – Is he dealing only with 6(1)? There was an amendment by hon. Ekanya in clause 6(3)(b) and there was an amendment by the chairman in clause 6(1).

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, are we adopting the entire clause 6 or only 6(1)?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yours and his. Okay, honourable members I put the question –

DR BARYOMUSI: Madam Chair, hon. Katuntu, introduced a middle ground, which we eventually took up, which is a departure from the chair’s proposal. Also, we were urging the chairman to abandon the issue of three years. The measureable objectives can still be five years and they can be evaluated along the way; so, there is no need for you to limit them to three years. I thought what we are passing will accommodate what we actually brought.

MR KASULE: Madam Chair, I have conceded on the five years; the minister had also conceded also.

MR EKANYA: Chairman, you have conceded, but kindly just clarify to me what Madam Chair said; there is the issue of three months in clause 6(1),(2) in the document you read and then in 6(6) it says, “The Minister shall within one week…” and yet up here it is talking of within three months. So, have you harmonised this? 

MR KASULE: Yes; we harmonised and agreed on one week after approval by Parliament for publishing; that is 6(6). In 6(2), we harmonised - “Government shall publish the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility and the Economic and Fiscal Update…” We harmonised this to one month extendable but approved by Parliament. That was the middle ground that somebody proposed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 6 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, are your proposals under the charter? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, they are under the charter.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, we shall leave provision for hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s proposals. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Chair.

Clause 7

MR KASULE: Clause 7 - “Deviations from the charter of fiscal objectives in exceptional circumstances”. The committee proposes that in sub-clause (2), we insert the words, “with the approval of Parliament” between the words, “the Minister may” and “deviate”. 

We also propose that we delete sub-clauses (3) and (4) in the Bill. 

The justification is that it would be prudent that since parliamentary approval is sought prior to the implementation of the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility, any deviation should be made after Parliament’s approval.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I have no objection to that but we should have started with sub-clause (1) because we are the ones who approved the charter. If you look at sub clause (1), it says, “The Minister may, in exceptional circumstances, with the approval of Cabinet…” Here, I propose that we delete “Cabinet” and put “Parliament” because we are the ones that approve. How do you go and sit with a few people who are at times worrisome and you change a whole fiscal charter which we agreed on here in Parliament?

So, on the first sub-clause, we should delete “Cabinet” and put “Parliament”. On the second one, I have no objection, Madam Chairperson.  

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, I do not agree with the position of the committee because this Charter of Fiscal Responsibility is based on a number of assumptions and deviations can come on some of these assumptions at very short notice. So, to be able to come again to Parliament, –(Interjections)- No! 

On issues dealing with inflation and force majeure, for example, it would not be appropriate for us to come and seek parliamentary approval first before we can really say that we make amendments to the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. So, we do not agree with the position that is given.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, the final approval is given by this House; so, how can a deviation now be made by another body?

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chair, of course, with much respect to the minister, it may just have a little time for the – One, this Parliament ordinarily sits for three days in a week. Two, the Speaker has the power to call Parliament even on a Sunday. If situations have arisen which the law defines as exceptional circumstances, Parliament may be summoned anytime to address the concerns of the minister.

Secondly, in the clause itself, or even under the interpretation clause, exceptional circumstances are not defined. It is just in the opinion of the minister.

Three, whenever we look at the minister, we are looking at Cabinet; we cannot divorce you from your own Cabinet. Any position that you are bringing to this House shall be a Cabinet position. So, we cannot provide that you consult Cabinet; you are part and parcel of Cabinet. Any business you bring to this House is Cabinet business.

So, the clause, as it is, is redundant, and the amendments of the committee make it better. Actually, Madam Chairperson, it sort of –(Interruption) 

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, the reason as to why that provision of Cabinet is there, to the best of my knowledge, - you will guide me because by age, you have seen more days – is because some of these ministers do not go to Cabinet to seek these detailed issues. That is why I think that it has now been their prudent way of management to say that there is need for collective responsibility, and ministers cannot stand here to say that this matter was not discussed. 

However, if it is mandatory, it even makes the technical staff prepare documents and share them within Cabinet. So do you think that it is really redundant; it helps Government? I am just seeking clarification.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chair, how does government work? All ministers are vested with Cabinet authority. There is no way a minister would come and say that this is the position of our ministry without reconciling with his colleagues. The technical people should be able to prepare papers for the ministers to take to Cabinet. That is how Cabinet ordinarily works. For us to start saying that the minister shall consult other ministers; are we going to have a Cabinet resolution to prove to us that there was a Cabinet consultation? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We have just passed clause 6; what did we do in clause 6? We removed from the minister the power to update the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility without the approval of Parliament. We are basically saying that you can update the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility, but do so only with parliamentary approval. 

We cannot now say, one clause later, “But you have the power to deviate from this without parliamentary approval but with the approval of your fellow delegates”. Ministers are simply delegates of the President. So, hon. Jachan Omach, we are saying that we do not intend to delegate our power to you. (Laughter)
 
MR OMACH: Madam Chair, they cannot all be backbenchers because they are full. (Laughter)

There are certain things that may happen which require the Executive to immediately handle if there are deviations. The Executive is expected to report to Parliament on such deviations within 30 days. These deviations could really come from exogenous factors.

We are therefore proposing that the Government may deviate from the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility on a temporary basis – (Interjections) - I am submitting; I have not finished. We are proposing that the Government may deviate from the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility on a temporary basis when such deviation is due to a major disaster, unanticipated severe economic shock or other significant unforeseen events that cannot be accommodated through employment of other flexibilities provided for in this Act or prudent fiscal policy adjustments.

Then two, we are also proposing that the Minister shall provide a report to Parliament stating the reasons for any deviation from the charter objectives, the plans to address the deviation and the expected time to achieve this.

Finally, we are proposing that the Minister shall provide the reports under this section to the Parliament within one month following the decision adopted by the Cabinet to deviate from the charter objectives.

Now, this is when there are exogenous factors, there are big factors that are beyond the control of the country and of Government.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know; where those are coming from? (Laughter) You are ambushing the House with your proposals.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chair, they are in 7 (2). Actually, 7 (2) defeats the argument of the Minister because that provision is saying that the deviation is on the objectives of the Charter, but we are going to create a contingency fund which you can use to fund some of the eventualities. 

However, if you are materially deviating from the charter, then you must come to Parliament. If there is a natural disaster, if there are economic shocks on international level, Parliament will be here. We are the ones approving the charter, so if there is a material deviation, you should come back to Parliament and we approve it. Why do you fear to come to Parliament?

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, if you are saying that you do not have the notes that I am referring to, maybe we will have to provide these notes to the House so that we move in tandem. There are exogenous factors that will definitely make it impossible for the Government to sustain the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. 

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chair, it would appear that my former neighbour across -(Laughter)- is proceeding from the way this particular Government operates, and I am getting a bit worried. You are talking about objectives of a charter - a promise that you have made on specific principles, which principles envisage all these matters we are talking about under clause 7 (2). Now, you want to throw away those specific objectives, do something that is definitely contrary to the same objectives and you want to justify deviating from the specific objectives of a contract you made with the people. What kind of Government will you be trying to portray - a government of liars or one that deals with matters on ad hoc basis? 

To me, Madam Chair, we should not in any way allow a responsible government - good enough, it may come – (Laughter) - to deviate from a Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. If you deviate from those objectives, then what are you really trying to show the people?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you know this is now very serious. If the charter is so important and can only be published after coming to Parliament, how can you then be given opportunity to just wake up and change it?

MR KASULE: Madam Chair, I think we should go systematically. We have said in clause 7, “deviations from objectives of the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility”; if we have agreed to put Parliament instead of Cabinet, then we continue down and give the reasons – (Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Chairman, it is only hon. Nandala-Mafabi, who was trying to amend to put in the issue of approval of Parliament, but some of us, even then, have issues with deviation in its entirety. Even then, the kind of grounds you are talking about for deviation – If you are talking of a contingency fund, what is a contingency fund for? Can’t it handle matters that will happen like the natural disasters, the anticipated severe economic shocks?

The whole essence of deviation is like saying, “Yes, we are going to con Ugandans”; we are saying that this is what we stand for but a week later, we are going to deviate and do something else.

MR KASULE: Honourable member, it is the committee which proposed to amend clause 7. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi just added to it. Clause 7(1): “The Minister may, in exceptional circumstances, with the approval of Cabinet, deviate from the objectives in the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility”. 

Then we went to sub clause (2) - “The Minister may…” - and the committee proposed that in sub clause (2) we insert the words, “with the approval of Parliament” between the words “The Minister may” and the word “deviate”. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chair, at first in my submission, I was reluctant about this principle of a charter and I was persuaded when it was said that whichever Government is in place, it has to be consistent with the charter and this charter must be strong enough to guide Government. It should be open, it should be clear. Ugandans should know we are moving from one principle to another. Having said that, with that high sounding promise, again you bring in an amendment that is to water down the essence of the charter; this is quite unfathomable. 

Two, if you look at 7 (2), it says, “…any other significant unforeseen event that cannot be funded from the Contingencies Fund, other funding mechanisms provided for in this Act, or using prudent fiscal policy adjustments.” What this intends to do, Madam Chair, is to encroach on the powers of Parliament in matters of appropriation, because if the appropriation cannot be contained within the contingencies fund, certainly he must come back and seek the approval of Parliament.

To that extent, therefore, we are saying, “Please, do not go any further than that”. You either want the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility or not; be clear. The moment we allow these amendments to come in, we would be watering down the essence of the charter and I can tell you that no other government shall comply with this. So let us be clear; we either want the charter or we do not want it. It is as simple as that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I propose that we adjourn now. Reflect on all these issues we have raised, - whether you want this deviation at all or we just want to amend - so that we can start off tomorrow. I think there are still some grey areas; what are the exceptional circumstances? 

I will ask the minister to move for the resumption of the House, then we can sleep on it and tomorrow we can come and tackle clause 7. Choose whether you want clause 7 at all or whether we want to define – 

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, before you adjourn – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I have asked the minister to move for the resumption of the House. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME
6.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMET (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Jachan Omach): Madam Chair, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
6.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMET (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Jachan Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Public Finance Bill, 2012” and has passed clauses 1 and 2, deleted clause 3, stood over clause 4, passed clauses 5 and 6, and clause 7 was stood over. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM 
THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMET (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Jachan Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)


THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you very much. We will resume tomorrow at 2 O’clock. House adjourned to 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.30 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 6 November 2014 at 2.00 p.m.)






