Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Wednesday, 13 November 2019

Parliament met at 3.13 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting.

Join me in welcoming the Speakers from the local governments and sub counties of Pakwach. You are most welcome. (Applause) They are represented by hon. Pacuto and hon. Ongiertho. They are here to observe the proceedings. 

I would like to update you on the issue of hon. Ngabirano. He is recovering steadily; thank you for your prayers.  I think later this week, he will be able to go home and be an outpatient. 

The third one is to do with the Parliamentary games. Our teams are training and we are the defending champions in the East African Parliamentary games. Therefore, it is important that we retain our title since we are going to host. 

I would like to encourage Members, especially the athletes; we have a shortage of activity in the athletes. We only have two gazelles running. Many of you, Members, are good at running. Please help us defend our victory of last year. The training takes place on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. Please go and participate. 

We also have residents of Mbuya I and Banda Sub-Parishes, Nakawa Division. They are represented by hon. Kabaziguruka and hon. Naggayi. You are welcome (Applause) 

Honourable members, I would like to give notice that the questions, which ought to have been answered last week, will be answered tomorrow. Please, ministers, do not disappear. Tomorrow, the first two hours are for answering Members’ questions. I know that you have them in advance. Let us have a few matters of national concern.

3.17
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi East County, Kakumiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The bridge on River Mpongo in Kisitwa Sub County that borders Kakumiro and Kyankwanzi Districts was washed away by the heavy rains a week back. As a result, a one Sulaiman Kafeero, aged 62, drowned while trying to cross to Kyankwanzi. That was on Monday evening and his body has not yet been retrieved. 

There are other bridges like the bridge on River Mabengere in Kisita Town Council and the bridge on River Masaija in Mwitanzige Sub-County and the culverts on the Katakemwa swamp in Kibito Sub-County on Nkooko-Kakumiro Road that have all been washed away and flooded. This has rendered the movement of goods and people impossible. I have contacted the UNRA office in Hoima several times but there is no response. 

I pray that Government takes up this matter urgently and fixes the bridges and repairs the roads, which have been severely affected by the heavy rains, to prevent the loss of more lives in my constituency of Bugangaizi East. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: I see the Minister of Works and Transport; I do not know whether she is taking note of the issues raised. Will you be able to respond next week, minister? 

3.18
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Ntege Azuba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was swamped with a lot of disaster where very many bridges have been affected all over the country. We have taken note of that. 

My condolences to the bereaved family of Mr Kafeero who drowned. The Uganda National Roads Authority and the Ministry of Works and Transport are putting together the bridges that have been affected. We are looking for supplementary budgets, which I think we shall get and be able to work on some of those roads. 

I, however, do not think we shall be able to handle all the bridges because every other day, we get a report of a collapsed bridge. We will start working on the bridges that are affected as soon as we get the supplementary budget. Thank you. 

3.20
MR KOMAKECH LYANDRO (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an urgent matter pertaining to the state of examinations in this country. 

You are aware that the senior six students continue to do their examinations, primary seven pupils and the senior fours have concluded. In all these, there have been a lot of challenges that continue to date. 

Many schools in this country have been barring students who have not completed payment of the school fees from doing the final examinations. This is a very serious matter and it is one of those that go beyond issues of just administration. It is a violation of fundamental rights of our children who should pursue education. I pray that the Minister of Education and Sports explains to the country why schools across the country are pursuing this act of impunity on citizens of this country that are supposed to run our future. 

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have just heard my colleagues give the two positions for those who have paid and those who have not paid. 

I think it is a culture that you are supposed to pay school fees. However, from what has been raised by my colleagues, I need to go and consult my colleagues and see if they have received any complaint of this nature and give a way forward. I cannot give an answer now. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there was something in the press yesterday. There were children actually crying in school uniform in Iganga, Top-something High School. They were on the headlines. They were senior six students that were barred from sitting for their exams. 

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give the minister is that Top Care School in Iganga District had students who were remaining with as low as Shs 50,000. These girls and boys were stopped from sitting UNEB Examinations and yet they were going to come back and pay when picking their results. 

There is a very big problem. It did not only happen in Iganga, there were some schools in my district as well as Tororo and all over the country where they blocked senior six students who had fees balances of as low as Shs 15,000 from sitting exams. I think the minister should give this Parliament an appropriate answer and we should take action to save Ugandans and prevent this from happening again in future. That is the information I wanted to give.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I hope you are now aware about the incident.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, as my colleague has said, we have got a body called the Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB). I have said that it is not about giving the answer but giving the facts about what is taking place. I promise that from here, I will summon some officials of UNEB so that I can give a clear answer to the House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I do not know whether my memory is accurate but I think there was a time the Government of Uganda issued an instruction that students should be allowed to sit for exams and pay fees balances later.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, I am aware of that and that is why I said that I am going to call UNEB and see why they are not implementing what was passed.

3.25
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a very serious matter regarding complaints from cotton farmers in Agago District. They have been complaining about the unfavourable prices of cotton. The part of the country where I come from relies on cotton. Whenever the farmers are being given cotton seeds, they are promised a lot of money. 

For instance, early this year when they were distributing seeds, they promised farmers that they would buy a kilogramme of cotton at Shs 2,000. However, as we speak, they are buying a kilogramme of cotton at Shs 1,300 and the middlemen are all over the district getting cotton. I would like to find out from the minister in charge whether the Cotton Development Organisation is really in charge of cotton prices. In addition, what is the actual price of cotton this year? Can someone come out from the organisation and tell us what the farm gate price is? 

Madam Speaker, we need an urgent answer.

THE SPEAKER: Is the minister here? She is not here. Okay, the minister should come and give us an answer next Tuesday – where is the minister?

3.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will have to find out the prices and come back. However, the Government does not set prices for the farmers. We give implements, seedlings and seeds. The prices cannot be determined by Government but they are determined by a lot of issues. Prices are determined by the international market – (Interjection) - this is a liberalised economy but we will get for you the exact answer on Tuesday, next week.

3.28
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Obongi): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of urgent national importance, particularly the problem of flooding in Obongi, which is affecting even the surrounding areas. The floods are due to the rains in Obongi and rivers bringing water from the highlands of Uganda’s borders with Congo and South Sudan, where streams feeding into the Nile bring water through Obongi. 

The other factor is the rising levels of River Nile. As a result, there is a problem with the ferry landing at the docking site due to the change in the water level. 

All the three roads to and from Obongi have been closed. We have refugees, who depend entirely on food brought by heavy trucks, as well the citizens who are starving. All the roads from Atiak to Adjumani, Adjumani to Obongi ferry and even the alternative road to Laropi through Laropi Ferry are affected. There are many vehicles stuck on the road. The road to Arua has been blocked.

Madam Speaker, there are homes that have been submerged and health centres and schools that have been closed. We have written to the Office of the Prime Minister and the details of the data written by the CAO for Obongi are there with the OPM.

I would like to draw the attention of the minister in charge of disaster preparedness as well as the minister in charge of works on the mitigation measures. There are certain things that need to be done to reduce the impact. The minister said something about shortage of resources but they could mobilise other departments to at least make sure that the roads are accessible so that even when there is relief or something coming from Government, the roads are passable. We need action immediately to have at least one road usable to supply the area.

There is also the problem of food, not only for today but in the long run, because the food in the garden – cassava tubers and all others – is rotting and the Government should be prepared for the famine. The issue of sanitation – shelter and houses – also needs to be addressed. The question of rehabilitation and restoration of the damaged areas may be where the minister is talking about a supplementary budget and this may be a long-term solution.

Above all, is the issue of prevention. Some of these floods can be prevented, particularly those which resulted from the silting of seasonal rivers, where the channels are blocked by siltation and they have to be removed so that water can follow its channels without branching to people’s homes. We have talked about this matter here. 

The minister in charge of disaster preparedness, please, help us prepare for these floods that are known in the areas of Teso and Obongi, where you know that the water coming from Karamoja will affect Teso and water coming from Koboko, Yumbe, Congo and South Sudan will pass through Obongi. If the siltation in the rivers is addressed, the water will just follow the channels of the river –

THE SPEAKER: Is that your prayer or are you lecturing the minister? (Laughter)

MR FUNGAROO: My prayer is that we should address the issue of the silted rivers.

THE SPEAKER: Can we hear from the minister in charge of disaster preparedness? I think the Minister of Works and Transport has already talked about the roads and bridges.

3.32
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Mr Hilary Onek): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank hon. Fungaroo for raising the issue. 

Unfortunately, the country is currently facing abnormal rainfall - which has never been experienced before. This is coupled with the total mismanagement of our natural environment, including people cultivating up to the river banks; so, the rain washes all the soils into the rivers, thereby silting the rivers. There is no proper supervision by the local governments to see that a buffer of at least 50 metres away from the river is left to natural growth so that the rivers do not get silted.

The floods have occasioned hunger. Unfortunately, whatever rice we recently got from our donors; Japan and China is running out of stock. We have sent rice to every district, 90 tonnes to some, depending on the size of what we were able to deliver. However, this is not sufficient because our population is big; 40 million people plus. We therefore need more. 

Regarding roads, we currently have an inter-ministerial committee, which is working out the technical solutions to some of these challenges. We have the Ministry of Works and Transport, Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the Ministry of Water and Environment, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Education and Sports, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Local Government, chaired by the Office of the Prime Minister.

Madam Speaker, we are trying to develop a comprehensive solution to the disaster currently affecting our country due to a change in climatic patterns. We are going to come with a complete technical report to the members of Parliament next week on Wednesday. 

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.34
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a matter of national importance concerning tobacco farmers in the whole of Bunyoro sub-region and Kyankwanzi in general.

We have raised similar complaints from Tobacco farmers here but this one has a new twist. Madam Speaker, there is a complaint about Alliance One Tobacco Uganda, which took over from British American Tobacco (BAT). At the beginning of every season, the company signs a Memorandum of Understanding with farmers. Tobacco is not like any other crop that you can sell to any market; you only sell it to a particular company that you have dealt with.

This company supplies farmers with fertilisers and other inputs at a loan. At the beginning of a season, they estimate that a farmer may produce a certain number of kilogrammes of tobacco. However, as a result of the good season and supply of fertilisers from the company, the gardens did very well this season and the farmers had a good harvest. 

Unfortunately, the company has only bought a certain amount of the tobacco that will cater for the loan and a little extra, leaving the rest of the tobacco with the farmers. As I talk, the farmers are stranded with tobacco and they are worried about where to put it. 

Madam Speaker, the prayer of the farmers is that Parliament compels the tobacco company to buy their produce because they entered an agreement with the farmers and the farmers have nowhere else to sell their tobacco. Therefore, I would like to request that the responsible minister compels the company to buy their produce because they cannot sell it anywhere else. 

THE SPEAKER: Does the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives have something to say about that? Hon. Gume -

3.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (COOPERATIVES)	 (Mr Frederick Gume Ngobi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We need to engage the tobacco farmers and the company in a discussion at our ministry so that we can come up with a conclusion that is workable to assist the farmers. I am therefore going to request my honourable colleague to get in touch with the farmers so that they come to our ministry and we dialogue. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kamusiime, please arrange so that you meet with the minister.  Hon. Buturo - (Mr Mwiru rose­_)

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, under normal circumstances, we have a Prime Minister in this House and we are dealing with an issue of policy. 

We have the Tobacco Control Act in place and we have famers engaging in tobacco farming. This is actually a very big problem. I think we need the intervention of the Prime Minister to state the position of Government as far as tobacco farming is concerned.

In my constituency, I have a tobacco company. I wrote you a brief, Madam Speaker, when we were opening that factory. Farmers are growing tobacco yet the law, as is, does not favour the operations of those farmers. Therefore, I wonder whether the Prime Minister could come with a statement to this House in order to give direction to the farmers so that they can diversify from growing tobacco instead of saying, “Come and we have an engagement to see whether people can buy your tobacco.”
I do not think Parliament can compel a company, which is in business, to buy.

Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence to request the Prime Minister to give the position of Government on that matter.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue raised by the honourable member is that the tobacco company gave fertilisers to the farmers so that they could produce. When they produced a lot, the company said, “We can only take so much, keep the rest.” That is the issue he raised.

MR ONZIMA: Madam Speaker, I had prepared to raise this issue, which has been raised by my honourable colleague. It is just that I travelled from my constituency this morning. 

The problem is that the tobacco companies do not honour the agreement signed between them and the farmers. They agreed to buy about 1,000 kilogrammes from particular farmers. However, after recovering their loans for fertilisers and other inputs, they did not buy the tobacco. That is the challenge.

Madam Speaker, this is a serious problem in the whole of West Nile. It is not about over production and therefore not buying. Rather, the issue is that the company does not buy what they had agreed to buy. They only buy from the farmers a quantity from which they can recover their loans. After recovering their loans in the form fertilisers and other inputs, they leave the farmers with the rest of the tobacco. That is the challenge.

THE SPEAKER: I think hon. Onzima and hon. Kamusiime should go and meet the minister because their issues are the same; the farmers produce a lot but only a little is bought. Kindly go to the minister and have a discussion with him. Later, we shall ask for a policy position from the Prime Minister. Hon. Mbwatekamwa, you have two minutes. 

3.40
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance concerning Marie Stopes Uganda.

Marie Stopes Uganda has been running the Reproductive Health Voucher Project. This project is funded by the World Bank through the Ministry of Health partners. The purpose of the project is to improve maternal mortality, reduce infant mortality and increase antenatal hospital attendance.

The project has been operating in several districts including Kamuli, Kiruhura, Ibanda, Sheema, Bushenyi, Iganga, among others. In this project, a mother is required to pay Shs 4,000 in any of the accredited hospitals. This money is supposed to cater for the mother to attend antenatal visits as well as a caesarean section operation, should the need arise.

Madam Speaker, as we talk, the Ministry of Health has refused to sign for - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Ministry of Health has refused to sign a document allowing the World Bank to renew that project and yet the World Bank has the money. Specifically, the honourable minister, Dr Ruth Achieng has refused to sign, for her own reasons.

My prayer is that the minister should explain on the Floor of this House why they have refused to sign to make sure that our mothers can benefit. 

Secondly, the Committee on Health should investigate because I am told that there was some disagreement between sharing of the money. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I see the Minister of Health; do you have anything to say about this issue?

3.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Madam Speaker, it is true Marie Stopes has been running that voucher project in selected districts and in areas where they were, there was an improvement in maternal health and reduction in maternal mortality.

However, I am aware that the project is ending this December and I am not privy to the document for renewal since it is specific, and he mentioned my colleague, Dr Jane Aceng. Allow me to inform her so that she can formally come and brief this House. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, can we receive an answer Thursday next week.

3.45
MR ABBOT OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. One of the areas I represent is called Hama Parish; it takes around three hours from Sigulu to Hama.

I was there last week and I found Hama hosting health workers, teachers and Uganda Revenue Authority. The teachers do not have staff quarters, Uganda Revenue Authority which is giving Government Shs 138 million yearly from Hama are sleeping in dilapidated houses.

They said that some of the ministers have taken years without going there. Hama Health Centre II has only one nurse and when he comes to the mainland, he takes another two weeks without going back.

My prayer is that communication is a problem. They do not have a mast and they told me that Government should ensure they get it so that they can communicate. Recently, they were almost attacked by Kenyans but they could not communicate this way.

I also pray the Ministry of Health ensures that they post health workers to Hama, which is very far away from other areas. 

The Uganda Revenue Authority - when I went to the police - these people live in caves. They do not have where to sleep and they told me that when Kenyan police come, they ask them whether they are really policemen. I wish that they travel there to see how these people are suffering.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Internal Affairs; do you have anything to say about policemen in the caves? And the other one was about no health workers and education.

3.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, the situation he has described is very bad and I promise that I will visit the area this week or next week and see how we can correct it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Health, there is only one nurse in the island.

3.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Madam Speaker, he is referring to a health centre II and Ministry of Health is not responsible for recruitment of staff in General Hospitals, health centres IVs, IIIs and IIs. Maybe we will help follow-up with the district.

It is the responsibility of the district to advertise and recruit staff for these lower health facilities because they are directly under them; so, the District Service Commission is supposed to undertake the recruitment but we can help to make a follow-up to ensure that the staff are available. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, you know that those are hard to reach areas I do not know whether they are very attractive.

MR OUMA: Madam Speaker, as you said, I would like you to look at Hama. We have a health centre III at Lolwe, which is being constructed; it takes three hours from Lolwe to Hama. Government should have special consideration especially for these hard to reach areas other than looking at the district. I would like the minister to go and assess the situation so that she can come with an answer.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, this is policy and we cannot shift from that but because sometimes the districts do not pay attention to certain areas; allow me to state that I am going to visit specifically those health facilities and interface with the district Local Government to ensure that they recruit staff for these facilities.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Waluswaka, leave that to the minister; he is going to handle.

3.48
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Sometime back, Government constructed Isimba Hydro Power Dam and on the day of commissioning it, we were there with the area MP, hon. Lugoloobi, among others. It rained heavily and terribly but we thank God we had elders around. Unfortunately, one of them, Budaghali, died only last week.

The contract for Isimba Dam was supposed to have a bridge to connect Kamuli and Kayunga but now, I think what they call the mafias have taken the money; the dam was commissioned but the bridge is not there.

When testing the new dam, the water thrust out and blew the ferry very far and the engineers from UNRA confirmed that it was by luck that the ferry got stuck on a stone. 

The issue I am raising is that when we go to Kamuli and Kayunga; we have relatives there and the villagers ask us about it. I would like the minister of energy and minerals and the Minister of Works and Transport to tell us why the bridge was not constructed according to the plan and contract and where did the money go?

A ferry is temporary but the money was passed by this House. Can the ministers explain? We are going for elections and the people will ask us - especially my chairman of the ruling party; how will he answer to the villagers? Can we get an answer from the minister? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can the minister of energy and the minister of works give us an update on the status of the bridge between Kayunga and Kamuli. By the way, at some stage, Shs 24 billion for that bridge had been eaten.

3.52
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Azuba): Madam Speaker, it is true that the bridge was supposed to be done at that point and when the dam was finished, we brought it up to the Ministry of Energy. They asked the Uganda National Roads Authority to do the design and they will come back with the funding so that it will still be under the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development.

I would like to request the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to expound further. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: They are not here. 

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter. The information the minister has given is extremely scanty. Honourable minister, since you are in charge of roads, do you want to tell us that now the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development is going to construct roads, yet the mandate of roads, given by this Parliament, is given only to you?

If you are shifting the roads to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, can you come and confirm whether the money is there because the allegations are that money was eaten? – (Interruption)

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague that at the time of construction of the dam, the design of the bridge was available. Therefore, when the minister comes here and tells us that they have sent it to UNRA for designs, my friend, I would like to inform you that the minister is not aware that the designs for that bridge existed. 

MR WALUSWAKA: Finally, Madam Speaker, usually, before a contract is signed, designs are already available. When the minister talks about design, honourable minister, if you do not know that the design is there, I will bring and give it to you because I have a copy. Even Uganda National Roads Authority is saying the mafias have eaten the money.

Since you have said that the energy minister will come here, it should be tomorrow because this is not only national but international. Thank you.

MS AZUBA: Madam Speaker, the funds – that is in response to hon. Waluswaka – are under the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. So, we will come in when the funds are given to the Ministry of Works and Transport. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have been following that matter for several months. The money - Shs 24 billion - was eaten in the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development.

3.55
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Madam Speaker, the matter on which I rise concerns lakes Kioga and Kwania, that have been on fishing holidays for close to eight months now. The people that I represent in Kioga and indeed the communities around these lakes Kioga and Kwania would like to get a commitment from Government on the real timeframe, when these lakes will be opened up to the public for undertaking sustainable fishing.

This will help to avoid suspicion as far as the timeframe of getting back to the lake is concerned and also help our people to prepare in good time to get back to the fishing expedition. 

Government had also committed to review the matter of the 28-foot boats which are too long, heavy and difficult to row using oars, using the National Fisheries Institute. The public wants to know the outcome of this review before they can start boat construction. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs to explain to us when the army will leave the waters there so that the people can fish?

3.57
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, it is - of course - in the interest of Government and indeed all Ugandans that fishing resumes so that Ugandans can have a livelihood and those who depend on fish for income can have income and Uganda as a country can resume the export of fish.

We are going back to the ministry, together with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, to assess the situation between now and end of this week. I will quickly give a way forward early next week.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I hope you are aware that this action has interfered with Article 40 of the Constitution on economic rights of the people. Fishing is their livelihood. For eight months, they have had no income yet that is their livelihood and for others, it is even longer. Therefore, next Tuesday, will you come with an answer? 

MR GUMISIRIZA: Madam Speaker, constitutionally, you are the third highest ranking officer in Uganda. You can get a phone and ring a President directly, unlike majority of us here. Therefore, when you make a statement, coming from a person of that standing, it is very serious. That Shs 24 billion gets stolen –(Interjections)– Whichever word you would like to use. 

I really got puzzled and listened in disbelief. Hon. Azuba, the Minister of Works and Transport says it is hon. Irene Muloni, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development. Madam Speaker, from your Chair, you seem to be having your facts on your fingertips that the money was eaten, chewed, stolen or whatever word. We gloss over it, ignore and keep quiet. 

A statement from the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda to say money is stolen for a project that is supposed to ease transport of this country is such a serious matter. (Applause) I would like us to summon hon. Irene Muloni and all the concerned people and delve into this matter. How can we?

The other day, money for Katosi Road disappeared and some guys who, allegedly, shared the money are in this House. How can we have a country like that? How can a Speaker – the third highest ranking officer in the country after the President and Vice President – say that money was eaten and we keep quiet?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have said I have been following this matter since March. I informed the President and even gave him the names of the “eaters.” I have been waiting for action; I have not seen it since March.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The bridge of Kayunga-Mbulamuti is not for the people in Kayunga and Mbulamuti or Busoga. We are putting the BKK ferry that is connecting that region to Busoga and Kampala. The access route, after using the ferry, would be that bridge.

Therefore, the few people that ate that money did not only punish people within that are but the entire nation. The procedural point is that you wrote to the President as a Speaker. We just would like to add our voice as Parliament, the institution that you lead, so that the President gets to know that it was not you as the Speaker alone but the whole institution that you lead that is making this statement.

Would it not be procedurally right that we take either a decision as a House or have a motion on the Floor so that that motion or decision that has the President to know that the institution is having this stand? Would it not be procedurally right to have the President to commit?

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Guma who –(Interjection)–  I am on procedure. Yes. Kindly sit down - (Laughter) - hon. Guma who stood up and came here with a matter that was almost diminishing from the House about your statement; that money was eaten and you repeated it.

I whispered to hon. Adolf Mwesige and said that this is serious. The Speaker is telling us that she has information that money was eaten; how can we leave this statement hanging. This is why I would like to thank hon. Guma and also thank hon. Waluswaka who raised the matter of the bridge as a very important matter.

I would like to propose that I table this concern from you and Parliament in Cabinet on Monday - where the chairperson is the President - because you have mentioned, in your statement, that you informed the President and I would like to tell the President in Cabinet that you informed him. (Interjection)- I am on procedure, please.

THE SPEAKER: Order. Allow the minister to speak and listen to one another.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA:  This matter concerns all -

THE SPEAKER: No, let the minister to finish.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: We have to discuss this and on Tuesday after Cabinet, the sector minister will have to come here and explain about the matter. I sit in Cabinet and I am a Member of Government; if money is eaten and we do not know who has eaten it, money is stolen by the unknown, it has an implication on all of us.

Therefore, I request that since you have raised the matter, can I move ahead and present the matter in Cabinet and then we move to the Floor of Parliament? This is the request from the Government Chief Whip.

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The matter you are raising is a criminality and the Chief Whip is right in saying the matter should be raised in Cabinet. However, if there is evidence that money was stolen, what is Cabinet going to do?

Madam Speaker, we are talking about crime. If people have eaten money, what we should be doing - now that the names are known - if for example the matter would be referred to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs committee and we become formal complainants before the Director of Public Prosecution (DPP), these names are known and clear; these people should be arraigned before the Anti-Corruption Court. Perhaps the President is still very busy. By the time he gets to look into this matter, perhaps some of the evidence has disappeared.

Madam Speaker, this is a matter that Parliament should directly call upon the DPP to intervene so that these people who actually ate this money can be prosecuted.

THE SPEAKER: We need a formal complaint before the DPP can take action.

4.08
MR JAMES NIRINGIYIMANA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I remember when hon. Abala moved a motion here on the Floor of Parliament to have parliamentary prayers and thanksgiving, that day, the Chief Whip and other Government leaders were here and you did mention one of the things that were affecting your health when you were going - and we praised God that brought you back because you were paying - the bridge is gone. The Chief Whip was there with all the Government leaders.

Madam Speaker, the Cabinet has been sitting since then. If it is in good faith that the Chief Whip wants to fight draught and especially that one in particular, in good faith - I am saying if it is in good faith - Allow me to –(Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, is hon. Niringiyimana in order to impute improper motives into my suggestion to mean that I could stand here and talk in bad faith? Is there any cause why I should stand here, an honourable Member of Parliament representing a district and the Government Chief Whip and dupe Parliament? Of course I stood in good faith and whatever I said was in good faith. Is he in order to impute?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, do you have any reason to impute improper motives on the minister?

MR NIRINGIYIMANA: Madam Speaker, I did not say that it is not in good faith. I said if it is in good faith and that is English - because she has mentioned that it is in good faith, I think that at that time, you would take it over as a concerned chief whip and table it in Cabinet. 

At this moment, we are talking about total graft and the siphoning of the money; the Government is going here left and right with impunity. It is this time that we applaud you for standing cardinally and stand out to say, “I said it to the President who is the chairperson of the Cabinet.”

It is this time that we need to protect Ugandans where the Government leaders are causing haulage of the national resources. I suggest that we devise means of solving this problem without going back to Cabinet because the Cabinet head was told; Government leaders were there when you were mentioning and I too was present. 

Now that hon. Waluswaka has failed to get any other opportunity, he has brought it up. I move that we get guided how to discipline the affected people without referring them to anywhere.

4.12
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality, Jinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are in difficult times; you know that this is not the first time that we are complaining that money has been stolen. You know for a fact that when it came to the construction of the Jinja Central Market, a whole floor was “eaten” and you complained about the same. I complained to the minister but nothing was done.

I would like to propose that this business of people in Government frustrating Government can only be curtailed by this House constituting a select committee to deal with this matter so that they come up with recommendations for us to act on. If we do not do that, this is going to be the practice in Government.

The President was in Jinja and the citizens informed him that the market was supposed to have three floors but only two were built. He launched the market himself. On further investigations, he realised that the same people in Government were the contractors of the market but nothing happened.

I had a discussion with the Minister for the Presidency but she did not do anything to help. For the market, the Auditor-General did an audit report on value for money in 2015. However, for this matter, we need a select committee to come up with particular observations and recommendations so that we act on them. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the minister wants to say something. 

4.14
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Azuba Ntege): Madam Speaker, I said that the designs were being done. A lot has been said about that bridge, which was part of the Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC) contract. When the dam was done and the road was not there, it was brought to the attention of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and the ministry is working together with UNRA. Right now, there is a contractor doing piling work, which is supposed to be part of the construction of the road.

Therefore, I would like to ask that we allow the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to make a statement before we take any further steps. Thank you.

4.15
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Regarding the proposal of the Government Chief Whip to take the matter before Cabinet, we have experienced very many grave issues before this Parliament. Taking those issues before the Cabinet is one of the ways of killing them.

The House should not accept that this matter be taken before Cabinet. Let Parliament do its work. We need a select committee so that we handle this issue conclusively. We have thieves who normally connive with their godfathers, some of who sit in the Cabinet. Therefore, whenever such issues reach Cabinet, they are silenced. Let Parliament handle this very important issue. (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, hon. Gilbert Olanya. Madam Speaker, the whistle blower who gave you that information knew the capacity of the institution you are leading. The information could have been given to the President, the Chief Justice, the DPP or other institutions. The person who gave you that information knows the legal mandate of Parliament. Accountability and holding others in check is one of the roles of this Parliament.

Therefore, for the very first time, I would like to agree with hon. Gilbert Olanya that Parliament should not only be seen to do its work but rather, it should actually do it. Thank you.

4.17
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have two issues; the bridge and the road. I went with the Parliamentary team to play football in Busoga. On my return, I got to know that I could not travel by the ferry because the bridge had broken down and yet, I had driven all the way to the bridge. This is a crisis.

The second issue is the money meant to have fixed that problem. My proposal is that we separate these two issues. We need a commitment from Government as to when they will fix the road and the bridge. We can then pursue those who “ate” the money, maybe through a select committee. If money was stolen long ago and Government has not taken action, you can understand the impatience of Parliament because if the Speaker informs Parliament that she spoke to the Chief Executive -

It appears the next option is to go to heaven since the President has not taken action to-date and my sister, the Chief Government Whip, says, “let me take back the matter to Cabinet, which he chairs.” 

Madam Speaker, my suggestion is that we separate this matter. We need commitment as to when this road and the bridge are going to be fixed. That is urgent and then, we can pursue those who “ate” the money. I have no problem with a select committee.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me give my ruling on how we are going to move tomorrow because we need a complainant and a formal motion. Let me do my ruling tomorrow. Thank you very much.

4.19
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter that needs urgent national attention concerning Katunguru Bridge on Kazinga Channel.

This road has developed a very big hole and vehicles cannot cross. I have seen a communication from Uganda National Roads Authority diverting vehicles not to use that road and to instead use other routes.

However, UNRA and the Ministry of Works and Transport have not given us the timeline as to when they are going to work on this road and when vehicles will begin using this road. Madam Speaker, could I get an explanation from the ministry?

4.20
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Azuba): Madam Speaker, our engineers have assured us that it will take six weeks. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Six weeks from now? Okay.

4.21
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a matter of great importance regarding the destruction of Manafwa Town Council Market.

On Tuesday night last week, Manafwa Town Council Market, which serves as the district market of Manafwa was burnt down. We do not know the cause of the fire but a lot of property was destroyed and it left many market vendors in tears.
I do not want to go into too many details but a lot of merchandise was destroyed ranging from iron sheets, saucepans and things that are sold and used in the market, especially in the restaurants.

My prayer is to request the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees not to behave like a minister of disaster unpreparedness to work fast to make sure that they come to the rescue of these market vendors who are in tears, yet they got loans. They are already being harassed by the loan officers who are asking for the repayment of the loans. 

The minister is here. We have written several times and he has never taken action. Can he assure this Parliament that he is going to do something because half the market was destroyed by the fire and people are in tears? I would like to get his assurance here because people have no recourse.    

4.23
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES)(Mr Hillary Onek): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees is in disaster of money. We do not have money for all these. The little that we have, we are trying to save the lives of the Bagisu who are under the rocks, which are about to collapse on them. We are soon going to relocate about 250 families away from the rocks so that they are not buried by the landslides. That is the little money that we have. 

However, if you appropriate more money for us, we shall build your markets. Please, give us more money in the next budget.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, at a different level, I think we would like to know the policy of supporting people in such a situation. Usually, when St Balikuddembe Market burns, big bags of money are carried very quickly. Napier Market has been burnt two times and no money was given. Other markets have got burnt but no money was given to them and I do not know who to ask. What do we do when citizens suffer in those circumstances? Where should they go?

MR ONEK: It is true that we have a number of numerous disasters, some of which we are not able to attend to due to the lack of resources. If you want our sympathy, we shall be there to sympathise. Otherwise, without the resources, what can we do? 

Madam Speaker, the resources are limited. Currently, we are meeting with all the nine ministries to develop a comprehensive plan so that every sector minister plays their role. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural matter I am trying to raise to the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees is that when an honourable Member of Parliament raises an issue, which needs an emergency; for example, food, they should have a courtesy of informing Members. What they normally do, they deliver a letter to the district and we know that the item should be delivered to the chief administrative officer. 

However, sometimes when the chief administrative officer fails to distribute them transparently, the blame comes to the Members. Recently, when you gave us assistance in one of the islands, which caught fire, I was out of the country and I was not informed. When I came back, there was a problem. 

My concern is that they should have courtesy of informing the honourable members of Parliament. I thank you.

4.27
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appeal to the Government to be sincere so that they tell the people that Government cannot do everything. I expected the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to inform this House that they are going to educate our people about the benefits of insurances. Government cannot build houses for everybody when their houses get burnt down. This has happened, Government will do. Government cannot do everything. They should take more responsibility in advising people in terms of the facilities, which are available.

I appeal to the Prime Minister to tell his ministers so that they tell the truth to the affected people; what can be done but not to pretend that they can do everything. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I hope they will do that. They should also not act in only one area. They rush to support in Kampala and money is sent. I have not heard anything being given to the other markets.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the colleague who brought up this issue. The issue of fire is very serious but before we speak of the effect of fire, where is the fire brigade department in all this? Manafwa is a district market and it burnt to ashes; there was nothing that they could do to put off the fire. I wonder whether it is not procedurally right that the ministry under which the fire brigade department falls comes and makes a statement. How could a district market burn to ashes and the minister is just here listening like a journalist in the gallery? When it comes to teargas, he is always on spot. It is important that he comes and makes a statement to that effect. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Sometime back, we asked the minister to tell us how he was going to support the country with fire brigade services. I do not know whether he ever came back to us. It was raised on the Floor. Honourable minister, do you remember? We would like to know how you are supporting the different regions with fire brigade trucks. 

4.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, I will bring to the House the stock of fire-fighting equipment under the department of police, which is responsible for fire control in the country. However, the problem is the lack of that equipment and resources.

You will then see the situation for yourselves; whether, if fire is in Manafwa and we have to get a truck from Jinja; whether we are doing that deliberately. 

4.30
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We were wondering whether some of us heard the minister very well. The minister said that the little money they are remaining with is for resettling the Bagisu and they no longer have any money to address any other disaster that may occur.  

The Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, which is there to prepare for any eventuality, a Member of Parliament is raising an issue about the market, which was burnt and people are suffering. The minister cannot give hope but to only say that our problem is lack of money. This means that we must find a way of solving any disaster that may strike ourselves.

This ministry is in the Prime Minister’s Office and this same office had the money to buy hoes for ministers to share but it could not have money to prepare for disaster. Madam Speaker, are we serious? Can the ministry work up a formula? Can the minister come back on the Floor and assure Ugandans that we are there to address a disaster that will happen instead of him telling us that the only little money they have is for Bududa and that they do not have money for any other disaster?

THE SPEAKER: What has happened to the contingency fund? 

4.32
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER, (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Mr Hillary Onek): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Byandala for bringing up the issue of insurance. I think that is the way to replace whatever losses one incurs in case of accidents or disaster.

Therefore, I would encourage the local governments with their markets to insure them. Besides, the local government collects dues from these markets; where does that money go? Why can’t they reserve that money to also rebuild the market if it gets into problems? I do not want us to labour in that area.
The Contingency Fund, which is under Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is also under strain. We are not the only ministry that uses that money. There are also other emergencies that depend on that money.

We have written to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give us Shs 18 billion to address these other disasters throughout the country. The country is very big and the remaining money is little. We are waiting to get that money. If it comes, then we shall address some of these small disaster related problems. 

Madam Speaker, whatever concerns other sectors, I have already mentioned to you that we have inter-ministerial sector committees whereby we are going to act jointly as Government to address disasters. We shall come up next week with a complete report for Parliament to help us address some of these issues. Thank you. 

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. While the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees is saying that they do not have the money, as Members have said, can’t you give hope? 

Secondly, the Minister for the Presidency is here. We have always seen markets, like Mbale and others that were burnt down and the President rushed there. Can the Minister for the Presidency ask the President to also help the people of Manafwa? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I am glad the minister is here. I hope she can cause the President to rush to Manafwa and support them and give them hope. 

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a matter of procedural guidance.  Two weeks ago, on the Floor of this House, we debated immensely on matters of Makerere University and you directed the Committee on Education and Sports to investigate and report on the 13th   of November. That is today. 

The media is awash with information relating to the meeting of the ruling party caucus that sat and resolved this matter. Of course, I am not oblivious of the fact that they have every right to sit. However, my concern is that in this particular caucus, there are members of this committee that the House mandated to investigate and report; they were part of the resolution to water down the report of the committee. 

I am aware that caucuses can sit but on a matter that the House has resolved and mandated a committee to report, wouldn’t this kind of arrangement render the works of the committee nugatory in view of the controversies and duties of Parliament and the spirit of separation of powers? I need your guidance, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, of course, I do not attend those caucuses but I read somewhere that some members of this House had taken a position in that meeting. Then I also heard that they had taken a position against some matters, which are before this House. 

I would like to caution Members: when we enacted the Administration of Parliament Act, we wanted to be free from the Executive but Members are lifting issues here and going there to agree with the Executive to undermine this institution. 

4.38
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Mpuuga for raising this matter. I think the Government Chief Whip can help. There are matters that are under consideration but there are also matters where Parliament has made a decision. 

On the matters of Makerere University, Parliament made a decision and then, we read that that resolution you made overturned the decision of Parliament. Members sat here and made a decision and then went and sat somewhere else and rescinded the decision they made. Can the Government Chief Whip help us understand if there is any other platform that can rescind decisions of Parliament just like that? 

4.39
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, the office of the Government Chief Whip is created by law and the functions are known. 

I am supposed to whip my Members so that we agree on how to move. Once we sit in my caucus and we take a position, that is what we make sure that we support. This caucus has rules that guide it. 

On the issue of the Administration of Parliament Act, the caucus which sat some months ago in Kampala had taken a decision and my role on Monday was to remind them of the decision we had taken. I wanted to know whether they had rescinded that decision. That is the only issue. 

On education, the Minister of Education and Sports had to offer further clarification so that we move together. When I say “we” I mean the NRM Members of Parliament. We are in a multi-party political dispensation. You do not just come to the House without caucusing and organising. (Interruption) 

MR MBAYO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Interruption) 

MS NANKABIRWA: I do not know which rule I broke. It may be through ignorance. May I be reminded of –(Interruption) 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The point of order I am raising is that yesterday, we followed, on NTV, two NRM Members of Parliament talking boldly, explaining what the NRM caucus had agreed upon. 

They informed Ugandans clearly that the caucus resolved that the 15 per cent on fees increment at Makerere must remain. 

Secondly, they also informed Ugandans that the caucus resolved on some critical issues that the Bills before the House should be abolished. We all watched it on NTV. 

Is the Government Chief Whip in order to tell lies before the House that the caucus sat some one month ago and yesterday, they were just reminding the members, yet, the members were very clear in the media?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I said, I do not attend those caucuses but I just want to reiterate; stop undermining Parliament. Stop undermining the institution of Parliament. (Applause)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE PRESIDENTIAL PLEDGE TO PROVIDE SANITARY PADS TO GIRL STUDENTS

4.43
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PRESIDENCY) (Ms Esther Mbayo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This ministerial statement arises from the issue of national importance raised by hon. Cecilia Ogwal on 8 August, 2019 and the resultant ruling in which the Speaker directed my ministry to update the House on the implementation status of the presidential pledge to provide sanitary pads to school-going girl-children. It is for this reason that I stand to present a statement to this august House touching on: a brief introduction and background; implementation status of the presidential pledge to provide free sanitary pads to school-going girl-children; challenges encountered so far, and; the proposed way forward. 

Introduction

Madam Speaker, the NRM Manifesto 2016-2021 under Chapter 11 – Human Capital Development, specifically paragraph 11.3.1 (k) – committed to providing free sanitary pads to address the school dropout rates for girls. Owing to the fact that implementation of presidential pledges has been mainstreamed into sectoral budgets in which specific pledges fall, I am glad to report that this statement was prepared in close consultation with the Ministry of Education and Sports. 

Suffice to note, Article 99 of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, as amended, vests all the executive authority in the President whose mandate enjoins him to, among others, abide by, uphold, safeguard the Constitution and laws of Uganda and promote the welfare of the citizens, who include girl-children.

Therefore, the manifesto commitment to provide sanitary pads to school girls is hinged upon the President's constitutional duty to promote the welfare of the citizens, especially school-going girls who are most vulnerable to dropping out of school due to menstrual-related challenges. 

Background

Madam Speaker, whereas the education sector has registered significant progress in increasing enrollment of both girls and boys at all levels during the last 10 years, challenges still remain in improving other education outcomes such as retention, transition and performance, especially among adolescent girls (Education Management Information System (EMIS), 2017). The dropout rate among girls remains higher compared to that of boys, especially in upper primary (P5-P7) and among lower secondary (S.1-S.3) particularly in rural and hard-to-reach areas. 

Most schools lack supportive infrastructure and facilities such as clean latrines, changing rooms, waste disposal facilities, water and soap for washing proper and hygienic sanitary wear (pants and towels) to support adolescent girls to effectively manage their menstrual cycles and related challenges. 

Consequently, most adolescent girls are forced to resort to unhygienic substitutes such as rags, pieces of foam mattress, toilet paper or banana fibres for menstrual management, which causes considerable health risks and absenteeism. A study by International Rescue Committee (2012) estimates that one in 10 menstruating girls skips school four to five days per month or completely drops out. A girl absent from school due to menstruation for four days of every 28-day cycle loses 13 learning days, the equivalent of two weeks of learning and 104 hours of school every school term. 

Around 23 per cent of adolescent girls in the age group 12-18, drop out of school after beginning menstruation. This implies that girls without proper sanitary wear may miss up to eight days of study per term due to menstruation. On average, there are 220 learning days a year. Therefore, missing 24 days a year translates to 11 per cent of the time a girl-pupil will miss learning due to menstrual periods.

Implementation status of the presidential pledge to provide free sanitary pads to school going girl children
Madam Speaker, it is against the above background that the Government, through the Ministry of Education and Sports has undertaken a number of interventions and initiatives to make the management of menstruation easy for adolescent girls. These include the following; 

    1. In 2015, the Ministry of Education and Sports sent out Circular No. 01/2015 to all schools and institutions on the management of menstruation in schools. Among other things, the circular stipulates that schools should provide emergency sanitary pads to girls who undergo menstruation while at school. 

    2. The Government, through the Ministry of Education and Sports has prioritised a number of interventions at the national, district and school levels. Key among these are;
a) 	Construction and provision of gender-responsive water, sanitation and hygiene facilities (WASH) that is, latrines, bathrooms, changing rooms and hand-washing facilities. These are very critical in the management of menstruation. 
b) 	Development of age-appropriate information packages in form of readers, animation videos and radio spot messages on proper menstrual hygiene management. A number of studies indicate that lack of knowledge on menstruation has far-reaching implications for adolescent girls and women globally. 
c) 	Training of learners in making re-usable pads using locally available materials.
d) 	Building the capacity of our teachers, especially senior female and male teachers, to support girls to manage the physical and psycho-social changes associated with menstruation.
e) 	Raising community awareness on the importance of girls’ education and provision of basic requirements to girls such as sanitary pads.

3. 	The Ministry of Education and Sports is also working with a number of Civil Society Organisations through the National Coalition on Menstrual Hygiene Management (MHM) to pilot interventions on providing sanitary pads to girls in a number of districts in the country. Such organisations include Afri-pads, Uganda Red Cross, Eco-pads, Fields of Life and Plan International. We hope to learn from these initiatives as we mobilise resources to scale up interventions to all schools in Uganda in the future.

Challenges 

Madam Speaker, although a commitment was made by the Government of Uganda to provide sanitary pads to all girls in schools, the sector still has challenges in fully realising this commitment. These include the following:

    a) Inadequate Resources

	This is mainly because of the dwindling budget to the education sector for the last three years. The sector is, however, working with a number of partners through the National Coalition on Menstrual Hygiene Management to pilot interventions for purposes of learning from the pilots and for future adoption.

    b) Inadequate parental support

	The Education Act, 2008 empowers all parents to provide basic requirements to their children as they come to school. However, many parents have not taken menstrual hygiene products as a basic requirement for their daughters. The sector is, therefore, concentrating on efforts to create awareness about the importance of providing basic requirements through community sensitisation and dialogue.

Proposed Way forward

Madam Speaker, in light of the above situation, I wish to propose that:

    1. Parliament, through the Committee on Budget, using its powers to appropriate, allocates a specific recurrent budget to the education sector for the provision of sanitary pads for adolescent girls in schools;
    2. Parliament supports the education sector in its efforts to advocate for tax exemption on sanitary products to reduce on the costs and make them affordable to the most marginalised girls and women;
    3. There is need to develop a national action plan for menstrual hygiene management to support resource mobilisation, collaboration and monitoring and evaluation of progress;
    4. The Ministry of Education and Sports and Parliament should benchmark with other countries that have made progress in providing sanitary towels to girls in schools. This will help in identifying strategies that are cost effective and adaptable to our setting.

Conclusion

Madam Speaker, I wish to reiterate that although sanitary pads are a basic requirement for proper menstrual hygiene management, there is need to holistically address all the components for proper menstruation management. These components include sanitary hygiene materials, clean toilets, hand washing, puberty education, pain mitigation, senior male and female teachers, inclusion of boys and men, support at home and de-stigmatisation.

Indeed, the education sector has made commendable progress in these areas. However, funding for this initiative remains a major hurdle towards full implementation of the presidential pledge to offer free sanitary pads to all our deserving girls in school. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I would like to note that this House already worked on the issue of tax exemption, I think as far back as the Seventh Parliament. If it is not being implemented, we should check. Otherwise, we removed these taxes sometime back. We need to check whether it is being implemented or not. Hon. Ruhunda, do you want to say something? Who raised this question? 

4.58
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam speaker. While I was listening to the ministerial statement, I got worried because it was almost like a petition by someone coming from a powerless environment and appealing to Parliament when actually, she sits in Cabinet. She has the technical staff and apparatus to get facts and cause the Government to act. Therefore, when I see this statement, I get very worried.

That aside, I have been pondering because wherever I move in the premises of Parliament, I find free condoms in the toilets even when we have not asked for them. How come preference has been given to condoms and not pads? I cannot comprehend what type of people are here. Is it the masculine? Are we just having patriarchs who are in charge of decision making and budgeting so that they have no sense of understanding the needs of the girl child? I cannot really understand this.

Madam Speaker, we have many female members of Parliament. For all this time, we have not been fighting for the girl child. You were part of these girls and you went through the whole experience. Why can’t there be some –(Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, you have been at the forefront of fighting for the girl child and you are a woman member of Parliament for Kamuli. I know that there are other women members of Parliament who have been fighting. Therefore, is the Member in order to mislead the country that the women members of Parliament just sit here without putting any effort to help their daughters and sisters?

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, you are out of order. (Laughter) Many Members and I have travelled to many parts of this country distributing sanitary towels. However, I wanted to answer one of your questions about patriarchy.

Within the Uganda Prisons Service, until this House put its foot down, we were budgeting for razorblades for the men to shave in the prisons but they were not budgeting for sanitary towels. I think it is a mind-set issue.

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, I withdraw my statement. I just wanted to provoke the women members of Parliament but I withdraw the statement.

Madam Speaker, benchmarking for such a matter is uncalled for and I think we can solve this matter if we put our minds to it.

I urge the members of Parliament that this time round, in the budget, let all of us stand together to make sure that the issue of pads is done once and for all. 

THE SPEAKER: Can I also remind Members that the battle for sanitary towels started in the National Resistance Council and we were defeated.

5.02
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for attempting to answer this problem of sanitary towels for all girl children. I did not expect the minister to come with the kind of answer, which she has just read to the House. 

I wanted her to be aware that we are allies in ensuring that the girl child gets sanitary pads.  Therefore, she should have come with a specific request that is relevant for Parliament to handle. 

She has quoted correctly Article 99 of the Constitution that gives all the powers to the President. She should have said that the President had looked round and has proposed that this amount should be given; and Parliament would take it over from there.

The role of Parliament is to appropriate and we cannot appropriate from nowhere. Can the Government come up with a well-documented, well-defined, well-planned and costed programme, which will stretch over some period, maybe, to help cater for sanitary towels? Then we can decide where we should start from and how far we can go, just as we did with Universal Primary Education (UPE).

The moment we agreed on UPE, it means that nobody should be left behind. Right now, by denying the girl child sanitary towels, we have left them behind in the UPE programme.

I think the minister has not answered accurately, as I was anticipating the Government to do. I am still asking the minister to go back and collaborate with the Ministry of Education and Sports and come back to Parliament. I hope in the next budget, you will give us how much it will require for us in the first year, second year and so on. That way, from next financial year, the girl child should be kept in school.

We need a record of how we have improved on the participation of girls as a result of supplying sanitary towels. That way, we will know that as a Parliament, we have contributed positively to girl child education. Thank you.

5.05
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Without any prejudice, if this question was to be awarded marks, based on whether the student has passed or failed, with due respect, the minister would have failed the question.

Probably, I wish you would set your own question to find out what the country would have wished to achieve in the direction of improving the sanitary conditions in schools for our girls. There you would have scored some marks.

The question that is before us and the response that the minister attempted to give, especially hinging on the very tight budget ceiling under Ministry of Education and Sports are not satisfactory.

The minister is aware of the fact that Article 93 of the Constitution gives authority to the Executive. It is in the Executive that should decide the ceilings for ministries, not Parliament. Much as members of Parliament are mandated to appropriate, we do very little without the consent and nod of the front bench.

Therefore, you need to go back as the Executive and if you know that this was a pledge that you made three years ago and this is the fourth year - 2021 is coming and I do not know what the Chief Executive will report to Ugandans by way of what he has achieved on what he pledged to do for this country.

How I wish even with the little money that goes into the ministries that you created a budget line and you were here reporting to us that during the last three years, we were able to provide 1,000 sanitary pads. That would be more convincing than for you to come here without distinct answers.

What you have reported about is the mobilisation you have done with the international community and NGOs; that is normal. However, you cannot take credit for that because you have committed yourselves as Government of Uganda to provide sanitary pads and therefore, the audacity that you need to put your money where your mouth is should have applied.

You should have prioritised this activity. If this activity was a priority to you, as tear gas is, I am sure you would have done something, however, small.

Since it was not a priority to you, have you, therefore, given it up that teachers must go and ensure that there are water tanks for children? Water in itself is not a replacement of a sanitary pad.

You need to be more committed to the course that you stood for and that way, we will take it that His Excellency the President has lived up to his commitment. Of course, for me as a person from the Opposition, it will be a credit when I come out in 2021 to say that you promised to do this but you did not do it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I hope the minister will be able to tell us. circular No.1 of 2015 where schools were supposed to provide emergency sanitary pads - do they have a budget for that? 

5.09
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleagues in thanking the minister for attempting to come up with a statement. This pledge was made in Lira during the campaigns.

The President is a fountain the of honour and I would like to inform the minister that by the time the President comes up with a pledge like this, touching the girl child, it could have been prudent for the minister to do everything possible to make sure that this pledge is accomplished.

When you look at the statement given by the minister, 11 per cent of the girls are school drop outs. This is not a small number. It is disturbing for the minister to say that they will go and benchmark.

Honourable minister, you have all the technical support. This was a presidential pledge but you are telling us that you do not have the capacity and yet, we even have sustainable goal No.4 and No.5 talking about gender equity and education.

When are you going to accomplish this? If you want to go - by the way, how many countries do you want to benchmark and how much money will you use to go and benchmark before you consider the girl child?

The minister made mention of Parliament to come and help; come up with a figure –(Member timed out.)

5.11
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I can only thank the honourable minister for the information on the implications of lack of proper sanitation for our girls. Thank you for giving us that information.

However, I am deeply disappointed because honourable minister, you are not differentiating two things. Holistic management of menstruation is different from provision of sanitary pads. These are two different things. The presidential pledge was specific: ”If you vote me into power again, I will make sure that school girls get sanitary pads.”

I have listened to the minister’s statement. We are telling the schools to provide them. Is that the pledge? We are, therefore, disappointed that parents are not well sensitised. We are going to sensitise the parents. Will that result into the pledge?

We are now telling civil society and Red Cross to help us. Was that the pledge, honourable minister? We are telling the schools to construct water sources and toilets. Was that the pledge of His Excellency the President? Colleagues, don’t we see a diversion? My disappointment is honourable ministers letting down the President. You are now throwing it back to Parliament; that Parliament should identify a specific budget for this purpose; really?

I wish somebody would come here and tell us, “We have 100,000 girls and each girl requires two thousand shillings. (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Please, use half a minute to conclude.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am told it is Shs 1,000 times two or three times a year, which is four billion shillings. Are we failing this as a country? 

Hon. Ruhunda, I do not agree with you on this one. You are saying that we should wait for next year’s budget and then, we agree. We are talking of a matter, which is happening now. We are talking of every month. I do not see why we talk about supplementary budget for hoes and roads and yet, we fail on our girls.

Therefore, I would like to make an honest request that immediately, the minister presents a well-made paper with a budget request for this purpose and Parliament provides it. This one should not go into next year’s budget, Madam Speaker. This is very urgent and it is for now.

5.14
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for attempting to give us a statement.  I am surprised that she is giving us statistics of how many of these girls have dropped out. These are statistics we already know. That is the concern. This is what gave rise to the question that was raised by hon. Cecilia Ogwal.

However, it is as if this statement was initiated by the ministry, which was not the case. It is Parliament, which initiated it and what we wanted to know was what Government has done in ensuring that the pledge is fulfilled.

You highlighted the challenges but they are weak strategies in addressing those challenges. I would like to agree with hon. Magyezi that this is an urgent matter that we can deal with because the funds we are talking about are not much.

I recognise the need to involve the parents and ensure that they own up this process and help the girls, even if Government gives the sanitary pads. We even know that as a ministry, you have a sex education framework in which you have included the element of the parents. However, you have not included it in this statement. Therefore, can you tell us what it is you are doing to ensure that you raise awareness amongst the parents so that they can prepare our girls?

It is not a matter of just getting pads and throwing them at the girls but have the parents talked to these girls? Have they prepared them so that they are able to –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MS KAMATEEKA: It is very important to ensure that we raise household incomes so that these parents are able to provide the children with sanitary pads.

On the reusable pads, I think for as long as there is no sensitisation, they are very dangerous. Are we sure that the girls know how to wash them? Do they have soap? I hear they are not supposed to be dried in the sun. How have we prepared them to use these reusable pads? We need a better response from the ministry. Thank you.

5.17
MS MOURINE OSORU (NRM, Woman Representative, Arua): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the opportunity you have given me. We come from rural-based districts. The honourable minister has attempted to present a report, which we have all heard. To me, the report that the honourable minister has presented here is disappointing.

You needed to see the crowd when His Excellency promised to provide sanitary towels for the girl-child. The women were very excited, including their daughters. Even up to today, they still ask the leaders about the President’s promise to provide their daughters with sanitary towels. How far have you gone? We, their leaders, get defeated in answering this kind of question.

The honourable minister mentioned that they are going to collaborate with schools. Schools are going to support the Ministry of Education and Sports by providing sanitary towels. Where is the budget? This was a presidential pledge, not for schools. Honourable minister, you need to clarify this. 

More so, how can you convince the country that we are going to benchmark? Even the money you are using for the trip could have already bought sanitary towels for the girl-child. What are you going to benchmark; in what and for what? (Laughter) We are all ladies here but in this kind of situation, there is benchmarking? The minister needs to come back to this House –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute for the young people.

MS OSORU: Thank you. The minister should come up with a comprehensive report. I think, honourable minister, you were not prepared when you came for this statement that you are giving us here. 

In most districts, our mothers struggle. Some of them even eat one meal a day and the President has pledged that he is going to help them. Why doesn’t the Minister of the Presidency first go back to His Excellency and sit down with him and remind him about his promise to the people?

5.20
MS LILLIAN NAKATE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I am actually very disappointed because I have seen you referring to a number of circulars like the one four years ago in 2015; when they said you should provide emergency sanitary pads. Are you sure this is happening? We come from rural places but there is no budget that was actually attached to that. These emergency sanitary towels are not there.

Even then, when it is provided to a girl, she will only get a pad for those few days but she will not come back for the rest of the three or four days in the week. So, are we still curing that?

Madam Speaker, I also would like to address the concern of the budget that we are trying to come up with. I would like to urge the minister to come up with something sustainable. Are we going to provide the sanitary pads forever? In my opinion, maybe at some point in future the budget should come down. Can the Government come up with a factory, other than appropriating money year in, year out for the sanitary pads? In your long-term plan, as we try to curb this vice, we should find a way of bringing down the budget but at the same time do something that is sustainable.

Madam Speaker, I would like to end by talking about the infrastructure. The minister alluded to the issue of friendly infrastructure in schools but even up to now, through the SFG programme, they are still constructing pit latrines that are not friendly. It even becomes worse when you meet a disabled girl who cannot even ride on a ramp to get to a toilet or clean herself. Many latrines are being constructed without even wash areas. The Ministry of Education and Sports is still constructing and sending our monies to construct those schools –(Member timed out.)

5.22
MR MICHAEL AYEPA (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to express my disappointment regarding the report of the minister. It is now almost four years down the road. By this time, we should be speaking about the impact of sanitary pads on the performance of the girl child and not here lamenting that we have not found money for the sanitary pads.

Madam Speaker, the President makes pledges, which should be aligned to the budgets of the line ministries, if that is where they get the money to fulfil those pledges. The question is: Who was supposed to align this pledge of sanitary pads with the budget of the ministry? There is something called the Presidential Advisory Committee on Budget (PACOB) and there are other budgetary groups in this country; why didn’t they think of aligning this pledge with the Ministry of Education and Sports’ budget before?

I see the Minister of Health here; I do not know whether the Minister of Health has nothing to do with aligning the presidential pledge on sanitary pads to their budget too. She is only talking about Ministry of Education and Sports; what about the Ministry of Health? Something should also be taken to the Ministry of Health for the schools sanitary pads budget.

Madam Speaker, regarding the issue of the budget, it is wrong for the minister to blame Parliament. For these four years, I have never seen a budget of the Ministry of Education and Sports that included a budget for sanitary pads and Parliament rejected it. They have not included it there. It is you to include it in the budget of the Ministry of Education and Sports and then you bring it here, but you have never done it –(Member timed out.)

5.24
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Time and again, we have seen you single-handedly come up and fight to make sure the girl child lives a better life and enjoys education like others. There are also several women in this country that have struggled to make sure the girl child enjoys education like others. 

Madam Speaker, one of the major factors causing the high rate of school dropouts of these girls is lack of sanitary pads. In the villages where we come from, for example Bugabula, the poverty that is reigning there is causing disaster. For some of these parents, when the child has not gone to school, possibly they take advantage and the child will be at home looking after this and the other. The child may not tell the parent why she has not gone to school but it may be simply because the day before when she was at school and she experienced that, she became a laughing stock. People laughed at her and when she goes back to school after some days, she is ashamed. Eventually, she will drop out of school.

As Government, we should stop lamenting. When we want to provide mosquito nets, we shall wake up with a programme and provide mosquito nets. When we have the other thing, people will come up with programmes and they will be there. These programmes where people have interest are championed and money is provided. Programmes where people have less interest are not championed and they will say that money is not there.

Madam Speaker, as Parliament, we must –(Member timed out.)

5.27
MR SOLOMON SILWANYI (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I would like to add my voice to that of other honourable members. However, before I do that, I would like to thank you for the effort you have put, especially in Busoga where –(Interjection)– No, I am going to talk about Busoga specifically today because you have supported the girl child very much. As leaders of Busoga, we are very grateful. In our language, they say that where it rains, a child says “it rained at our place”. Therefore, that is what I will talk about. 

Madam Speaker, as we speak now, in Uganda there are reusable sanitary pads. Let us sit as Parliament and appropriate the budget. Even the minister who is presenting all this, I see her struggling in her constituency to distribute pads using her few resources. I have seen her making attempts in Luuka to buy and distribute pads. Why don’t we sit as Parliament and come up with a budget – even if we bring a supplementary - and we call off this issue? This is not a lot of money as compared to other supplementary budgets that we bring here for things that are not even going to work out. Let us sit as Parliament and agree to bring a supplementary budget - it could be tomorrow or next week - then we come up with the money and buy sanitary pads for our girls.

My stand is that let everyone stand up and we buy sanitary pads for our girls. By the way, some of us have only girls as our children and this issue touches us when we are talking about sanitary pads. Let us handle this as an emergency and we appropriate money to buy pads –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the idea is good. However, we need to see how we can circumvent Article 93 of the Constitution. Who will be the mover? Who is the main driver?

5.29
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Much as I support the issue of providing sanitary towels to our young girls, I am very pessimistic that we are starting on a project that we shall never complete. Let me give you an example. Government wanted to give money to the elderly. We kept on putting money in the budget but every year, we were told that there is no money. Finally, they told us that they have increased the age bracket to 80 years and above. What happened? It is because there was no money. 

This project of providing sanitary towels may not be feasible as I can see. Let us calculate. A packet of sanitary towels is about Shs 3,000 or Shs 4,000; multiply this with 12 months and about 5 million girls who are school-going. If we bring a supplementary here, are we sure that after the supplementary, there will always be money to support the budget?

There are many pledges that we make as Members of Parliament. We are saying that the President is the fountain of honour therefore he cannot tell lies, but how many pledges have we made in the villages and we cannot fulfil them because of lack of funds? Therefore, let us also look at the income of the people in the villages. Can we improve the livelihood of the villagers so that they can help their children? However - (Member timed out.)

5.31
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have seen Members pretending that they are disappointed with the minister. Personally, his statement does not disappoint me but I am disappointed with the President who made the pledge. We are persecuting the minister for no good reason. The person who pledged is the President.

I have also seen Members of NRM lamenting. However, what do we do in our caucus –(Interruption)

MR KASOLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The President made a pledge to provide sanitary pads and his term is still on. Is hon. Mbwatekamwa in order to mislead Parliament and the entire country that the President made an empty promise yet his term is still on?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that item has not appeared in any budget, so it is “air”.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. Honourable members, let us not shift the blame to the minister. We have our President who pledged. If we are to consider someone who is a chief liar, then we must –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister talked about benchmarking. What are you going to benchmark - the size, fashion or the colour of the pads or do you want to benchmark and bring a factory here?

Lastly, Madam Speaker, the minister talked about a circular that they sent to schools. Why should you shift the burden from someone who pledged to the schools? In addition, how much are you giving to these schools, even if they are Government schools? You are giving Shs 700 and you want the headmaster to use that budget. 

I happen to operate private schools. If I have 800 students and 450 of them are girls and you are saying that we need to have an emergency, will it still be an emergency? How many girls do you expect to menstruate in a month? It means you are saying that schools should provide what the President pledged.

In conclusion, if Government cannot handle, please let us use local content. Can we venture into reusable pads? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.35
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I am happy that the minister mentioned Plan International. I was one of the managers of Plan International; whenever a staff had very little to report, he would write a very big report. That is what I saw in what the minister was saying.

The minister was also very clear that presidential pledges are implemented through the various ministries. I am very happy that the ministry where this would have been implemented is actually the ministry where the minister is the wife of the President. Honourable members, I do not know if you noticed this. I also agree with hon. Mbwatekamwa that we might be roasting our lady minister here and yet actually, we should be questioning the First Lady because she is the Minister for Education and Sports.

I am a member of the Committee on Education and Sports; we would have expected the First Lady to come to us with an indicative figure relating to the pledges of the President. When that does not come, what do we do? Therefore, I would like the honourable minister here to go back and tell the Minister of Education and Sports, who is the First Lady, that she has been roasted here a lot and she expects her to help her out of this situation. Thank you so much.

5.36
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I tried to pay keen attention to the minister so that I could pick take-home notes from the report. However, when she concluded, I could not pick a point to take home for the information of those girls who are waiting eagerly for the President’s pledge.

Madam Speaker, when I took the contribution you made to the orphans of Maracha, the girls reminded me about the pledge that the President made to them to enable them to continue with their education. Some of them, out of anger, said that they are dealing with a habitual liar. When hon. Otto presented a report here on the number of pledges the President had made, we were told they have accumulated to over 800 and all that is what many call “hot air.”

Therefore, I do not know if you may want to go back and discuss this because in the policy documents, all these things that you have been narrating do not exist. I do not know where you are going to begin to patch - It is clear that all that you presented was co-opted from different places to calm the country down. At an opportune time, however, I am sure that this issue of pads is going to hang on someone’s neck. Therefore, the earlier we resolve it, the better for this country. Otherwise, many Ugandans will think it is something you have designed to fail them because if a girl does not have a pad, it means she is not going to participate like her colleagues who are able to access these things, and we call that a structural failure- (Member timed out.)

5.39
MS ZAITUN DRIWARU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for the Presidency for making this statement on the Floor of Parliament.

Honourable minister, four years down the road, Parliament and the country expected you to come and brief them on what you have done and where the gap is, so that people can help to fill it. It is very disappointing that four years down the road, you still come to lament. By the time the President made that pledge, he was aware that Parliament gives him money to handle issues like pledges. Therefore, the President was well aware that there was some money for him to use. 

Voters do not forget pledges. They can forget other issues but when you make a pledge, even if it is in the middle of the night, they will never forget. Therefore, you better go back to the President and remind him of the pledge that he made. It seems there was no follow up on what the President promised the people, otherwise by now he should have done what he promised.

Honourable minister, our girls are losing out. As you correctly put it, girls lose four to seven days in a month. When you calculate all those days, in a year –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: That is what the minister said in her statement. What you are saying is in her statement. Okay, make your appeal quickly in half a minute.

MS DRIWARU: Honourable minister, I would like to appeal to you because the country depends on girls. Please, let us look into this issue seriously. I would like to support my colleague by saying that we build factories so that we can sustain the project we are going into. Thank you very much.

5.42
MS LUCY ACHIRO (Independent, Aruu North County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My appreciation goes to the minister. However, I strongly support the submission of my colleagues because often times, our voters claim that once elections get closer, Government comes in saying that they want to provide or that they want the names of the veterans. I would like to request that Government implements the provision of reusable pads for girls. The issue of reusable pads or lack of pads has caused very many problems like early child marriage, early pregnancy, infections and poor performance in schools. 

Relating to the issue of sustainability, we have Government programmes like the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP) where very many women groups are being provided with money from Government. We can link these women groups to such provisions, or they can make these reusable pads. In my NGO, we produce reusable pads and these pads can be used for a full year. As Government, this is something that we cannot fail to provide for our girls. It is very important that Government implements the use of reusable pads. The rich can buy the disposable pads and the poor will use the reusable ones. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.44
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, Persons with Disabilities): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for this report. 

Arising from the reactions of the Members of Parliament, I think there are more questions than answers in addressing this problem. Therefore, as Parliament, we need to advise Government to come up with permanent solutions. What we are proposing is to provide a supplementary budget; I am agreeable to that, but it is a temporary measure. The situation our young girls are undergoing is permanent. Sanitation is a very strong component in enabling our young girls to succeed in their education. 

Honourable minister, my proposal is that you forward this message to the appropriate ministers. We have been providing attractive packages to investors to invest in producing various commodities in this country. My colleague across had suggested that in order to sustain this project, Government should build a factory. I would like to improve on that; Government should introduce a Public Private Partnership (PPP) - we could encourage private entrepreneurs – and maybe tax exemptions so that we can have the production of sanitary pads in the country, because we have a permanent problem.

Madam Speaker, I implore the minister to take that direction. In the meantime, we can have the stopgap measure of providing money for these sanitary pads through a supplementary budget. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.46
MR ISAAC ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for the report. I equally want to say that I am totally disappointed by the report. First, the minister was referring to a circular of 1 September 2015, where the schools were directed to issue sanitary pads. This circular was just a plain letter that did not state the source of the funds. 

In the few years I was a head teacher, and I would like the minister to borrow a leaf from this, what we used to do was to allocate part of the UPE funds – Of course, these were funds allocated for administration, management and co-curricular activities. We internally reduced some percentages to make sure that the office of the senior woman teacher at least got a share of this. It was practical and worked very well. That was how we managed to keep our girls in school. 

I read the circular which the minister sent, because that time I was a teacher, and it gave no direction. The Ministry of Education and Sports should have allocated part of the UPE funds for this, just as they have allocated funds for co-curricular activities, administration and management. 

Honourable minister, you are talking about the senior women teachers here. That department was created by the ministry and does not have any funding. I do not know whether you are aware of that? 

When I look at your report, there are no challenges mentioned. Today, you are saying that the Education Act, 2018 empowers all the parents to provide basic requirements for their children. You have seen how the President is particular about the parents making any contribution; he does not want parents –(Member timed out.)

5.48
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is only Uganda that is still importing consumable materials for 51 per cent of her population. This is a consumable, which is going to last forever and ever. It is not our fault that we were created as women or that girls are created as girls. The Government should come up with sustainable solutions.

Uganda grows cotton and we even make lint out of cotton and linen. These are key components, which can be used to make pads. We have the National Enterprise Corporation (NEC), which produces certain products. Why can’t NEC be instructed to start producing sanitary wear for the girls? Why should Uganda continue importing consumables, which are going to last forever and ever, because we are not ready to stop producing girl child?

I would like to add to what the honourable engineer from Luweero said, and it is good that NEC factories are in Luweero. As we make our budget, let us prioritise the way we prioritised before - you remember during the last Parliament when we decided to scrap off the tax on sanitary wear. Let us prioritise and put in our budget a provision to establish factories in Uganda, which are going to produce sanitary wear at regional level, so that these consumables are supplied at a low rate. I know you may not be able to sustain buying sanitary wear for every girl child in school. However, you can supply it at a reduced cost and you equip the emergency kits within the school and the rest can be purchased by the parents. 

Secondly, about the senior women teachers, I have tried using them in my district. If these senior women teachers are given the skills to making re-usable pads, they can be able to skill these young girls from the age of nine. Nowadays, young girls start their menstrual periods at nine because of environmental factors like televisions and the movies they watch. The system changes and a girl starts menstruating at the age of nine years – (Interjections) – Yes it is true. There is a hormone which adjusts and tells the body that it is mature and the girl starts menstruating. This is from a researched report that has been produced. 

If these senior women teachers are given these skills – I tried it with my school; I took people who taught them how to make re-usable sanitary ware and they started teaching children from – (Member timed out) 

THE SPEAKER: You have one minute to conclude. 

MS BINTU: We would put aside a Friday evening in all the schools and the senior women teachers would teach girls from primary five to primary seven on how to make these reusable pads. Those schools where we tried it, it is working. You, however, have to equip the senior women teachers. They are there and even if they transfer them, there will be another skilled one replacing them and we would have a sustainable process where girls would be taken through the process of making reusable pads as the Government comes up with a factory. 

Otherwise, we need to support the girl child by keeping her in school and by providing all the necessary – (Member timed out)

5.52
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda North County, Mitooma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When you read the background to the statement of the minister and then you compare it with what has been done, you get surprised. From the flow she was showing in the background of the statement, where she showed the gravity of the problem, especially in the last paragraph, you appreciate that the minister and Government know the problem. 

However, on the interventions, when I saw intervention one as the release of a circular on management of menstrual periods, I was surprised. I asked myself how helpful it would be for a girl from Kiyanga at the national park to receive a circular on how to manage her menstrual periods? I think that is where the disconnect comes from. 

I would like to look at the issue of sustainability. I can tell you that the pads are around and available but the cost is prohibitive. The proposal by hon. Jalia Bintu of NEC working with Uganda Development Corporation is welcome. The model would be recovery of costs. You would find that you can produce a reusable pad at around Shs 1,000 if you go for a recovery cost model where you are not aiming at making profits. 

What the minister has done in this statement is to absolve Government and herself by pushing it back to Parliament. They have said that Parliament –(Interjections)– I am concluding. 

Madam Speaker, I propose that since the minister has handed it to Parliament, you direct the Committee on Budget, they look at items that they will suppress from their own budget and we give it to the item of pads. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I think this matter has suffered because no one is interested in it in Government. I think we should first quantify - How many children are we looking at? Let us quantify it in numbers and the cost, both for the ordinary pads and for the reusable ones. During the budget process, the Budget Committee should then bring it up to the Ministry of Education and Sports and we should get money from those sectors and use it to deal with this issue. We should stop talking; we can do this. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, when a pledge is made, and this was a serious one made during the campaign time and it is in the manifesto, I understand that it has been calculated. We know the number of girls, we know how much it costs and it should have been put in the budget. 

When the Minister of Education and Sports was appointed, I was very happy because I thought she was going to implement the President’s pledge because they are one and the same. I would like to ask that the Minister of Education and Sports comes here with the figures and how much is needed. The Minister for the Presidency cannot be of help to us. We need the Minister of Education and Sports to come here and present this. If there are any challenges, let them tell us what they are. 

I know by the time one makes a pledge, all this should have been calculated. We have all these presidential advisors advising the President on manifesto implementation; where has it gone wrong? We need the Minister of Education and Sports to come here and tell us how much money they need and what has happened. 

We are only remaining with one financial year before we go for the next campaigns, that is, the 2020/2021 financial year. This must come now so that we are able to address this matter. I know that it is possible that they knew how they were going to implement this when they were making the pledge. We should not be assuming that this is how it should be. Let us hear from the horse’s mouth. 

5.57
MR AZA ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. It is true that the President promised pads for the girl child for the whole country. Minister, you have heard what people have been talking about. Can you take our words to the President and put pressure on him so that he can fulfil his pledge? 

Secondly, before the President promised the pads, our girls were using these pads already. What we are trying to emphasise here is that although there were few girls who were using these pads, because of poverty this now has to be increased so that all the girls in our country can get these pads. 

As stakeholders in education development of our girls in this country, it is our role and responsibility. Who are these stakeholders? The leaders are the first stakeholders and then through the Ministry of Education and Sports, we have the inspectors of schools, the boards of governors, the Parent Teachers Associations (PTAs), the School Management Committees (SMCs), senior women teachers, nurses and teachers on duty. All these are stakeholders; they are there to ensure that all our girls in the class are educated, and we should ensure that they get these pads. Thank you.

5.59
MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Madam Minister, your report lacks numbers and figures showing what we are planning for and what we want to achieve. We need to improve on that. 

Menstruating is not an option whereas sex is an option, but we find that in some of the toilets, they provide free condoms. I imagine the cost of condoms is the same as that of sanitary pads. The condoms they are providing for the gentlemen are being provided for people who can even afford them. We need to know the source of those condoms. If they are free, why don’t we also consult the source to provide the pads?

Madam Minister, you talked about benchmarking but I do not think benchmarking is necessary. It would be wasting taxpayers’ money. We are all candidates and you do not need to go far to do the benchmarking when we are all here. If you need to check, you come to us so that you finalise your report.

On the issue of reusable pads, Madam Speaker, they can be a challenge especially in terms of hygiene. These reusable pads can actually cause problems. We need to do a lot of sensitisation if we want to opt for them. We need to sensitise the senior –(Member timed out.)

6.02
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the report despite the fact that it has gaps. Sometimes I compare a report like this to a person having dotted teeth, meaning it becomes difficult for them to bite. (Laughter)

When a President makes a pledge and a pronouncement, it automatically becomes a Government policy. To come here and say it is not sustainable is a different matter. We are talking about what came out of the President’s mouth, which has now become Government policy. I do not agree with the idea against the provision of sanitary pads to our girls; we should be able to provide what we have said we will.

The Minister of Education and Sports should come and tell us the specifics. Like hon. Okupa said, we should have been told this by now, but statistically, there is no information here. I appeal to the minister to come back to the House and tell us the specifics and the reality, because most of our girls are dropping out of school because they do not have sanitary pads. We must take the girls back to class. The Government is coming to say that they have no money and it is not sustainable. I do not agree with the Government on that matter.

MS MBAYO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank colleagues for their concerns, more so when it comes to the issue concerning the girl child. 

Presidential pledges are categorised into two. There are those that are honoured by State House and then there are pledges that are mainstreamed to the line ministries, like the case of the sanitary pads. True, it was a pledge by the President but it was mainstreamed to the Ministry of Education and Sports –(Interjection)– I said that this particular presidential pledge has been mainstreamed and that is why I said we got together with the Ministry of Education and Sports to come up with this statement. However, the details are supposed to be provided by the Ministry of Education and Sports.

Madam Speaker, it is within the powers of Parliament to allocate and appropriate funds. Once this is mainstreamed in the Ministry of Education and Sports, expect the Minister of Education and Sports to come here with a budget regarding that.

I would also like to respond to the issue of benchmarking. On benchmarking, we are talking about quantifying and sustainability. In my proposal, I said that the Ministry of Education and Sports or Parliament should benchmark in other countries that have made progress in providing sanitary towels. We are looking at a situation where it can be very difficult to quantify and come up with a budget that can be sustainable, because every day we have many girls beginning their menstrual cycles. In such a situation, we should look at what other countries are doing in order to address this issue.

Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate hon. Cecilia Ogwal for raising this issue. However, as I alluded earlier, this is a joint statement by the Ministry for the Presidency and Ministry of Education and Sports. I plead with Parliament to provide money through the Ministry of Education and Sports for sanitary pads after the ministry has come up with a budget that can be sustained.

Madam Speaker, hon. Mbwatekamwa alluded to the fact that the President is a perpetual liar. It is not true that the Fountain of Honour can be a perpetual liar. When he makes pledges, we categorise the pledges and forward them to the respective ministries. The President has the prerogative to make pledges. He makes pledges and honours them –(Interruption)

MR OYET: Madam Speaker, I sit on the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation and we have on record some pledges which the President made in 1986 and they have not been implemented up to now. We have pledges totalling to over Shs 800 billion. We have the records. Is it, therefore, in order for the minister to deny the fact that a promise which has been broken by His Excellency since 1986 cannot be called a lie?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you aware of the pledges that have not been handled?

MS MBAYO: Madam Speaker, I said that the President continues pledging and honouring pledges but fulfilling –(Interjections)– It is not a lie but it depends – For instance, there are pledges that are honoured through State House and the President has the prerogative to tell which –(Interruption)

MR WALUSWAKA: Honourable minister, the information that I would like to give you is that the President is not a lair. When he mentioned cities, Masaka and Mbale were included. Therefore, he is not a lair. We are only working in a progressive manner. That is the information I would like to give.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us be serious about this issue. A pledge was made but it has not been fulfilled. Let us find a strategy to fulfil it. Forget the cities because we are talking about the children. Honourable minister, what is the way forward? What do we do to ensure that this is done? That is what we want to hear.

MS MBAYO: Madam Speaker, as the minister in the Office of the Presidency, I have to list all the pledges. This one is not included because I have said that some pledges are directly linked to the line ministries and those that are –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, you have fully guided this Parliament. What the minister needs to do, and I thought she would make an undertaking on behalf of the Government, is that tomorrow or another day, she needs to bring a budget of how much money we require to implement this particular pledge.

Madam Speaker, when you gave her time, I actually thought she was listening and she would tell Parliament that considering the Speaker’s guidance, she is going to consult the Minister of Education and Sports so that next week, they bring a budget. She should not come here and say the President is not a lair because that will not solve the problem. Honourable minister, you have been guided by the Chair and the Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what is the way forward on this issue?

MS MBAYO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The way forward is to request that this issue be handled by the Ministry of Education and Sports who should come up with a conclusive statement.

THE SPEAKER: Can we direct the Clerk to write to the Minister of Education and Sports to quantify the number of girls who will need sanitary protection in the primary schools and also quantify the cost of ordinary pads vis-à-vis reusable sanitary pads? The ministry should bring the information to this House so that we can discuss it and take a decision. 

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I would like to request the minister to assure us when we can expect that statement. Can it be done within one week?

MS MBAYO: Madam Speaker, you have guided well that the Ministry of Education and Sports should take up this matter. For the timeframe, I would like to propose a month since this issue requires coming up with quantified numbers.

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable members, the Minister for Education and Sports should answer next Thursday. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON FLOODS DAMAGE AND LOSS IN THE COUNTRY OVER THE PAST FOUR MONTHS

6.15
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Mr Hilary Onek): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stated earlier that we have an inter-ministerial committee, which is working together to gather all data and work out solutions to combat the disasters that we are currently confronted with.

What I have before Parliament is a statement of the problem. Other aspects will require that all the other stakeholder ministries, with whom we are currently working with, come up with a report next Wednesday containing details of what action we are taking and the budget framework, so that Parliament can debate meaningfully rather than lamenting the problem at hand.
	
Madam Speaker, that is my proposal. The different ministries like the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Works and Transport and all the other ministries responsible are preparing their reports. 

THE SPEAKER: We expect you and your colleagues on Thursday next week. The Prime Minister was supposed to have coordinated that matter.

MR ONEK: We shall speak with one voice, Madam Speaker.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION BY THE EVICTEES OF KISWA PARISH, MBUYA 1 PARISH AND BANDA PARISH ON COMPENSATION FOLLOWING AN ILLEGAL EVICTION BY KCCA ON 27 JULY 2014

THE SPEAKER: Present the subject and the prayers only, not the merits.

6.17
MR MICHAEL KABAZIGURUKA (FDC, Nakawa Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I present a petition by the evictees of Kiswa Parish, Mbuya I Parish and Banda Parish beseeching Parliament to order for their compensation following an illegal eviction by Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) on 27 July 2014.

Kampala Capital City Authority carried out an eviction of people who were living on railway land. This eviction was declared illegal by the High Court of Uganda vide High Court MISC Application No. 052 of 2014 where a writ of certiorari was issued quashing the decision of Kampala Capital City Authority.

It is therefore the prayer of the evictees that Parliament moves to order for the compensation of Shs 36,250,000,000 to the evictees who have been subjected to untold suffering for all this time since the eviction in 2014. This figure is as a result of the evaluation that was undertaken by a certified surveying and valuation company.

This petition is supported by the signatures of over 810 evictees who suffered and continue to suffer as a result of this action that has since been declared illegal by the High Court of Uganda. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MR KABAZIGURUKA: I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the petition.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Kabaziguruka. The petition is sent to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to handle expeditiously so that the citizens can get justice. Thank you.

Honourable members, we have done quite a bit of work. I adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.20 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 14 November 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 

