
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Tuesday, 2 November 2021

Parliament met at 2.14 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. We learnt, with profound sadness, of the death of hon. Alice Florence Lubega, who was the first woman Member of Parliament in the LEGCO. She passed on Thursday, at her home in Entebbe. 

Upon receiving the news, I visited the family and contacted the A-Plus Funeral Services to support the family as a contribution from Parliament, which they have done. 

His Excellency, the President has also, in honour of the great contribution of Mrs Lubega to Uganda, directed that she be given an official burial. 

Today, we will be moving a Motion here to pay tribute to this fallen colleague. However, let us stand and observe a moment of silence in honour of Mrs Lubega. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In the last Sitting, I communicated that we needed to have all Members, staff and security personnel that come to Parliament vaccinated. I request that we respect the directive and act as an example to the rest of the country. We want more people to be vaccinated. 

Where there is a shortage of vaccines, we will ask Government to come in and maybe give us information to that effect. Otherwise for now, let us observe the set SOPs in addition to getting vaccinated. 

The Clerk to Parliament issued a circular - and in my office, today we bounced somebody who had come in, but was not vaccinated. We need to act as examples in this so that while we urge our people out there to get vaccinated, we are vaccinated too. 

You know how much our voters listen to us, Members of Parliament. What we say is final because we are the voice of the voiceless. Before you tell voters out there to get vaccinated, get vaccinated, yourself. 

I am happy the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Attorney General’s chambers are implementing the same. Nobody can access offices for those entities without a vaccination card. Therefore, as Parliament, we should walk the talk. Thank you again for coming. 

Honourable members, I am going to have a variation in the Order Paper. We will make some changes and have the tribute presented first; other matters will come in later. 

In the gallery this afternoon, we have distinguished visitors who have come to follow the proceedings as the House debates the Motion to pay tribute to the late hon. Florence Lubega. And they include:

    1. Bishop Joshua Lwere;
    2. Bishop Moses Odong;
    3. Mr Paul Wamala;
    4. Ms Florence Settimba;
    5. Mr Geoffrey Natuyamba;
    6. Ms Annette Natuyamba;
    7. Mr Dan Kagambwa;
    8. Mr Stephen Magembe;
    9. Mr Patrick Magembe; and
    10. Mrs Teddy Magembe.

They are all here to observe the proceedings in this House regarding the debate on the Motion to pay tribute to the late Florence Alice Lubega. There is a condolence book placed out there. Kindly sign it as you get out. You are most welcome. 

2.20
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter. Last week, on Thursday, I reported, with your permission and indulgence, the conditions of the two honourable members of Parliament, the hon. Muhammad Ssegirinya and hon. Allan Ssewanyana, under detention in Kigo and Luzira prisons respectively. 

Whereas I reported about the sickness of the duo, today, I am here to report that in particular, hon. Ssegirinya is not sick but ill. And the medical personnel can distinguish between one being sick and ill. 

This is not to ask Parliament to exonerate them but because, at some stage, Parliament offered to make an intervention specifically to indulge the State in offering leeway to have these honourable members get proper medical attention. When I visited hon. Ssegirinya on Thursday, he was clearly in pain. He was evacuated on Saturday to Mulago but the family was not formally informed until yesterday, when someone tiptoed and informed the family that the honourable member is in dire state of health. 

Madam Speaker, as one of the leaders in this institution I thought I owed his family public duty to raise a red flag before his colleagues and peers in this House, that his health has been neglected by the State. They would also be informed that should anything go wrong, the people to blame would have known that it has been publically communicated that the honourable member is in dire state of health. For some reason, his personal doctors have not been involved yet somehow, his health is shrouded in secrecy while he is ailing. 

Yesterday, one of his attorneys was able to visit him and confirmed to me this morning that anything can happen to this honourable Member. I am here to raise a red flag to this House - and to the Speaker in particular - to make a humanitarian intervention to consider options of securing his health so that whoever wants to prosecute him does not prosecute a dead man.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I am sorry I forgot to introduce the “Iron Lady” - Mama Miria Matembe. She is also in the Gallery. (Applause) Welcome, Hon. Miria Matembe. 

The Leader of the Opposition has raised the issue of hon. Ssegirinya. We will wait for Government to give Parliament a green light. We told you in this House that we are ready to do whatever it takes – even if it means taking the Member abroad for treatment. Government should give us a go-ahead because it is the one to do that. Parliament cannot move on our own. Government will maybe come up with that.

2.26
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, I have taken note, on behalf of Government, the condition which our brother is in. Since he has said he has a personal doctor, I request that you and I take trouble to go and see him with the personal doctor and maybe some of our colleagues and also advise on the way forward.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We will go to visit the patient – the three of us – the Leader of Government Business, the Leader of the Opposition and myself and see what can be done to save his life. If we want to prosecute, we need to prosecute a person who is alive. So, we will do that. 

MR MPUUGA: Thank you for your indulgence. Madam Speaker, not to necessarily controvert the promises by the Prime Minister but we would like to remind the House, that again, you ordered the Ministers of Defence and Internal Affairs to intervene and report to this House on the issue of the citizens whose names I submitted here, who had disappeared. We even met in your office. The ministers have never got back to us about these disappeared citizens, whose names are on the Hansard.

I laboured to seek out the Minister of Security, Maj. Gen. Jim Muhwezi and he informed me that he does not have information as yet. Therefore, I want to believe that in this case, we are not going back into rounds of promises. While some people are in our hands, are alive and ailing, the response is flimsy and scary.

Up to now, the ministers you ordered have never reported on the citizens who I reported as disappeared for more than a year from their families. I use this occasion to seek your indulgence to order these ministers once again to return to the House and report whether they know the whereabouts of the citizens. If they were killed and buried, we can re-bury them decently and assure their families that these people were prosecuted illegally. We can bury them and settle our troubles.

Tomorrow, there are prayers by one of the families of a citizen I reported about on the record of Parliament, to which some people told them to forget him and hold his last funeral rites - by state actors, Madam Speaker. This is very worrying and I think somebody has got to be serious. It is good the Prime Minister is here to take note that your ministers were given a list of citizens who disappeared, with records of their families and contacts. They have never come back here, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, the list was given to my office and when you reported that today, I called the same ministers for a meeting. We decided to handle that in the office. I have written to the ministers to come and we have a meeting to that effect. So, we will have feedback from the said ministers and we resolve that.

Members, we have a very important Motion to pay tribute to our fallen colleague. As I have said – (Member rose_) - the Rules of Procedure state that you sit when the Speaker is talking. We are paying tribute to our fallen colleague - the first woman legislator. So, why don’t we first debate the Motion, we let the family go and then we remain in this House? (Applause)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ALICE FLORENCE LUBEGA, THE FIRST WOMAN MEMBER IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

2.31
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, I move under Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Mrs Florence Lubega, the first female Member of Parliament for her dedicated service to the Republic of Uganda.
“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received with deep sorrow, the sad news of the death of Mrs Florence Alice Lubega, which occurred on Thursday, 28 October 2021;

AWARE that Mrs Florence Alice Lubega, who died at the age of 103, had a long and successful life and was a pioneer in Ugandan politics, having been the first female Ugandan legislator in the Parliament of Uganda, as well as being the first female to be admitted to the then prestigious Makerere College School;

NOTING that Mrs Florence Alice Lubega has had a distinguished career, serving in several capacities, both in the Public Service of Uganda and in the private sector and held several key responsibilities;

RECOGNISING that Mrs Florence Alice Lubega was a role model for the girl-child, an inspirational leader and an advocate for women emancipation and empowerment and is credited for having mainstreamed the protection of the girl child and unveiling the girl child and women access to and equal opportunities in education, employment, elective politics, leadership positions; 

APPRECIATING that Mrs Florence Alice Lubega immeasurably participated in shaping the destiny of Uganda and served this country with dedication, patriotism and was instrumental in highlighting and addressing gender inequality existing in Ugandan societies;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved as follows, that:

    1. Parliament collectively conveys its deepest condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and the people of Uganda for the loss of a distinguished and gallant citizen of this country. 

    2. Parliament takes cognisance of the immense contribution that Ms Florence Alice Lubega has rendered to the people of Uganda, especially the realisation of the rights of women and the girl child.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Madam Prime Minister. Is the Motion seconded? It is seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, Dr Batuwa, hon. Silwany, Lt Col. Charity Bainababo, the Chairperson of UWOPA, the Government Chief Whip and hon. Bahati. The whole House has seconded the Motion. Would you like to speak to your Motion? 

MS NABBANJA: This is the justification for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Florence Alice Lubega, Uganda’s first female Member of Parliament who died on Thursday, 28 October 2021.

We mourn the life of the only female legislator in the Legislative Council of May 1962. Hon. Lubega was passionate about empowering the girl child and women emancipation. She is quoted to have said, “What could be of more importance to the health and progress of a society than to give its women the best that education can offer.” 

Born to the former Katikkiro of Buganda, the late Samuel Wamala and Elina Nantongo on 05 November 1917, hon. Lubega studied at Gayaza High School, Buloba Teachers’ Training College, Makerere College in 1945 and later St Hugh’s College, Oxford, London University in 1950 to 1951.

She mentored many women politicians including Joyce Mpanga, the great woman who was a Member of Parliament in Mubende before she joined politics as a Member of Parliament for Ssingo North Constituency.

Hon. Lubega was among the 52 prominent legislators who were recognised for their contribution to democracy, good governance and the rule of law when Uganda celebrated 50 years of independence.

Hon. Florence Lubega served as a Deputy Minister of Community Development and Labour in the Obote I Government; that is in the 1967 to 1971 Government. 

We wish to extend our profound sympathies to the family and the people of Uganda. May the Almighty God grant her soul eternal rest. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Madam Prime Minister.

2.39
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to join my honourable sister and Prime Minister in seconding the Motion to pay tribute to an honourable daughter of Uganda that rested a few days ago.

If we had enough time, probably her life could have been an indelible blackboard; call it a whiteboard - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: A Member who is on Zoom, for example hon. Esenu, should consider that they are in the House. This goes to all the Members who are on Zoom. When on Zoom, do not do other things because you are in the House. We can see what you are doing. Please continue, hon. Mpuuga.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you for the indulgence, Madam Speaker. This House owes Members an up close orientation on etiquette. Probably the Members are victims of that absence of orientation. I will take leave of that. I said that in jest. 

Strictly speaking about the fallen daughter of Uganda, I was saying that on another day, her life and life experiences would have offered us an opportunity to mirror into the lives of each one of us in public life and what our political history has been since independence. She became a Member of Parliament when my state of life was not defined because I was only born much later when she had even left Parliament and gone into exile. 

The fact that the bulk of her life after Parliament was lived in exile is a huge tale of how our politics are shaped since independence. It should be lesson enough to educate us on the circumstances that exiled her. I am very sure no single citizen would love to live a life away from his or her people.

For those of us who have globetrotted, you meet so many citizens of Uganda who are exiled and you can see their sense of emptiness because they left a country they call home that they miss so dearly because our politics has been laden with contradictions and the inability to move to the centre and coalesce as a people and cultivate a common agenda that has badly eluded us. 

To this fallen honourable member, who returned home in her later years, I am very sure she did not have enough time to make a contribution she would have loved to make on her motherland. 

She has been hailed as one of the forebearers of the women emancipation movement. This settles the ghost to the effect that women emancipation is a thing of the 80s. I am not quoting any years. So, it simply says that efforts have been with us over the years since independence to put the girl child at the forefront of efforts to develop their aspirations and dreams of Uganda at inception.

At the making of Uganda in 1962, the country had dreams for its daughters. These dreams have since dwindled because the very issue that would put the girl child at the forefront of incubating the growth of this nation has either been thrown on the wayside or neglected. 

Her demise should rekindle the desire to prioritise girl child education because not many are as privileged as she was. She was a daughter of a Katikkiro; that is no mean feat. Others cannot have that opportunity. 

Therefore, we should remind ourselves of a duty of care. We owe the girl child in this country and prioritise, in our budget, programmes and policies, how we can secure the girl child when we are now aware how the girl child has immensely suffered during this COVID-19 lockdown. We discuss every day how many have fallen out of the school system. We are discussing pregnancy at infancy. These are challenges that our systems must address to secure the girl child.

Finally, I would like to offer my condolences to the family and remind the Government that this honourable member lost her every belonging when she went into exile to secure her life. She had property such as land and houses in Kakiri and they were all confiscated by the then Government.

Successive Governments must, as of necessity, inherit the problems of the past Governments. Whether those Governments were being run by terrible humans, the decent humans must work to restore parity to those who lost in those times.

I would like a commitment from the Prime Minister that probably, a conversation with the family will take place to try and restore what was lost unfairly that belonged to her and her close relatives as a form of recognition. This Motion will not atone for what she and her family lost until something is practically done to restore the loss that was caused by the Government. Probably, the current Government occupies part of it - that I do not know. Even if not, Government owes a duty to the family.

I thank you, Madam Speaker. May her soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Macho is speaking on behalf of the dean of independents before we open the debate.

2.46
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I am shocked that up to now, my good friend hon. Luttamaguzi does not know that I am an independent Member of Parliament and I can step in the shoes of my dean.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am giving you only two minutes.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, we are standing in the august House in the Pearl of Africa to discuss the first honourable woman who carried the flag of the women in Uganda. It was a testing time since the role of women was to dance for the colonial leaders and to cook for their husbands. 

However, through the encouragement and hard work of hon. Lubega, she rose up and came to the dining table of the leadership of this country to show the world that women were not created as porters but as partners in the leadership of every country. (Applause)

My boss - the dean - told me to speak about the good values that made hon. Lubega what she was. When our researcher dug into the life history of hon. Florence Lubega, we discovered that she was a visionary leader. She was a woman of humility and a respectful woman. She was a Member of Parliament but still knelt for her husband. This is what we need for the generations to build the culture of women in this country. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, I know that modern culture has brought up emancipation and empowerment to mean something else but we cannot forget our roots. 

Hon. Lubega was a team builder. During the time she worked as a deputy minister, history shows that her ministry performed better than many others. This teaches us a lesson today that we should support women not like it is in this generation that every woman who rises up, they will pull her down. Protect our mothers who are in leadership so that the whole country knows that even if we are men, women can lead together with us to build a stronger nation. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, seconders of the Motion. Hon. Macho, even women of these days kneel. However, kneeling does not only mean respect. One thing I need to bring to your attention is that the late hon. Lubega was also a Deputy Minister of Planning and Community Development. She was the first woman Member of Parliament who broke the barriers and set the pace for the women of today. No wonder, in this Government, most of the leaders are women. That was courtesy of the first women in leadership.

She also become the first pre-independence and post-independence woman Member of Parliament. Together with Dr Sarah Ntiro, hon. Frances Akello and hon. Joyce Masembe Mpanga, they defied all the odds such as early marriages and succeeded as women.  Because of that, we have the women Members of Parliament in this House who are fully emancipated to the level of becoming a Speaker.

I would like to assure this House that I am still a Deputy Speaker for 10 years. (Applause) Our Prime Minister is also a woman. Honourable members, the debate is open. Can we have the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development first?

2.52
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition for moving and seconding the Motion respectively. 

As history has indicated, hon. Lubega, the first woman Member of Parliament, treasured education. The Speaker has quoted one of her statements and that quote dwelt on the importance of education to the girl child. If we were not educated, we would not be standing here.

I would like to salute her for ensuring that she advocated for education of the girl child. I thank her for the journey that she made throughout; from 62 to 103 years and remained true to emancipation of women and the girl child. Even when she was dying, she was still advocating for emancipation of women. 

I would like to say that the journey has not been in vain because the history of women emancipation in this country has been that of achievement amidst challenges. However, today we boast of 47 per cent of women in Cabinet. (Applause) If you look at this desk or go to the Cabinet, you will see ministers who are women and you will agree that they are holding very important portfolios that people would think that women cannot hold.

Regarding the Ministry of Energy, people would think that oil and energy are for men but we have a woman and before that, we had a woman. We have a woman Minister of Health just behind me here. (Interjections)– Is that a man? Now the men want to claim her - can you imagine?

We have the Prime Minister who is referred to as Majegere seated here and she is a woman. The Vice-President chairs the Cabinet. We are defining the agenda of this country. Madam Speaker, you are seated there but you have done wonderfully as our Speaker. Before you, we had the Rt Hon. Kadaga who had been a Speaker for 10 years and Deputy Speaker for 10 years.

When you go to Makerere University in the Department of Law, the women are more than 60 per cent of students of law. When you go to the engineering department and department of technology, they are being headed by women. That is education.

Therefore, I would like to thank hon. Florence Lubega for cutting all the thorns for us who are seated here today to enjoy the struggle that she and others stood firm to define; the agenda for today.

On behalf of the women of Uganda and as the person who holds the ministry that defines the women’s policy – the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development – I would like to say that we condole with the family, the women, the Government and people of Uganda. May her soul rest in peace. 

2.55
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me, first, to thank colleagues – both female and male Members of Parliament – who supported and voted for me as chairperson of the Uganda Women’s Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) amidst all the challenges and flying phone calls. (Applause)

I would like to support the Motion to pay tribute to our dear mother, the late Florence Lubega. She was the first Woman Member of Parliament and also the first female to be admitted to Makerere College. What I have read about her is that she was a prayerful woman. We need to thank God that she maintained her eyesight and hearing. She was not impaired. 

Most importantly, other than being the first female Member of Parliament, she was also the vice-chairperson of the Uganda Council of Women. I believe this is the council that should have opened doors for women in politics.

Madam Speaker, the late was a remarkable debater. From what is on the Hansard, she gained popularity for her firm stand against the Executive. She was angry when a number of colleagues crossed the Floor to the Government side. She said she always felt sad because they remained mute.

If I can quote, one of the things she said is, “There is no harm in pointing out to Government what part of its duty is not being properly fulfilled. We are not here to joke. We are not here to please each other. We are not here, even to earn popularity amongst our fellow Parliamentarians. We are here to perform our duties and to the best of our ability.” 

Can we, as women in this 11th Parliament, emulate the late Lubega by speaking out? If you speak out, it does not mean you are an enemy. You are only trying to ask the Government to do its bit. We took an oath to defend and protect the Constitution and let us stick to that.

Madam Speaker, it is reported that she did not have children. I would like to request that it is our duty as Members of this Parliament to ensure that we support the women and men of this country who are unable to have children. The Assisted Reproductive Technology (ART) is a very expensive venture. We need to ensure that we have adequate resources to support such people so that they are not here.

We have a number of gender-related Bills in memory of the late Lubega. Can we have them: the Succession Bill, the Surrogacy and Assisted Reproductive Technology (Art) Bill – that is supposed to be moved – the Marriage and Divorce Bill and the Sexual Offences Bill? All these are gender-related Bills. Can we, in memory of this great lady, as the 11th Parliament, pass them?

She was supposed to meet the members of UWOPA in September. Unfortunately, she could not. She wanted to speak to us about the girl child and the increasing teenage pregnancies. Unfortunately, that was not achieved.

Madam Speaker, we have a Motion on the girl child, which also touches teenage pregnancy. I would like to request that in memory of this great lady, that Motion be prioritised so that we can debate as the House and make the necessary recommendations to the Government.

I would like to end. The honourable Leader of the Opposition was asking about what exiled her. From the information that I have read, it is said that President Amin, then, wanted to marry her and she decided to take off out of fear because rejecting him would have cost her, her life. (Laughter)

With that, I beg to second the Motion –(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members. My presumption is that what the chairperson of UWOPA has said is not true. (Laughter)

Honourable members, we are going to have a limited debate. Everybody supports this Motion. As we said, we need to release the family to go and arrange for the burial, which is going to take place. In response to what the Leader of the Opposition had raised about the compensation, when I visited the family, we had a long chat. I realised that the President was a personal friend to Florence. No wonder, he has given her an official burial. (Applause)

What the family also said was that there was an instruction to the Attorney-General to recover what belonged to the late Florence. It is now upon the current Attorney-General to take over. However, the President has been supportive to the late Florence. She was even recognised during our Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference (CPC) and on a number of women’s functions. She is actually the icon of girl child education.

3.02
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also stand to support the Motion. Indeed, what we should learn from this – some of us never knew this lady but for God to bless her with 103 years is something very important.

However, whenever I come to the Floor, I still insist that we should know these people and this country needs a council of elders. These are the people who can talk to the Head of State without fear or favour and tell him, “What you are doing here is wrong. Please, correct this area.”

We normally come here to praise these people but we do not see them in our daily lives. For example, right now, there is a Vice-President who has just left but suffering with traffic jam in a very ramshackle car. These people need respect. We need to see them. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the President has caused the former Vice-President to suffer in traffic jam and he has a private escort yet he is the former Vice-President of this country - H.E Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi. 

As we talk about the ladies, people have been boasting that they are the ones who brought women emancipation. It has been there for a long time; since 1962. That is why you have Florence who was energetic. She was a professional teacher, like hon. Joseph Gonzaga Ssewungu, who went through a Grade III Teachers’ College: Buloba Primary Teachers’ College. 

Some people think that teachers are only for teaching and are signposts. Here, you have a teacher who taught and became a Member of Parliament like the one standing in front of you and speaking very good English. 

Madam Speaker, in your powers, just like you stated, you might need to designate a day each year for us to speak about these big people. There is Rhoda Kalema in Kiboga. She is a former Member of Parliament. She is now 96 years old and she has written a number of books. On such a day, they can come here and join us to merry-make. This will help them live with happiness. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as the Speaker said, why don’t you give these people what they are entitled to, if the Attorney-General already directed so? These people are going to die. They want to enjoy their lives and eat everything whether it is “Komamboga” or any other thing. They want to enjoy their lives as they leave the world. Otherwise, this business of coming to move Motions and praise them after their death is – that is why you see Gen. Moses Ali enjoying.  (Laughter) Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have a law that was passed on the benefits of the former speakers, deputy speakers, vice-presidents and prime ministers. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, do you want to tell me that the law is not being implemented? 

3.06
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, it is true Parliament passed a law on the benefits of speakers, deputy speakers, vice-presidents and prime ministers that have served this country for some time. What I know is that His Excellency, Edward Ssekandi, has got a car. He has a security lead car and other security detail.

I was with him the other day in Masaka and his security detail was leading us. He has even been appointed as a special envoy with a very good salary of over Shs 20 million –(Interjections)- colleagues, I am speaking from information. I am the Leader of Government Business and I know this. And more so, H.E Edward Ssekandi is my brother. We are of the same clan. I have been to his home twice. Even the other day, I went to Kyanamukaaka with him. 

Madam Speaker, I think it is not in order for colleagues to come here and deceive us. It is not good to tell lies to Parliament. I would like to request and appeal to colleagues to ignore his information. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. He has never communicated to us that you are his self-appointed spokesperson. Members, if it is not true that he does not have the privileges, then he will get them. However, to the best of my knowledge, I met him in Rubaga for prayers. I can also confirm that he still has his whole security detail. It does not matter whether it is old or not. The point is he still has his security detail.  

The other important point is that we need to have an archive of those old Members of Parliament - and they are very few - because we need to always interact with them and see what we can do for them. 

3.08
MS HARRIET BUSINGE (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the voices of other honourable colleagues, to condole with the family of the late mother of Uganda and to pray that God rests her soul in eternal peace. It is my prayer that as Ugandans, we do not only stop at saying the good things that the dead have done or to talk about their contribution to this country because but it is our duty to take lessons from their death and lives. 

I believe hon. Lubega did whatever she did because of the conducive environment that was accorded to her, as a woman of this nation. It is, therefore, my request that we take this as a lesson to support women whenever they are given offices of responsibility. (Applause) 

The emancipation of women we talk about in Uganda is just in words. Look at what is happening; whenever a woman gets appointed to a position of responsibility, they instantly get attacked. You have seen what is happening on social media. How will they perform if that is the atmosphere we are subjecting them to? 

It is, therefore, my prayer that we support the women of Uganda to perform and mother their nation. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I would like to encourage all the women to never allow to be brought down because of any intimidation or blackmail; never allow it. We know the people doing it and so, we must stand firm. We must take this country up to where we want it to be. (Applause)

I have my 10 years as Deputy Speaker and another 10 years as Speaker in Parliament. (Applause)

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Anifa Kawooya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am very energised by your last words; you are here to stay.  

I rise to support the Motion and add my voice to pay tribute to our first lady, hon. Lubega, our role model. As a former Pan African Parliament President for the women caucus, I would like to say that in the African Charter of 2063, the movement and acceleration of the girl-child and emancipation are high on the agenda. 

The gift from God is to have independence of mind and critical thinking. Indeed, from what we have read and what has been attributed to her, the late hon. Lubega had independence of mind. 

Madam Speaker, the resilience of those who were here before us and their persistence to see the emancipation of the girl-child is the reason His Excellency, the President, from day one after he came into power, advocated for the emancipation of the girl- child. When you look at this Cabinet – very capable indeed – and you being in that Chair to steer this august House very effectively, determined and confident; we applaud you. 

Lastly, the only thing we can do, as women legislators now in power and for those to come, is to ensure that those barriers that are keeping the rural women behind are handled so that they are brought to the forefront. 

We need to ensure that all those barriers, together with our counterparts the men – because you men are here because we are here – should make sure that all the rural women are also emancipated to follow suit. 

I pay tribute to the late Florence. I condole with the family members and everybody else who is bereaved. I thank each and every one of you that has participated to recognise the effort of the girl child. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Hanifah Kawooya. Maybe, for your information, two years ago, the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of Parliament invited and hosted Mrs Lubega in the conference hall. It was presided over by the Deputy Speaker then, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah.

As Parliament, we are going to pass a resolution that we must recognise these people before they die. We will pass that resolution and have these people recognised. The Prime Minister can go visit some of these people and associate with them. 

3.15
MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Madam Speaker, I add my voice to those celebrating the late hon. Florence Lubega because even if she moved a lonely journey, she did not embarrass us – the girls who were yet to be born. She made Uganda know that the girls and women can. So, I celebrate her for that. Because of her, we are now able to be in this House because Uganda realised that women can. 

Today, we are lucky to have many women in Cabinet, in leadership positions and other positions of influence. I implore them to also play a role of mentoring other women, instead of fighting them or trying to be the queen bee and saying, “Don’t come near me.” We lift them up so that when we are no more, they will rise to the occasion and continue this emancipation. 

When we see a signal of a powerful woman fighting middle or small ones, we will stop the signal. That is our commitment as women because we do not want to break that which hon. Florence Lubega started; of growing and serving and giving space for other women also to serve. Thank you.

3.16
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the Motion but also to pay tribute to a very strong woman, an “iron lady” and a light to the women in Uganda and in Africa. This is none other than the Late Florence Alice Lubega. 

She was born in Mityana. She is one of the two women that joined or that were part of the first Legislative Council in Uganda, together with Visram who was an Indian and got the name “Namubiru”.

The late Mrs Lubega gave a maiden speech in 1960 and in that maiden speech, she was calling upon the Members who were in Government and Parliament to make sure that they work on the facilities of the girl child with the intention of attracting more to come out and study. She was an advocate for the women and she has died with that passion. She wanted to meet UWOPA to make sure that she does not die with the dream. 

It is recorded that in 1960 when she made her maiden speech, it was quoted by the Observer in London and they said she had given a passionate speech, and that she deserved a standing ovation and she got it – (Member timed out.)

3.19
MR GEOFREY KAYEMBA-SSOLO (NUP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to support this Motion for paying tribute to the departed legislator. 

As we all know, we all have a time to die. We leave and go but how do you want to be remembered? Do you want to be remembered as a person who betrayed your people that elected you and instead followed the ideas of one person?

Do you want to be remembered as a person who ate money for drugs that would have cured people and people died because of you? My fellow legislators, let us know that we all have to go. Remember what people will say about you. 

Secondly, as a sports person and an alternative minister of sports, this lady has been active in sports and exercises. If you want to be healthy and live longer, come and participate in sports and exercises. 
I beg to submit. 

3.20
MR JOEL SSENYONYI (NUP, Nakawa Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the Motion remembering an incredible lady, hon. Florence Lubega. She had a chance to go to school, acquire education and she became what she became. 

There are many other young ladies in this country who have not had that chance. Part of the problem is menstrual health. In 2019, a study was carried out by our ministry of education on the menstrual health issues of our young ladies and they found that 23 per cent of girls aged 12 to 18 drop out of school when they are in their menstruation periods. Some actually drop out of school for good. 

In 2016, during campaigns, there was a campaign promise by Government to provide sanitary towels to girls in this country. To date, that promise has not been fulfilled. This would be an opportune moment, in remembrance of the late Florence Lubega, to fulfill this promise. 

I hope, now that Government is according her a state funeral, talking about her incredible achievements, please fulfill that promise of availing sanitary towels to young ladies – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is an official – not state – funeral.

MR SSENYONYI: Okay, official funeral – there you are – which is not gotten by many people. 

Now that we are according her that official funeral recognising her achievements and efforts, as Government, please fulfill that promise you made to young girls in 2016 to avail sanitary towels to them so that they also acquire an education like the hon. Florence Lubega or even better. Thank you. 

3.22
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the Motion. This country has lost her gallant daughter. She has been a moral and cultural example because she cherished her Kiganda culture and loved her country Uganda, as a whole. 

The late hon. Florence Lubega was defiant to all kinds of undemocratic tendencies; even during Amin’s time when it was very risky to discuss issues regarding democracy, she was there to stand and defend her country. 

Lastly, the late Lubega was a mother; she was a leader and she had the sort of good discipline a woman should have and the country would like to have. May her soul rest in eternal peace. 

3.21
MR DAVID SSERUKENYA (NUP, Makindye Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to celebrate the life of our fallen “soldier”. We, Christians, are not moved when you know someone who has passed on believed in God. We know where she has gone. 

Allow me to call upon the Ministry of Education to think of the children who are pregnant now, and have a special programme for those children so that they do not drop out of school completely. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.23
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Firstly, I salute Government and more so, our Prime Minister. Thank you very much for the Motion; I am here to support it. I know that as Ugandans, we ought to see what women are trying to do to make sure that we sustain progress.

Madam Speaker, from the departure of the late, we learn a few things. First, it is good to give people what they deserve when they are still alive. I say so because the late should have enjoyed what she deserved. If she was exiled and her property was lost, where did the property go? Do we have a Government? Government, where are you?

My issue is that we give the women what they deserve when they are still alive. Today, we have a Deputy Speaker. Give her the right support when she is still here. I say so because that is what good men do. It is also the kind of support that women should be giving to fellow women. I expect all of us to support women whenever they are in leadership. I say so because women are good listeners. When you have a problem with them, do not shout at them. Go and talk to them; they will listen.

Madam Speaker, it is very important that we give the women of this country an opportunity to move forward. Those women who are not clapping doubt themselves. (Laughter) Yes. However, those who are applauding my submission know what they know.

This House is a proud one because if you looked at the history –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, the late came on board at a time when there was nothing like affirmative action. She defied the odds, meaning that women have the brains. Nobody should ever think amongst us that women cannot equate themselves to men – no. They can even be better. Hon. Lubega has already demonstrated it. 

In the 1960s, was there affirmative action – each woman per district? Was it there? It was not there but she came to Parliament. A woman of power; a woman with brains, wisdom, intelligence. She did it; all the women here can do it. Let us protect the women. (Applause)

Government gives assurances but Madam Speaker, I can give a personal assurance that I am here to protect the women here. (Laughter) 

3.27
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the Motion to pay tribute to the late Florence Alice Lubega, who was one of the pioneer women in the politics of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, the likes of hon. Cecilia Ogwal must have learnt from this great woman. This week, social media was awash with issues about hon. Ogwal. To me, with all this activism, hon. Ogwal must have learnt from this great lady, who was one of the first six girls at Makerere University.

I call upon our daughters and sisters to emulate the women who have excelled in this country, such that together, we build a great and prosperous nation.

Madam Speaker, on the issue that you raised, I escorted you to the home of the late and we heard from the family. This is why I must bring it to the Prime Minister. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we should not stop at simply talking. Can we have the properties before you even think of tokens to give the former MPs?

For these people who had their properties, we were told that evening that her farm of three-square miles on Hoima road was taken. Up to today, it has never been returned. The family told us she has been crying about that property. So, I call upon Government to return this to the family.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I think it should not only stop at when someone passes on and then we come in. In the last Parliament, through the Parliamentary Commission, they invited all former MPs from 1962 and we were in Serena Conference Centre. The President promised to give a handshake to all those former MPs.

Madam Speaker, I would like you to spearhead this in the Parliamentary Commission that it should not just remain that way. We have many former colleagues and you never know, tomorrow you may fall in that group. Can Parliament ensure that this promise by the President is fulfilled? Thank you, Madam Speaker. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We will make a follow up. The good thing is that the Prime Minister is a member of the Commission and she will make a follow up on the handshake for those former leaders. 

3.30
MS PHIONA NYAMUTORO (NRM, National Youth Representative, Female): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the Motion and join the rest of my colleagues in paying tribute to the late hon. Florence Alice Lubega.

Madam Speaker, over time, society and culture have always defined roles and limitations to the African woman. It has only been the platform of education of the girl-child that has granted them the opportunity to break barriers and sit on tables to make decisions today.

It is very unfortunate that with all the progress and success of women emancipation today, the appreciation of women in leadership is still very poor, to the extent that a honourable colleague can stand and insinuate that the success of a very powerful woman whom we are paying tribute to can be related to kneeling down for her husband.

Madam Speaker, much as it might sound laughable, that is how the contribution of women to the development of this country is watered down in jokes that we encourage as leaders and as the legislative body of this country. (Applause)

I would like to call upon my colleagues that it is incumbent upon us as leaders to shape the perspective and narrative in which women contribute to the development of this country. That can only be done by identifying and focusing on discussions that are only on serious business, are development-oriented and strictly translate to what contributions they bring on board as advocates of gender equality and equity – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, like I told you, we appreciate that the whole House is supporting the Motion but we also have to release the family.

3.32
MS DORCAS ACEN (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to join my colleagues in paying tribute to our fallen soldier, the late hon. Florence Lubega. She remains iconic and a great inspiration to the girls and women of this nation and even Africa and beyond.

From what we have heard from the mover, we know that she made a case for the education of the girl-child. That is the point that I would like to dwell on, to say that the Lord has called the late hon. Florence Lubega at a time when Uganda is grappling with issues of teenage pregnancy.

From the report that we have seen from the Forum for African Women Educationalists, we are seeing a 366.5 per cent increase in teenage pregnancy. This is a trend that has not been seen in decades. This is the point where I request our honourable colleagues, the women and men of this nation to join hands and work together to reverse this trend.

May the death of our fallen soldier be a turning point that will re-energise us to be able to reverse the trend which is affecting the plight of the girls of this nation. May I, therefore, join the family and other colleagues to say, may her soul rest in peace. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

3.35
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I first want to take this opportunity to thank you. Immediately we heard about the loss of hon. Florence Lubega, you were one of the first female leaders that appeared at the home. It is a rare gesture that you have always shown. On behalf of the Parliamentary Commission, we really thank you for always taking lead, especially in this.

Many people have talked. We should all stand and support the women of this country. Today, I take the opportunity to thank the NRM Government. It is during the NRM Government that women have come up in very powerful positions. We used not to see this in those days but today, when I look at the Front Bench, I see Rt Hon. Nabbanja smiling, the Vice-President – Just look here; the men are almost going into extinction. Women are everywhere and I thank the NRM Government –(Interruption)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Speaker, we are honouring a great woman and the mover of the Motion, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, said on record that hon. Florence Lubega was appointed a minister in 1967. The National Resistance Movement (NRM) was not there in 1967. If they were, they existed somewhere in the bush. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Silwany to come here and misinform the House when we are discussing a very serious matter without taking cognisance and appreciation of President Obote who was in power at that time and he is on record that he was the first President that appointed a female minister in this country? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Odur, what hon. Solomon is saying is to appreciate his Government now that we have so many women; 47 per cent. At that time, it was only hon. Florence Lubega. He is appreciating the 47 per cent. Therefore, he is in order to support his Government. (Applause)

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, for the record, even Obote’s daughter-in-law is right here in Cabinet. (Laughter) This has been done by the NRM Government.

I join Members in condoling with the family of the late Lubega. I thank everybody for coming today to stand with the family. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Imat Lango, do you have anything to say as an elder in the House? 

3.39
MS CECILIA ATIM (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to join the House in mourning our dear sister, mother and grandmother, Florence Lubega. Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, being a fellow woman, for leading the House in mourning this great lady.

I was restrained to make my comments because I had so many things on the wrong side of the balance sheet. Because you requested whether I would continue keeping quiet or say something, I think it is important for me to say I appreciate that the women, the Government and the generation of today appreciate what the generations before us have done. (Applause)

I continue to lament that as I grew up, I did not have many people to look up to. Why? It is because they were not many. So to see a rare person like Florence Lubega, all of us women have to celebrate her life.

All I can say is that the only way we can celebrate the life of Florence Lubega and others is to continue to appreciate what they have done. At the time when they did that, they did not get any allowance. They were not encouraged by anyone. I must tell you that the women who were at the forefront in mobilising the country for affirmative action had to prove themselves that they were more than just women. You would sacrifice even more than a man. In any office, a woman had to do better than a man to prove that she was a staff in that office.

For Florence Lubega to stand out amongst the Members of Parliament and even to be a minister means she was able to be a better minister than an ordinary minister could be. Definitely, we have to celebrate the life of this lady. We need to thank God for her life. 

I know time is against us but allow me to mention two things. One, if we really want this country to benefit from affirmative action or women emancipation, let us look at the bottoms up approach. How much are we doing, as a country, for that rural child who is now being impregnated at the age of 12, 13 and 14 years? That is the Florence Lubega we are murdering at that stage.

Today, you see the country is celebrating Ogwal’s nakedness in a swimming costume. I do not know why. Suddenly, you are thinking about Ogwal. What have I done really? Forget about my beauty. Look at the speech I made –(Laughter)– Forget about the swimming costume, forget about the beauty. Look at the maiden speech I made in the Constituent Assembly. Then you would say, “That is the woman we want to celebrate”. Not the woman with a hairstyle. Please, stop celebrating the hairstyles of women. Stop celebrating our lipstick, stop celebrating our legs, stop celebrating our heels. Please celebrate the good things we have done for this country. 

The women have done a lot, which has never been highlighted. Sometimes, it is very annoying. Women have done so much. Here is my son, Solomon, standing up and saying, “This is NRM.” Which NRM? (Laughter) NRM was not even there when the Florence Lubegas were standing. Please, let us talk about Uganda. Let us appreciate what the DP, KY and UPC did to give us the seed which the NRM is building on. To me, the NRM has invested zero because I do not see –(Interjections)– yes, the NRM has provided, maybe, a platform for me to speak my mind but it cannot claim that they have made me who I am. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit that if we care about the women, let us make sure that we create a database for the women who have exited Parliament. We should not be talking about hon. Lubega whom some of us may not even know but we should have a database so that we can know who these women are. 

There are many women who, when they leave Parliament, are totally forgotten. Let us have a record of who our women leaders are and try to deploy them where they can be deployed. May God bless the women of Uganda. For God and my country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as promised, we are going to have a database for women who are former leaders. Of course, the performance of a Government is relative. Hon. Nabbanja will come up here and say, “NRM has made me.” So, we do not mind but of course everybody has to appreciate their parties for making them. Therefore, we cannot say that they have not done anything.

As we prepare to send off a mother, mentor, an inspiration and pride of the women's movement, we would like to thank the family of hon. Florence Lubega for taking care of her for 104 years. She was making 104 in the next five days, so, she is 104 years old. We thank the family. As somebody said, the Bible gives 70 years. So, she lived a bonus life and we thank God for her life. Without her, we would not be talking a lot about women here.

We appreciate what she did for the girl child, from the education she brought to the affirmative action and emancipation of women. Women can talk today because of the women who started. If they could do it, who are we? We are here following their steps and I pray we follow their steps in a good way. We pray that the soul of hon. Lubega rests in eternal peace.

I now put the question that the Motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the hon. Alice Florence Lubega that was moved by the Leader of Government Business and seconded by the Leader of the Opposition to pay tribute to the first woman Member of Parliament of Uganda be adopted by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Family, thank you very much. We will join you during the burial. Be blessed.

MR MWIJUKYE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Just last week, this Parliament raised concerns about the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development hindering the activities of Parliament in respect to cuts that were done and now committees cannot move – they are stuck – and part of parliamentary work is being hindered.

You directed that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development harmonise with Parliament. That has not yet happened, yet, we saw in the media the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – who is not only a Member of Parliament but also a member of the Parliamentary Commission – belittling Parliament that Members of Parliament are insensitive to the challenges of Ugandans, when we are being sensitive by saying that we cannot go and do oversight or the work we are supposed to do as Members of Parliament because he is not doing what he is supposed to do.
 
Madam Speaker, by the minister belittling Parliament – and being a member of the Parliamentary Commission, he could have raised all these issues in the Parliamentary Commission rather than going to address a press conference and attack Parliament. 

If the minister is doing this, I am raising a procedural matter on whether the minister is not working against Parliament and whether he should not be asked to come and apologise to Parliament. I beg to request you, Madam Speaker.

3.50
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, because of my busy schedule, I did not watch the news and that is the reason I did not even attend the Commission meeting the other day. I was represented by the Deputy Leader of Government Business.

Honourable colleagues, you need to be informed that the economy is not doing well. I believe that maybe, that is why the minister is stressed on how to make ends meet. We have to be sincere. Remember, as Leader of Government Business, I wanted to inform you that today; - the Vice-President and my office have been in a meeting to see how best we can all fit in the available resources.

Madam Speaker, we are not seated. We want Parliament to perform its duties because there are a number of things Parliament has done and we appreciate. If you move and help the Government to do checks and balances, that will save taxpayers’ money. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like the honourable members to give us some time. Like you are aware, we are not sitting down but struggling to see that we all move in unison and within the limited resources that we have. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we had a Commission meeting, where you were represented. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was there and the resolution was that we must not stifle the operations of Parliament. Stifling the operations of Parliament, where Members of Parliament go beyond a month to even get their own salary and allowances –  leave alone that, you bring Bills here, you bring supplementary budgets and want them to be processed but the committees cannot sit. That is what the Member is raising.

You have a supplementary budget but the committee cannot sit because we do not have money. Therefore, we agreed that we have priorities and our priority is committee meetings. If you want a committee to go upcountry, how will it move there? How will they do their oversight role? That is what we are saying: give us the money for the oversight role of Parliament. We are not asking for too much. (Applause)

If we do not do the oversight role, then what is the essence of us coming to sit here? We are doing the work of the Executive. Let us have the issues of committee work handled. We have agreed on the travels being put aside but committees’ work is paramount to us.

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I look at this matter as administrative. I request that you and I, as members of the Commission, go behind the scene and agree on how to move forward. I beg to move. 

3.55
The leader of the opposition (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to agree with the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that this debate should, in the first place, never have arisen here; the very reason you should never allow your ministers to berate Parliament publicly. It should be a lesson for you to caution when you meet them.

Secondly, where there is no oversight, there should be no expenditure. You have no business to spend if Parliament cannot exercise oversight on you. We shall not be Government but something else. Therefore, there is no space for Government to claim that Parliament has no money to spend when Government has. 

Madam Speaker, I am putting the Front Bench on notice that tomorrow, I intend to present to the House a proper analysis of the mid-term releases and the Prime Minister will have occasion to explain to the country the Government priorities.
The issues of public spending and priorities concern the people. We are sensitive to the fact that the economy has a bit shrunk and therefore, all of us are duty-bound to exercise frugality and prioritisation in our activities.

However, maybe in the same breath, the Prime Minister, an honourable member and veteran of this House, explain to this country and the House a statement attributed to her to the effect that those that did not vote for Government will not benefit from Government programmes? Were you wrongly quoted? (Applause)

This is your platform to clarify –(Interjections)– you have every right to clarify, which is why I am here –

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members – 

Ms nabbanja: Order, Madam Speaker. You know the friendship I have with my brother and the respect I have for him as the Leader of Opposition. 

On Thursday, I was with the Member of Parliament for Masaka in a place called Kyanamukaka where people had suffered losses due to hailstorms. Those people voted an opposition Member but we took food to them. 

Therefore, is he in order to come here and deceive Parliament that I was quoted –(Interjections)– yes, I was with hon. Sebamala and the Woman Member of Parliament for Masaka. They are not NRM members of Parliament but I was there. Is he in order?

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, we were discussing priorities of Parliament. We should be seen to be doing our work. Parliament has four roles and we should be able to perform them.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we are going to have a meeting and resolve issues of Parliament. We must report this to the House on what we have agreed up on –(Mr Odur rose_)– I thought I am making a ruling of what benefits you.
 
Mr JONATHAN odur: Thank you, Madam Speaker –

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jonathan Odur, we need action to this. I know some of you want to smuggle in matters of national importance. I am going to give you time to raise those matters of national importance. It is in the interests of Speaker Jacob Oulanyah and in my interests as part of the Office of the Speaker to ensure Parliament performs. Therefore, there is no way we can allow it not to.

When you see us agreeing – if we have a way of agreeing on how to make priorities, then we should do it. Let us not disadvantage the country by discussing only that thing when we have so many items. Next item.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE ANNUAL MACROECONOMIC AND FISCAL PERFORMANCE REPORT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

3.59
The government chief whip (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table, the Annual Macroeconomic and Fiscal Performance Report for the Financial Year 2020/2021.

THE ANNUAL BUDGET PERFORMANCE REPORT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/21

4.00
The government chief whip (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table, the Annual Budget Performance Report for the Financial Year 2020/2021.

The Deputy Speaker: The report is referred to the standing Committee on Budget with instructions to report back in two weeks.

Hon. Mpuuga, can we lay the papers first before you come with your procedural matters.

4.00
Mr david karubanga (NRM, Kigorobya County, Hoima): Madam Speaker, I stand as the Chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. 

On 29 September 2021, the presiding officer referred the Landlord and Tenants Bill, 2021 to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure for consideration. He guided that the committee should restrict itself to the two clauses referred to by His Excellency, the President, in his letter dated 27 October 2020 since it is the Bill that had already been passed by Parliament.

In the course of our deliberations, the committee realised that the Landlord and Tenants Bill, 2021 defers in content from the Landlord and Tenants Bill, 2019 as passed by Parliament and submitted to His Excellency, the President for assent yet the President’s proposal was based on the latter. I made a communication to the Office of the Speaker on those discrepancies in a letter dated 12 October 2021. 

I will not go into detail of those sections but they are around 10 where we noticed discrepancies. I stand here –(Interruption)

Mr mpuuga: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Chairperson, did I listen in well that you intimated that there is a discrepancy between what was done and what was submitted? If that is true, is it a matter of typographical mistakes or deliberate smuggling of issues into a matter Parliament handled? Did you establish at what stage we lost or did it have other issues not debated included in the Bill? Would you like to clarify?

Mr karubanga: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. I had said that I did not go into the details but probably for the record of Parliament, I can read these sections; section 1(2) – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, those details will be discussed in the committee. How much time do you need us to give you? 

MR KARUBANGA: Madam Speaker, we request for 15 more days to handle clause by clause because what Parliament passed is not what the Ministry of Lands brought back. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are giving you 15 days to go and scrutinise the whole Bill and report back to this House. Next item. 

DR BATUWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter on the issue of COVID-19 vaccination. First and foremost, allow me to appreciate your relentless fight against COVID-19, especially at the very beginning when you instituted a team to go around the country and assess the impact of COVID-19 on this country. 

True to your efforts, we see very many interventions from the Government. However, addressing myself to the issue of vaccination, the policy given to us from the Ministry of Health is that all Ugandans above the age of 18 – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Batuwa, we have a paper on COVID-19 coming up after this. Why don’t you raise your issue when the honourable minister finishes making her presentation? 

DR BATUWA: Madam Speaker, my procedural matter is directed to the brief you made at the beginning of the sitting. That is why I am raising it – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will raise it when the report is being presented. 

DR BATUWA: Much obliged. 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter. We have just paid tribute to a distinguished Member of our community, who is a woman. We have a Motion that was supposed to have come to the Floor last week but it did not. It was supposed to address the plight of the girl child. Arising from that, I have already noticed that there seems to be a strategic and deliberate attack on the leadership of women. When anybody sees a woman rising, that woman must be knocked flat down. 

We have been reading in the media condemnation of the leader who is steering this institution of Parliament. I have always said – and I would like to say it now – that an attack on any leader who drives this Parliament is an attack on you and me; all of us. (Applause) Therefore, it is an attack on the institution of Parliament. If you say that the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker is a prostitute, then all of you are prostitutes. It means we all condone that behaviour. 

Madam Speaker, as an elder, it is a very uncomfortable status I have assumed but it is important that we address this issue. There have been media attacks. I do not know whether you call it a cyber-attack. I am still very weak on the ICT approach to communication and you cannot condemn me for that because I was born earlier than all of you. 

I need to understand whether that is now the order of doing business in this country – that you can attack even the highest of the leadership of the institution and we all keep quiet as if nothing has happened. 

I beg to suggest, as an elder, that there must be an investigation of this matter because some people are even trying to bring up the whole concept of the contest between the Government Chief Whip and the Deputy Speaker or the Speaker and the former Speaker. They are trying to bring all these things in order to address an attack on a woman. 

I would like the issue of this attack on the Deputy Speaker of the institution of Parliament to be officially investigated. Anybody that has information must transparently provide it so that we know. However, all I can say is that this tradition must stop. This started from the time of H. E Specioza Kazibwe; she was attacked. They brought it to Kadaga and now to Anita Among. Why is it so? We have to ask why. We cannot just keep quiet. 

You claim to have been brought up by affirmative action. You were not brought with a padlock on your mouth. We must speak out, as women and leaders of this country. Whether you are a man or a woman, the institution of Parliament cannot be attacked and we keep quiet. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this matter be investigated and that hon. Sarah Opendi’s Motion be brought forward so that it deals with the plight of the girl child. (Applause)

I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members of Parliament, I really appreciate your support. You are a very good Parliament. However, I would like to tell you that in leadership, you will continue to suffer if you have an eMotional reaction to everything that is said about you. True power is about sitting back and observing everything to its logical conclusion. If words control you, that means everyone else can control you. Breathe and allow things pass. That is what I am doing. (Applause) 

I can assure you that as we speak, the culprits are known. We know you and we will handle you. As I said before, nothing will intimidate me. (Applause) Nothing will deter me from doing what I am doing. I am number five in the National Order of Precedence in this country for 10 years. (Applause) 

MR OSHABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for allowing me raise this procedural matter. I like the joy and the spirit you have, as a person, for these attacks can continue. 

However, in the statement of our elder, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, she requested that these people be investigated. We just cannot let it pass because even if you are emotionally strong, people can derail you in the way you are doing your work. 

A former Vice-President of this country claimed that there were mafias. He was a Vice-President but he kept talking about the mafias pinching him. The mafias are still around. If the mafias continue work in that form and we just leave them move like that, tomorrow they will be on my Leader of the Opposition and make claims of that nature. 

My humble request, as a Member of Parliament, I think for such matters, we have UCC – an institution of Government – and a minister that can investigate this and bring to us who the perpetrators of this are and what their intentions are. You may end up seeing that they are coming from the usual mafias that we are suffering with in this country. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. As I said already, investigations are going on and we already know the persons. We know them – Do not worry; sit. We will handle it. 

4.14
THE MINISTER OF SECURITY, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Jim Muhwezi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me time to make a response on this long awaited question of 4 August 2021, which was raised by hon. Anthony Akol of Kilak County. 

At that time, he was concerned about the security of the people because the communities were clashing and some people had been attacked with bows and arrows. 

The security organs took up the matter and handled the situation and it became calm. I would like to make a response to the long-term solution. The conflict of Apaa is generally a result of boundary contestations between Amuru District and Adjumani District, where both districts claim ownership of the area. 

His Excellency the President has held two meetings, one with the Acholi leaders and the other with West Nile leaders. Where it was agreed that Apaa is in Adjumani District and what is required is how to manage land use in that area. 

H.E the President is going to appoint a judicial inquiry which will recommend how the community should utilise the land. After the judge has been appointed to investigate, a report will be given and Parliament will be informed of these results. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. There was another report on Zombo raised by hon. Nambeshe. Speak on both reports. 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Again, this was raised in July and I have always been ready with a response but I had never been given opportunity. Thank you for giving me this opportunity. 

MR MAPENDUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister said that the leaders met The President and there was an agreement that Apaa is in Adjumani. The information the honourable minister is giving is not correct. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Martin Mapenduzi, I told you that you would come and discuss both reports after he has finished presenting the second report. You will bring your issue when we are debating both reports. 

MR MAPENDUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I only thought it would not be proper for the honourable minister to give false information. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what you will tell him when you are debating. 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The situation in Zombo was of a security matter. At that time, the UPDF had been attacked on 16 July 2021 at around 15:30 Hours.

A UPDF unit in Zewu in Zombo District repulsed an attempted attack by a group of over 20 criminals who were armed with six AK47 rifles and machetes, disguising as forest workers. During the attack, UPDF soldiers shot dead six of the attackers, recovered an AK47 rifle loaded with 11 live ammunitions, bows and arrows, while other suspects escaped to the Eastern DRC with injuries. 

Unfortunately, one UPDF solder, Lance Corporal Ochaya David was killed and three others, Private Mako Godfrey, Lance Corporal Aziku Abdul and Private Musa Kayemba sustained injuries and are currently receiving specialised treatment at Bombo General Military Hospital. 

On 17 July 2021, eight of the attackers of Zewu Detach that sustained injuries were admitted at the Agmouba Hospital in Mahaji Territory in Eastern DRC, where two died on arrival at the hospital. 

After the attack, six suspects were arrested and interrogated, which led to the arrest of the commander of the criminals, one Howard Opinjuru, together with three others on 16 October 2021 and are undergoing further interrogations. Further, 45 members of the same militia have surrendered to security forces and have been pardoned and reunited with their families. 

Currently, the security situation in Zombo District is calm and peaceful with security agencies mobilising the population against criminal activities. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. 

4.22
MR OKIN OJARA (FDC, Chwa West County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to comment on the first report by the minister on the issue of Apaa. 

I respect the minister very much because he is a senior cadre in the NRM. But I disagree with his giving us a one page report, which is not even very clear; stating that the situation in Apaa is now calm and not telling us exactly what kind of deployment has been done there. What kind of garrison has been constituted to give hope and respect for the people of Apaa? 

Madam Speaker, it is barely a week that there was another attack in Apaa and yet this matter was raised some time back; I think last week or the other week. Therefore, by the minister simply coming to take it casually by giving us information as if he is talking to I do not know who - he should be very serious. He should have given us a comprehensive report on the security situation, done an analysis of security and presenting it before this august House so that we are able to debate the report.

Secondly, the minister indicated, in his report, that the President is about to appoint a commission to go ahead to analyse and handle the issues of Apaa. However, he has not stated when this appointment is going to take place. 

We have had this issue of Apaa - Madam Speaker, you have been in this Parliament. I do not know how many times we have debated the issue of Apaa here. When is the President going to appoint this commission so that we sort this issue of Apaa once and for all? This is my concern, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.24
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the issue of Apaa, Government has taken us for granted for too long. The year 2012 was the beginning and it was an operation by Government, headed by the then Deputy IGP. We went and stopped it but our people continue to suffer. 

Up to 20 people have been killed over the issue of Apaa. Right now, some of our people are either in police cells or prison in Adjumani. Apaa has become another country. As the Opposition, when we wanted to go there, we were stopped. You find roadblocks because Apaa is a different country. They tell you, “Go and get a visa in Adjumani”. 

The Acholi and Madi have remained friends and there are intermarriages but there is somebody behind this conflict. That person behind this conflict is going to cause a problem to Uganda. There will be a problem. You have arrested, you have killed - We have ever co-existed. 

Even if Apaa was in Adjumani, our people should still be able to live on their land. We live in Kampala peacefully. This is not our land and yet we live peacefully. Why should it be very difficult for Acholi to live in Apaa and they have been the original occupants of Apaa. Shame! Shame on this Government! If this Government cannot solve the problem of Apaa –

I even told them that if I were a man, I would have already taken a spear and bows –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know how sensitive Apaa issues are. This time round, we asked the minister to go and ascertain the security situation and that is what we wanted, not whether Apaa belongs where. We do not have those powers to determine that. We want to know the security situation. How far are they going to protect? How much are they protecting people? That is what we want.

However, when it comes to the issues of demarcation, this is not what was brought to this House. Ours was on the safety of the people who are living in Apaa. Let us not bring eMotions in this Apaa issue. It is not only Apaa that has a boundary issue; even Tororo and other areas do. Let us debate with calmness. I know it pains but let us debate with calmness.

4.28
MR AMERE ONEKALIT (FDC, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Madam Speaker, the issues of Apaa have taken too long. I want to state, without any iota of doubt, that there is a third hand on the issues of Apaa. If there is interest that someone has on the issues and land of Apaa, it should come out clearly.

As the people of Acholi, we have lived with our neighbours; the Madi, for a long time – for centuries – without any chaos or problem. However, the issues of Apaa are not being settled. If the minister is stating before Parliament today that there is calm in Apaa, it is a big shame. 

People are dying. So far, we have lost 21 people. People are being arrested and they are languishing in prison. For the minister to come before Parliament and say that there is calm in Apaa; we are embarrassed.

Madam Speaker, I request that the minister goes and comes back with authentic information, if we are to debate it in a sober way. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this question was raised some time back. I am even happy that you commented that the issue has taken time on the Order Paper. Is it possible for us to get the current status of what is happening in Apaa? If we had the current status - from the time the question was asked, maybe something else has happened.

So, can we have the current status on what is happening in Apaa? Leaders of that area, why don’t you take the initiative to go with the minister on the ground? Go with the minister but do not fight on the ground like the Masaka team fought because we are now debating what we do not know. This side is saying there is a problem but the minister is saying things have been calmed down.

Honourable minister, can you go on the ground? (Mr Macho rose_) Members, we are getting a solution to this. I want the minister plus the leaders to go on the ground. Go on the ground and come with an authenticated report.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I was reporting on what I investigated then and the steps Government has taken. However, I take your advice. I can go back, investigate and make a report about the current situation. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You need to go on the ground with the leaders and I do not want to hear that there was a clash between the Members and the minister. Please, I want you to go on the ground.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. At that time when the matter was raised –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, when you switch on a microphone and then ask for a point of procedure, I will not allow you. Sit down. You are the same people who want current information but you are the same person who is rising on a procedural matter. So, which is which? 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Madam Speaker, what I knew is that UPDF deployed a special unit in Apaa to control the situation. If it has changed, I am going to check. I can go with the leaders, we make an on-the-spot assessment of the situation and report back to this House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Report back to this House in one week on the status of Apaa security wise, not on who owns the land. We want a report on the status of the security – on the lives of the people. 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Much obliged. 

4.33
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had the benefit of having been part of the 10th Parliament, where these issues started. At some stage, they were very emotive, even here on the Floor. Honourable members were accusing each other of involvement and crass partisanship in this subject matter.

With due respect to the good General, I am not convinced with the solution by the Government of involving the judicial commission to determine what to do with the land. First of all, before even the ownership issue has been decided, the Government is deciding on how to skin a cow whose ownership is in dispute. The ownership has been the dispute, eternally.

My sense is that Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Muhwezi does not have the latest. If his position is the position of Government, can we have – what he says in his report, that eventually the Government decided to use the judicial commission, for me, is inconclusive. I have not seen record of what they discussed to come up with that as the way forward. 

His statement, to me, is to settle the demands of the Speaker at the moment. It is unsatisfactory. If the Speaker is convinced, however, I will have nothing useful to add but in the circumstance, I doubt his statement. 

All of us must be ashamed. At some stage, deaths were reported from Apaa. Before we talk about the minister going back with the leaders, is he being truthful in what the Government decided? Do we have a record of that submitted for the record of Parliament?

I have tried to look at his statement. It looks like an AC office-generated statement, not really one generated by consensus. I do not see the voices of the leaders in that statement. I might be dead wrong – and the minister is here to rule me out of context. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, the question was on Government’s action to calm the situation of Apaa Village, arising from insecurity caused by bow and arrow wielding persons from Adjumani. There is nothing that was said about the boundary. I have asked the minister to come with a report on what the question was. He has understood and we have given him one week. So, I do not see any problem, really. He has accepted that he will be here in one week. 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: To answer my friend, the Leader of the Opposition, the question was about insecurity at that time. I actually could have stopped at what steps were taken to stop the bow and arrow people who were causing insecurity –(Ms Ababiku rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Jesca, just a moment.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: However, I elected to give more information, which if you do not want, I can withdraw and stick to the security matters alone. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, do not pick the microphone when a colleague is talking. 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: I was saying that I could have stopped at what steps we took, which were that the UPDF deployed a unit to make sure that there was law and order in the area. I accept that we are going to check and get the latest status and report back to Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, Members are commenting because you hinted on the ownership. So, do not go beyond what you were asked. You hinted on the ownership and that is where issues are coming from. Our concern right now is on security. We need security in the area. Give us feedback. 

I can see that hon. Jesca Ababiku is dying to talk. You will go on the ground with the minister and report to this House. (Ms Ababiku rose_) I thought I had ruled on that issue.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. The procedural matter I am raising in relation to what we have just concluded is about the fatigue and the negative effects we are going through because of unresolved issues surrounding Apaa. 

Although I agree with you that the minister’s report should only relate to the security matters, unless issues about where Apaa is, is concluded, there will be no peace. It is because people will still keep fighting over this same piece of land. Therefore, in order to resolve this matter, let the location be affirmed and that will be one of the solutions [MS BETTY AOL: “Order!”]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She is on a procedural matter, the former Leader of the Opposition. Hon. Jesca Ababiku, the Woman Member of Parliament of Adjumani, for now, do not take us into the boundary issues. We will ask the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and other ministerial departments to sort that out. Come up with your own Motion to that effect. This was a question on the security matters. 

Members, in the distinguished strangers’ gallery, we have a delegation of staff from the Parliament of Malawi, including:

    1. Mr Leonard Tilingamawa. He is the Chief Research Officer in the Parliament of Malawi.
    2. Ms Deborah Mangulama, Senior Research Officer.
    3. Ms Thokozani Chikuse, Librarian. 

Honourable members, please join me in welcoming the members. They are here to observe our proceedings. Thank you.  

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE INCOVENIENCE SUFFERED BY ARRIVING PASSENGERS AT THE ENTEBBE INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT WHILE AWAITING RESULTS OF THEIR MANDATORY COVID-19 TEST

4.43
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to appreciate you for requesting me to present to this august House what is happening at Entebbe International Airport. 

As many of you may recall, we have been testing incoming travellers with support from the private sector. The testing, which was at the Peniel Beach Hotel started in May 202l and ended on 21 October 202l. It covered 10 countries categorised as high risk. 

The categorisation took into consideration the presence of the variants of concerns, high rate of transmission of the disease, the number of deaths reported and the vaccination coverage of at least 60 per cent. 

Madam Speaker, at a Cabinet sitting on l3 September 2021, a decision was taken that Government should carry out mandatory testing of all incoming travellers, at their own cost of $30 at Entebbe International Airport and all other points of entry, as a means of preventing importation of new variants into the country. 

In preparation for this, the Ministry of Health, under the guidance of the Rt Hon Prime Minister, and with support from the Ministry of Finance, Civil Aviation Authority, the National Planning Authority, Post Bank, NITA-U and the UPDF Engineer's Brigade, set up sample collection facilities testing laboratories, client flow processes, online payment systems and all the necessary infrastructure at Entebbe International Airport, to facilitate the mandatory COVID-I9 testing.

Categorised testing of the original l0 countries began on 22 October 202l following the official launch of the testing facility by H.E the President. However, mandatory testing commenced at 9.00 a.m on 27 October 2021 when the 48-hour international requirement had matured.  However, like any new intervention, the procedure faced some challenges, which a few sections of the media portrayed as messages of frustration from passengers who experienced some delays as they went through the various processes.

Madam Speaker, with this feedback from the passengers, we responded promptly by visiting Entebbe International Airport to understand the issues and put in place mitigation measures. 

Allow me to state here that the entire team of the UPDF brigade, the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA), NITA-U, Post Bank Uganda, the National Planning Authority and other key stakeholders are still at the airport. 

The challenges identified include the following:

Results Dispatch System

This was cited as the biggest challenge, which inconvenienced travellers. The travellers were not able to access their results, which were being printed and read out manually. The public address system was not audible and there is congestion at the Results Dispatch Desk. 

The above challenge has since been resolved as follows:

a) 	Results will no longer be given out manually but through an online system, which includes emails, Whatsapp messages and display of names on the available screens mounted on the walls for those who do not have smartphones or laptops;

b) 	Results will be linked to passports or travel documents to enable quick scanning and verification;

c) 	Adequate portals for charging of electronics will immediately be made available to support those who run out of battery during flight;

d) 	Free Wi-Fi has been made available although the internet remains weak and is affecting operations; and

e) 	Exit was made easier through scanning of QR Codes using tablets and the waiting area should be beefed up with additional ushers to support the comfortable seating of passengers.

The turnaround time for results takes between 45 minutes, if the passenger’s result is run on a Genexpert machine, to two hours, if passenger’s result is run on other PCR tests.

The other issue was communication. The airport infrastructure at the new terminal does not favour the use of
the public address system. Communication through the numerous screens mounted on the walls is currently ongoing where we are displaying names but also giving information. In addition, we have deployed five public relations officers to support all forms of communication. 

The other issue was the challenge with online registration and payments. The former link was not working but the updated link for online registration has been shared and publicised
though all communication channels including the CAA and the Ministry of Health websites and other social media platforms. 

All incoming travellers are required to fill this form and pay online to quicken the sample removal process, testing and receiving results upon arrival. Once the form has been completed, a QR code is generated and the traveller is required to show this code to the sample remover at the point of sample collection. 

An online payment system has been activated to enable travellers pay via credit or debit card or mobile money. Those that are unable to use any of these options can pay upon arrival in Uganda shillings. All travellers are requested to provide their Whatsapp phone numbers or email addresses when filling in the forms. 

Sample collection

There are 30 sample collection booths, with the capacity to collect 30 samples every five minutes. Passengers are encouraged to cooperate to make the process as smooth as possible and as quick as possible. 

Tourists that are registered with the Uganda Tourism Board (UTB) are not affected by the system because they do not go through the system. They register with the Uganda Tourism Board and identify themselves upon arrival. They have separate booths and are allowed to continue to their hotels in Entebbe where they wait for their results before proceeding to their designated destinations. 

Their results are shared via email. In the event that a tourist tests positive for COVID-19, they are isolated in their designated hotel at their own cost and after 7 days, they are tested again for free at a Government laboratory. 

Travellers who test positive are notified by the Ministry of Health surveillance team and they will be transferred to either a public or a private isolation facility, depending on the preference of the traveller. Those who opt for private facilities will meet their own costs for treatment while those admitted to public facilities will be treated free of charge.

Testing of outbound passengers 

These are the ones traveling out of the country. The Ministry of Health wishes to clarify that it is no longer working in partnership with the private laboratories that had set up at Peniel Beach. 

However, we have been informed that the following laboratories: Safari Lab, Case Clinic, Test and Fly and Same day lab, on their own initiative entered into contracts with different airlines like Emirates, Air Uganda, Fly Dubai, Uganda Airlines and Air Arabia to test outbound passengers with a timeline of two hours before departure. The private laboratories decided to hire Peniel Beach as their venue for testing. 

Our new proposal

Madam Speaker, today in our meeting, after having reviewed all the available information and noted that out of the 7,363 people tested in five days, 34 tested positive. We resolved as follows:

    1. We shall allow travellers to go home and self-isolate after a sample has been removed.

    2. NITA-U will develop a tracking system within two days - that is tomorrow, Wednesday and Thursday - and make it available for tracking the on average five cases per day. Travellers will be required to provide adequate information for easy traceability. 

    3. From 5 November 2021, travellers will be allowed to go home after testing.

    4. The Ministry of Health will strengthen the surveillance system and follow-up of all the identified positive cases.

In conclusion, allow me to appreciate the teams working at the airport, those who have provided information and to state clearly that we regret the inconvenience that has happened to the travellers. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you, honourable minister, for the report and information you have given to the House. Can we start with Dr Batuwa who had a pending question?

5.54
Dr timothy batuwa (FDC, Jinja South Division West, Jinja City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I wanted the minister to speak about the capacity of testing - the number of genexpert machines - because the issue at the airport is about delays and a critical factor. However much we make the electronic results’ transmission or scanning perfect, as long as the results which are in the “kitchen” are not coming out in time, the subsequent processes will be delayed.

I have borrowed the results for the arrivals at Entebbe Airport of May to understand the numbers and maybe put it in perspective. The minister has said that the collection booths are 30 and it takes five minutes to collect samples from those 30 people. 

However, the arrivals at Entebbe Airport in May are 77,000. If you divide them by 30 to get the daily arrivals, you are talking of 2,500. If you further divide those by 30, it means our scale of testing is still low. Therefore, I urge the minister to multiply the booths several times such that passengers take a very short time at the airport.

Last but not least, I urge the Minister of Health to take a lead role in the fight against COVID-19. The policy about vaccination is to vaccinate all those above the age of 18. From the minister’s words, those people are 22 million. The number of doses of COVID-19 vaccine we have received so far are about seven million. I am told that at most, by the end of the year, we shall have nine million doses.

Given that each person takes two jabs, that takes care of 4.5 million people getting vaccinated against that 22 million that should be vaccinated. Look at the situation we are getting into where organisations are restricting Ugandans accessing their premises. Like the Speaker has said, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has already instituted a policy - If you are not vaccinated, you should not access that facility.

The people we are condemning to those restrictions are 18 million. It is not because they do not want –(Interjections)– yes, when you talk of nine million doses. Even if you call them 10 million and each Ugandan is taking two jabs, we are budgeting for five million Ugandans against 22 million. This means that 18 million Ugandans are not going to get vaccinated, not because they do not want but there are no vaccines.

Come out and speak loudly about those restrictions like what the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is doing to restrict Ugandans from accessing their premises. This will be replicated in other institutions. We have already heard of universities that are demanding that a student who is not vaccinated should not access a university premise. Come out strongly on that.

Soon, we shall be hearing that the Ministry of Health, which should actually be at the forefront of making sure that everybody gets vaccinated, is also issuing directives that if you are not vaccinated – (Interjections)– I am saying soon. It is wrong to issue such directives right now. Ugandans are willing to get vaccinated but there are no adequate vaccines.  

Finally, speak out; to what end are we demanding that for someone to access an institution, they should be vaccinated? Are we saying that a vaccinated person will not transmit COVID-19 or does not contract it? We know that even when you are vaccinated, you can contract and can still transmit COVID-19. Vaccination will help you to arrest the transitioning of the disease. You will not transition from mild or moderate to severe. 

Therefore, let us emphasise standard operating procedures (SOPs), the masks, sanitisers and social distancing. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Batuwa, it is not wrong to give that directive. There are vaccines. What we need is to make sure that you, as leaders, encourage – (Honourable members rose_) - can you all sit down? What we are supposed to do is encourage our people to get themselves vaccinated. 

I was giving an example of my own office today. I had two staff members who were afraid of being vaccinated. They said, “People will die.” I said, “You either choose to be vaccinated or go away.”

Let us mobilise our people to be vaccinated. We are giving instructions and I want to tell you that we must stand by the instructions we have given as Parliament; that people must come with vaccination cards. On the rumour going around that we will not agree, there is leadership in Parliament and it must be implemented. (Applause)

Another thing is, politics aside, hon. Jane Aceng, your ministry has done a good job. (Applause) – (Dr Batuwa rose_) – Dr Batuwa, I have not allowed you to talk. 

We have a team that I secretly sent to the airport. I wanted them to assess what was there. Let me have hon. Elijah Okupa and then the Chairman of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry.

5.00
Mr Elijah okupa (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Health for the work you have done since COVID-19 started and also from the day I raised this matter in this House. We all need to first applaud the minister. The circumstances under which they are working are immense. (Applause)

Given the directive the President gave that day and ordered that Government takes over the testing immediately, I think it caused a great challenge to the Ministry of Health and the Uganda Civil Aviation Authority.

Yesterday, we left here at 6.00 p.m. as the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry headed by the chairperson, hon. Mpaka, with about five or six members like hon. Aogon, the Shadow Minister for Tourism, Trade and Industry, among others.

When that directive was issued, it gave the Uganda Civil Aviation Authority and Ministry of Health a challenge of ensuring that they make provisions for the testing booths. Yesterday, when we went there – first, we would like to thank the team that provided the tents where the booths are. I can confirm that there are 30 booths where they collect samples from. We were told that they have 60 staff to handle the testing.

Madam Speaker, one of the things I would like to disagree with the minister is about the collection of the samples - because we found some passengers there. The time for collection of the samples is not five minutes; it is more than that. Why is this so? It is because of filling of the forms.

We have a challenge with the internet at the airport and this is where we need to hold NITA-U responsible because the passengers who are supposed to have filled the forms from their place of abode – if the internet at Entebbe is bad, cannot fill them. 

Therefore, when they arrive at the airport, they must do the manual one, which takes time to issue the forms; the signing, entering the data and then the samples are picked. It cannot take five minutes. The five minutes can only be the ideal time when everything is working normally. However, the passengers we found there had faced that challenge. They had to fill the forms and in the end, the average time was about 30 minutes. 

It becomes a big challenge if that is the situation when more than one flight arrives. Imagine flights like Emirates, KLM and those big planes arriving with more than 300 passengers. If they are two planes, those are 600 passengers - how much time is that? You can calculate that. 

There is need to increase the number of booths for collecting the samples but NITA-U must also up their game to provide faster 5G internet services at the airport. We provided money to NITA-U for purposes of upgrading. What happened? They must tell us. 

Madam Speaker, we were also taken through – because after the passengers get out of the plane, they are brought down. They go to pick the samples and then from there, they come to Immigration. From immigration, they are led to pick their cargo. After that, they are taken up. If it rains, there is a challenge. However, at the moment, the Civil Aviation Authority is erecting a canopy that enables them to climb up. They are sharing a place for arrivals and departures but they have somehow tried to separate it. When they get in there, they have to wait at that point for their results, which are displayed on the screen and then they go to the desk. 

The honourable colleague that left raised the issue of the capacity of those machines. We found five machines; two GXV, which take 16 samples at ago. We were told it takes two to two and a half hours to get the results. When you multiply those by two, you get 32. 

There are also three BioRad CFX96 that take 96 samples at ago. If they are three, you multiply that by three. That can only be one plane like Emirates. If they take two and a half hours and there are two to three flights that have arrived, that can be a challenge. 

The minister should tell us whether there is a possibility that there are machines that can take more than 96 samples at ago. If the money is not there, then Parliament must provide it. However, we wondered why they brought these small ones because they should have been fit for the health centres IV and not the airports. We understand the challenge they are facing given the time they were given. That needs to be addressed. 

We would like to thank the Government for reducing the testing fee from $65 to $30. The passengers are complaining. Why should the private sector charge people $65 yet at the airport, Government is providing $30? The private providers at the airport must deal with that. 

There was another challenge we discovered that the minister should tell us here. There were those that said they paid by mobile money and the money went to a mobile number registered in a person’s name. We need that clarification so that the country gets to know the truth. 

Amidst all these challenges, we saw an improvement yesterday and we would like to thank you. We take the apologies that you have given here. We were not lying. We were right to raise the issues here so that we get better service and tourists are not discouraged from coming to this country and the economy gets affected. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, my colleagues will add what I may have left out from that submission. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Okupa. Of course, in every new system, there are always challenges. We appreciate what the ministry is going through –(Ms Anifa Kawooya rose) – hon. Kawooya, for now, leave that discussion. 

In every new system, there are challenges but we are impressed that we are improving. We would also like the monies that are being paid to go to Government, not to private investors because this would help the Government. 

You also need to improve on the time of collection and delivery of results. The ICT should also improve the internet issue for it to work better and increase the number of booths collection centres. 

5.08
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable minister for giving information to this House because since last week, this House was yearning for answers. 

Madam Speaker, yes, we can be told that systems have improved and that is what we all want. Uganda depends on tourism partly to raise her revenues but we need statistics of the number of imported cases since testing began. How many imported cases have you got? This is in order for us to assess the relevance as to whether it is still necessary not to trust the PCR results that other countries are sending us here? This is because the basis of that is that we do not partially agree with the PCR results from those countries. 

I can tell you that if you do not treat other people well, there is reciprocation. When we do it to citizens of other nations coming into this country, it is the same way we shall be treated. That will mean that I test on departure from this country, through private means and I will be subjected to other tests. Now, this increases the cost of my travel budget. It creates inconvenience. Before you know, we shall even be told to quarantine. 

Madam Speaker, we are suffering from many things because of diplomatic reciprocation. I can give you an example and honourable members, you have all been here. I do not want to digress. There is an issue between Uganda and the United States of America on visas. In East Africa, many of other citizens are given more than five years. When we asked them this question, they said we give them six months because we are more interested in money. That is why they give our counterparts 10 years. We are more interested in visa money and we do not look at the broader picture that when a tourist comes in regularly without being asked for money, they spend more. 

Coming back to health, it is the same; lumping up countries and subjecting them to the same will attract for us the same repercussion wherever we go, which will increase our cost of travel and inconvenience. 

Yes, we want to keep our country clean and we have no problem. We understand the measures you have introduced so far but is it still necessary? What should inform that are the statistics that you must give us; that out of the people that entered this country, amongst those we have checked, we have picked out 0.5 per cent out of the 10,000 tourists or returnees. Those that came in after checking, we discovered about this percentage. This is in order for us to find out whether it is still necessary anymore to impose tests at the border posts? 

Madam Speaker, that is why we prefer that we be moved by data so that someone comes here and gives us statistics for us to come up with an informed view. For example, that yes, we need to advise the Government and the President of this republic that based on the statistics, it is still necessary or unnecessary. We already have porous borders between Uganda and Kenya, Uganda and Congo, Uganda and South Sudan; so, how do we monitor that?

We are, therefore, only relying on data of people who have to fly into the country. What of the porous border crossings where people just walk in or buses? 

Even if you say the cost is going down, that is not the issue. The cost of the inconvenience; someone thinks twice. One asks, why should I go to Uganda and be subjected to this rigorous process? If we could do the rapid testing – yes, it has 60 per cent compliance that it might be correct or false but let that be backed up by the data. 

Otherwise, the issue of the internet is a nightmare. Public facilities in this country do not have fast, reliable and functional internet. Therefore, telling someone travelling from another country to register online and they reach here and cannot even effect payment is another nightmare. This is the first impression we give to people that enter into our country. That is the face of our country. How do you treat your guests or returning residents? That is what shall inform our decision. 

In my opinion, we seek clarification from the honourable minister about the empirical data. Give us the data and we shall give you our decision. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, how I wish you would not repeat what has already been said. Let us bring in fresh ideas to help the ministry perform. When we talk about quantitative analysis - I heard the minister talking about figures and I thought that was qualitative enough. 

We did not ask about what is happening at the borders. Maybe we shall now ask the minister to find out for us what is happening in the porous borders. First impression is lasting but we must also protect our Ugandans. We should not just bring in Coronavirus. 

5.15
MR OJARA OKIN (FDC, Chua West County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me thank the minister for this report. I would like to agree with my colleague that we need to do some planning and thinking of how we shall be able to execute what you have planned for. 

I recently travelled and when I came back, my sample was taken. That was on Friday. Madam Minister, you said the results come out in 45 minutes – I am still waiting for my results up to now. They took my phone number and my email address. I do not know whether I am positive or negative – (Interjections) - I am honest about it; it is not a joke. That is why I am saying you need to do some thinking because if I am positive, then the entire Parliament is at risk. 

I am just talking about the inefficiency at the airport. Why should results take four to five days to come out? You take samples and then release the people. The travellers are released to go and all this information comes after. Are you doing good service to this country? 

Maybe there is some capacity that is supposed to be improved as Members have said –(Interruption)

MS NABUKEERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I too took a test on Friday. Today is Tuesday and I do not know whether I am positive or negative. Basically, checking is not reliable because we do not have results. I do not know how you are going to go about that. 

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, hon. PP Okin talked about being tested but the results have not been given to him up to today. I would like to provide more information. When I came back from Dubai, I was not tested. I was only tested from Dubai when I was coming here. When I reached Uganda, I was not tested. I just came like that so that is the situation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You dodged the test.

MS BAHIREIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the great job being done by the Ministry of Health to control COVID-19 because we have managed to be one of the best in the region in controlling COVID-19. Thank you very much. 

We even thank you for the efforts you are putting in place to restrict access of some places basing on vaccination status because COVID-19 is about life and death. We cannot just play around with it. 

I would like to bring to the attention of the House and specifically to the Minister of Health and her team that we have seen situations where Members of Parliament negotiate for a subsidy on the COVID-19 test because it is high. You can imagine when an MP reaches the extent of crying that Shs 250,000 is a lot of money. It means that it is very expensive for our ordinary Ugandans. 

We appreciate that we are in a free market economy but we kindly request that when it comes to social services, especially in emergency situations, the Government and the Ministry of Health should come in and regulate payments for these services. Otherwise, Ugandans are being squeezed so much. That money is too much. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Elijah, that is a maiden speech. You do not put somebody on a maiden speech to order. (Laughter)

5.20
MR PAUL OMARA (Independent, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me time. I would like to thank the minister for her information to the House. I would also like to thank her efforts in enumerating the conditions that we saw at the airport and the improvements that have so far been done. 

My observation is around the harmonisation of COVID-19 policies across Africa. Recently, I had the privilege of travelling to South Africa on a business visit and I took a test from here. I flew to South Africa and they just asked for the COVID-19 results, which I provided at the airport and I was allowed to enter into the country. 

When I was returning, I did another COVID-19 test and travelled the following day and I was negative. 
The question is in line with what the honourable member raised before; reciprocity of actions. Before the COVID-19 pandemic, tourism was our number one revenue earner and it was recently overtaken by gold. 

If we provide these kinds of policies, of course, there will be an inconvenience to visitors coming here. They are bringing us money. The only thing that we can do is to harmonise our policies under the African Union. Secondly, we can only be efficient if we have to protect ourselves against COVID-19.

So, I would like to hear from the minister what policy framework she is working around with fellow ministers across the continent. I thank you.

5.22
MR JOHN TEIRA (NRM, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the minister for the great initiative in combating the COVID-19 pandemic. Honourable minister, I would like you to take keen interest in preserving the integrity of the testing process, lest we risk being dubbed “inconsistent”. 

On 5th October this year, having taken a PCR test 48 hours before getting to the airport, I did a rapid test. From one testing point, I had two results; both negative and positive. I was advised by the authorities not to travel because they were not sure which results were accurate. On insistence, they cancelled the positive results and handed me the negative ones.

Surprisingly, when I went into the office at the clinic at the airport, there were several other people of different nationalities, who had the same challenge.

Honourable minister, now that the Ministry of Health has come to the airport to take responsibility, I kindly beg you to interest yourself in the integrity of the whole process, otherwise we shall continue to risk a lot. Thank you.

5.25
MR MARTIN MUZAALE (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to begin by thanking the minister for the report. However, what is very unfortunate is that we are picking a lot of information from our colleagues, that is different from the position of the minister. The minister says that it takes 45 minutes and colleagues are saying they have spent about four or five days without receiving their results.

Madam Speaker, in view of that, I find myself a little bit in a fix on whether I should take the information of the minister or that of colleagues. I think it is important that you interest yourself in this matter such that we find the rightful information in regard to this.

We are today focusing on the Uganda Civil Aviation Authority – the entry point, which is normally at the airport. However, we also have other border posts. I request that the ministry also takes interest in monitoring those other border posts. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, that is why I said that do not repeat what has been said. I had already made a ruling to that effect. Where did hon. P.P Okin Ojara test from? Okay, it is not you who tested. 

5.27
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Protection of lives is very expensive. My opinion is that we must do all it takes to keep Ugandans and any other persons safe. 

Therefore, my proposal is that our ministry and the Government should look at the time over which people have complaints. If we can reduce on the duration, even if it were me to go outside the country and I get tested in order to save Ugandans and myself, that is worthwhile.

I pray that our ministry gets help so that we do not take too much time but we keep steadily testing people when we are going and coming back into the country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.28
MS JANE PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues in thanking the minister for the report. I thank the Ministry of Health for all efforts being made to control and manage COVID-19. However, this afternoon, the Prime Minister told us the budget cuts are so because the economy is not performing well.

Madam Speaker, premised on that, I would pray to the Minister of Health and her team that we are soon going into the festive season. Therefore, we shall have an influx of tourists and businesspeople wanting to do business. We are already very hopeful that come January, the country will be fully opened. That is why I support that testing should be done at the airport. However, can it be done in a shorter period than 45 minutes? Imagine if an investor or I flew in for business and would like to have a quick meeting in Kampala and travel back. I feel that 45 minutes is still long.

The economy has to open because we have to move on with business. I request that the period be reduced but all efforts continue to ensure that we are prepared to reopen the economy, come January. Thank you – (Interruption)

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, thank you. Thank you, my colleague, for allowing me to give information. (Laughter) I would like to inform the august House that according to what my colleague has submitted, even to enter Kenya from Busia, you must be tested. However, what is challenging is that the cost of testing in Uganda is higher compared to all countries in East Africa.

I, therefore, would like to inform the Minister of Health that the cost of testing in the neighbouring countries is cheap because they have not left testing in the hands of private companies, like what is done here. An airline company has no authority to condition a country and take over the testing with all the money that Government has given to the Ministry of Health. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.31
MS RITA ATUKWASA (Independent, Woman Representative, Mbarara City): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I add my voice to commend the Ministry of Health for all the efforts they have put to make us stay safe.

I was part of the team that visited the airport last evening. However, one of the salient issues that – even when we address all these challenges - if it is not addressed we shall continue to see people at the airport complain about the categorisation of what a tourist is.

To the Ministry of Health and the Uganda Civil Aviation Authority, they only consider tourists that come through registered tour companies. Believe you or me, Ugandans have taken on their cardinal role to market their country and invite their friends and relatives to come into Uganda to be able to spend money here.

So, if they do not address that aspect, do not get surprised to see tourists who will stay longer at our airport still complain. 

My prayer is that the Ministry of Health takes effort to record more data. This will help in ensuring that whoever comes here for any business does not stay long at the airport. We are all guests and we are all marketing Uganda.

Lastly is the issue about the timing. I want to affirm what hon. Elijah Okupa has submitted. It is the truth and nothing but the truth. We interviewed the laboratory technicians and they said this: the first test machine produces results in one and a half hours. The second one produces results in two and half hours. 

Dr Ruth Aceng, you have done a wonderful job but do not hesitate to ask for money. If we are going to use tourism as a mechanism to revamp our economy, please procure the fastest and heavy testing machines. We want this money from tourism and we want jobs. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.33
MR RONALD BALIMWEZO (NUP, Nakawa Division East, Kampala City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was so much perturbed when I read stories about what happened at the airport. Taking into consideration what Dr Batuwa said, if you compare the number of people that came in May and divided with the number of days in a month, you will get basically 2,300 people day. And when you calculate the number of minutes that the 2,300 would require, you will realise it is too much time. Therefore, I request that we increase the number of booths so as to quicken up the process.

On the other hand - and I am saying this in good faith - today, I was called by my people at one of the centres where vaccination is taking place. They were about 300 people but they were only given 70 immunisation cards and 70 jabs. We have mobilised people to go for vaccination but the vaccines are not available. 

Honourable minister, why aren’t the vaccines available yet we have been basically given 12 million doses?

The other thing is that the people who are administering vaccines are complaining heavily. Recently, I met quite a number of them. Majority of them are from the private medical facilities and they are complaining that they are being paid only Shs 5,000 for transport. I pray that you increase that money to motivate them to vaccinate our people well. Thank you.

5.36
MR MARTIN OJARA (Independent, Bardege-Layibi Division, Gulu City): Madam Speaker, first of all, I thank the minister for every effort she is making together with her team. It is important to note that the minister has tried so much, during this difficult period, to do what it takes to save the lives of Ugandans. 

A few days ago – it started last week – we saw, on different social media platforms, very disturbing video clips where foreigners bitterly told very painful stories of how they were treated at Entebbe International Airport. This sends a very wrong image of the country. I know there are efforts being made to attract people to come and invest in this country but also to attract tourists to come. 

We talk about the impact of COVID-19 in as far as the economy is concerned. We also talk about trying, even within the difficult period, to attract people. However, as long as we do not build systems that function well – Honourable minister, much as you are trying your best to put systems that work to improve on how things are done, there is a culture that has been built at Entebbe International Airport that needs to be fully checked. 

I am sure you recall, when you appeared before the COVID-19 taskforce, that I made mention of a very disturbing experience when a team of visitors came from the U.S to Uganda and they were in Gulu to meet the team from Gulu University. They were to fly back the next day and we made arrangements to have them tested. They told me, “No, we do not need it.” I asked, “Why?” They said, “We have already made arrangements. There are some people at Entebbe International Airport who have arranged to give us results without getting tested.” They paid $60 dollars. I shared this information when you appeared before the committee. 

Much as you are trying to put systems in place, unless we deal with that corrupt tendency, that cancer that has already entered our system - we know what you go through is difficult but we need to be alert at all times. Make sure that even when you try that good intention –(Member timed out.)

5.39
MS SANTA OKOT (PPP, Aruu North County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I sat down there quietly and listened to many submissions. I join the honourable colleagues in thanking the Minister of Health for her fight to reduce COVID-19 infections amongst the people of Uganda. 

I need clarification: to me, all people are equal before God. The tourists come to Uganda, they are tested and they wait for their results from the hotel. This is what I heard. However, I also heard that there are people who were tested and found positive. When you are found positive, you go to your home and you will be followed with different steps. 

The rest of the people - the investors who also bring money, then Ugandans who are returning and many other people who come into the country have to wait at the airport for their results. When the results are out, that is when you can leave. This includes even those who have been found sick.

Why don’t we arrange it in this form? You capture the data of everyone who arrives at the airport and release them to go and because you have their data, you can follow them up just as the people you found sick and asked them to go to their homes and you would follow them up. Why don’t we do it like that and make every person equal? That is my clarification. 

5.42
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for the statement presented. Honourable minister, I want to assure you that, yes, you are trying and I appreciate you. 

Madam Speaker, in this modern era it is shameful to come on the Floor of Parliament and say that our Wi-Fi at the airport is failing when in Karibu Lounge, it is functioning very well. Issues to do with COVID-19 are about personal contacts and we should be having a well-situated system of online transmission of information because we need it and that is how we can avoid direct contact.

Madam Speaker, the minister has not explained well. She said that they have left Test and Fly to do their business as the government also carries out its testing. However, honourable minister, you must have direct control over Test and Fly as a ministry. When you sent us there to investigate the taskforce, we asked them and they said they had a contract with the Ministry of Health but when we asked them how they were outsourced, they could not tell us. 

If you give all the privileges to Ugandans using our free method, these people are also going to adopt the same and people will go there because of time – planes leave people.

Lastly, I do not know how you come out to determine that anything you do, you need the UPDF yet there are complaints about them. However, there is confusion between these people and SFC. What is out in the public is that people allege that SFC is manhandling and mistreating people –(Interjections)– There is a difference, yes, they can be all UPDF but they are of different categories.

Why don’t you also take the Uganda Police Force and the Uganda Prisons Service to do the same? What is wrong with them? Every time you source, the UPDF must be involved. Let us avoid some political interests when carrying out this clearance of people.

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I pray that the honourable minister – still her statement does not show us the relationship between the Uganda Civil Aviation Authority, the Ministry of Health and those companies bringing in people. We need to get that clear linkage, where you are working together from your ministry, along the way, at the airport and people flying in Uganda. That linkage should have been heard from your statement but it is not coming out very well. Keep on trying and I will continue thanking you.

5.44
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga):  Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate the Minister of Health for the huge public duty she is carrying out. I encourage her not to do the heavy lifting alone. This is not about you but about everyone and it is about us.

Therefore, since the heavy lifting is not about you, share the burdens, tribulations, frustrations and do not bottle up on behalf of our incompetence along the way. This Parliament can carry the load with you, support you and we deliver this public duty together. That is the encouragement I would like to give you from onset. Therefore, when Members rise up and raise questions that have the potential of rattling systems, please, do not bottle up. Open up and we support you because it is about us. 

I have two basic issues I would like to share with you and the House. One is to confirm and insist on the turnaround time. It is part of the frustration that filters through the system. You did not make those Genexpert machines but only imported them. Would you like to confirm that you have the right age of those machines? Or we have the old system and there are better ones? We can have to quicken the turnaround time so that it does not become a burden to you that you have to explain to the people. 

You do not have a factory manufacturing them at your place. You did not buy them using your salary but we buy them and we can buy you better machines because it is about us and not about you.

Madam Speaker, I visited Elegu last week and one of the key discoveries is that the Government bought machines at this border post and surrendered them to a private company. Probably, the honourable minister will explain to this Parliament the circumstances or arrangement that engendered the surrender of a public facility to a private company – for my comfort and the comfort of this House.

Secondly, it is for the honourable minister to confirm – again as a way of supporting each other in this heavy lifting. If you are going to inoculate 22 million people of about 18 years, you probably need 44 million doses. Would you like to confirm how much is at your disposal and factoring in the challenges we have, so that going forward, we can properly think through an arrangement that can enforce compliance to inoculation.

Short of certainty, that is why people raise questions asking, “Why do you tell me not to come to the ministry when you have not assured me of the availability of vaccines?” Therefore, would you really like to confirm that we can work out a framework that can support your systems to deliver on time?

Lastly, we receive all “tribes” of vaccines, so to speak and one of the most challenging ones is Pfizer because storage is – I am advised – below minus 80 degrees Celsius. Would you like to share with Parliament whether it has been distributed countrywide? How many doses are available and their expiry period – because I am advised that we received 1.6 million doses of Pfizer, which are stored under very strict conditions?

In any case, Parliament’s duty, which the honourable minister may not even know, which is why you have the Committee on Health - with the indulgence of the Rt Hon. Speaker, probably the committee can interest itself in establishing the expiries of some of these vaccines especially Pfizer, which is very dicey and expensive and difficult to store.

Probably, the minister may want to comment on the capacity to store Pfizer in the way that is not going to expire in our storage. There is a very huge challenge of distribution.

I do not recollect quite well but there is an honourable member who raised an issue of motivation of health staff that are handling vaccination. It is a very serious challenge. I can confirm that for the last one week, they have had no vaccines in Masaka in the entire subregion. (Interjection)

Madam Speaker, the honourable member is forgivable. I have the audacity of speaking confidently because I never speak without information. Therefore, I am not trying to condemn the honourable minister but I would like to invite her to share with us the challenge of distribution and access so that we do not lose money expended on these vaccines; some of them are donations and they were given to us at the edge.

Lastly, it is about the COVAX facility; would you like to confirm, honourable minister, whether we are safe? I am alive to information that they have threatened to withdraw our quota because we have failed to utilise what we have and they are threatening to give it to other beneficiaries. It is a matter of confirmation that that information is not right and set our spirits and we support you to deliver your duty. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. 

5.51
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the minister for bringing this information to the House. Madam Speaker, I would like to get information from the minister whether she knows that we have got Ugandans who are deported from other countries, most especially from the Middle East. When they come in, they do not have money for testing. 

In addition to that, we discovered yesterday when we visited the airport that those people escape after failing to get money for testing. I am still wondering whether they just escape or they are assisted at a certain point to escape because they are becoming a problem.

Secondly, I want to know from the minister about the plan the ministry has got for university students who have not been allowed to join their universities. As far as we know, as Ugandans, if you are not 50 and above or a front liner like teachers and defence or us, you cannot access the vaccine. At the moment, students have not been vaccinated and are not allowed to go to their universities. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Hope, I will talk about your Bill. Honourable members, can we get a response from the minister because it will help us – [Hon. Sarah Opendi rose] – on what issue?

5.53
Ms sarah opendi (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to propose to the Minister of Health that in other countries where we have been, where they need to test you on arrival, they are using the Rapid Diagnostic Tests (RDTs) and it is taking just 10 to 15 minutes. When we travelled to Vienna, we tested and within 15 minutes, we were out.

Therefore, I would like to request the minister that since the tourists are paying and come in with their results, having tested using the Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR), when they arrive here, please use the RDTs unless there are issues. 

I am wondering why it is safe to use an RDT in Italy or Austria where I have been and it is a problem here in Uganda.  That is the proposal I wanted to suggest.

We can use the RDT but also pick samples for the PCR, allow people to go after the RDT and then the PCR results can be run. If the person is positive, you can make a follow up.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, I thought you were going to ask whether there is a vaccine for pregnant women.

Dr aceng: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank honourable members, for their contributions and also for the encouragement. Before I respond, allow me to say two things: 

First, in my statement I said that from 5 November, people will be sampled and allowed to go home. I was very clear on this. It is in my statement.

Secondly Madam Speaker, you requested that I make a presentation on vaccination and I have been on the agenda for quite a while but did submit a presentation. I would like to appreciate that honourable members lack information and I should be given opportunity to present. 

However, there are two very important pending papers. I request that adequate time be provided so that I can share information with the honourable members. On the issue of machines, there are many being made world over. The quickest machine so far is of various types of genexpert machines, which take 45 minutes. The attendant processes including results release, may make it go higher but the machine is designated to release results within 45 minutes. It is true that right now at the airport, there are only two for 16 samples, which give out 32. However, we have been given funds to procure 20 genexpert machines for the airport. 

A service provider also came along saying that they can place the machines and we buy the samples. We are discussing whether it is worth buying and later on when there is no COVID-19 we use them for tuberculosis (TB) or we place them and leave the service provider to service because it also costs money. However, the issue of machines at the airport is being addressed.

The daily turnover at the airport does not exceed 900. We have statistics to that effect. Sometimes, they are even fewer. The planes do not come full but of course, the numbers will improve eventually.

We appreciate the issue of increasing the number of booths but again to the teams that went to the airport yesterday, there is no space. I am sure you toured where the booth is. Our airport is a very small one and we are trying to do everything in that small space. 

I do appreciate but we are hoping that when internet services improve and people register online, it will take a shorter time. The actual sample removal takes five minutes. The filling in and everything increases the waiting time. The National Information Technology Authority of Uganda (NITAU) is working around the clock. If they fail to do then we shall look for other ways possible.

I went to find out why the internet is weak and I was told there was an injury to the fibre optic cables at Entebbe, which was repaired yesterday and today. That may increase the broadband width and several other things that are necessary. However, NITA-U has also committed itself to put another router to serve the airport in the meantime.

I am not an expert to say that the internet there will be adequate. Indeed, it is a major challenge because the entire laboratory system is connected onto the internet including the results dispatch system. Therefore, when anything goes wrong, the entire system shuts down. We are committed to seeing that it runs. NITA-U is working with us every day and we are having meetings at the airport on a daily basis. 

As to whether mobile money payments go to private pockets, I am not sure so I cannot comment. Post Bank was recommended by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and they are doing that work on their behalf; so perhaps –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, to which account in Post Bank? In which names?

Dr aceng: I do not know. It was a question here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe you need to find out for us the account where the money goes because we expect it to go to a Government account, which eventually goes to the Consolidated Fund.

Dr aceng: The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development opened an account where Post Bank is depositing the money. Eventually, it will go back to the Consolidated Fund to be re-voted. That is what I know.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

Dr aceng: The question that came here was whether I was aware that some mobile money payments were going to private pockets. I am not aware. I do not know so I cannot clarify. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What you need to do is to go and find out because it is still hearsay. There is no evidence to that effect; so, go find out and give us information.

Mr ssewungu: Can I give you information?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want information with evidence.

Mr ssewungu: Yes, mine is always with evidence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Lay the evidence on the Table.

Mr ssewungu: Madam Speaker, I think what the minister would say is that she is going to take keen interest in that. What is happening even with other institutions like Makerere University and other Government institutions is that they bank through mobile money but the money goes to the Consolidated Fund and the system is there. Even if it is Post Bank, all the money – because it is in my interest, as a ministry. 

What you need to tell the House is that you are going to take interest in finding out whether there are any funds diverted because at the end of the day, the questions will go to you and your permanent secretary. That is good information. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mwalimu, that is what she has said. She is going to find out. That is a friendly one - he is a teacher. 

DR ACENG: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the guidance and I thank the teacher for the counsel. In my statement, I indicated that we have tested for five days; we have tested 7,363 cases and 34 tested positive. If you want us to work backwards to the month of October when we started testing, I do not recall the numbers we tested. However, 896 tested positive. 

We run them on genomic sequencing and we have the various variants. I cannot tell you all of them now but majorly, we had Delta and Delta plus. Therefore, we do genomic sequencing for all the positives that we get at the airport. 

We have 53 border points of entry. Previously, we were testing at 53 border points of entry and it was extremely expensive and unmanageable, let alone playing health workers to stay at the border points of entry. Subsequently, the East African Community went into an agreement that only Uganda upheld; the others did not. However, the travel system is still working and we have still stuck to the travel system that whoever is coming tests and comes with a negative test at the airport. Many of them stopped testing. Some are still testing at a low rate. However, discussions are still ongoing to sort out the system.

It is majorly the Ministers of Health that have been having this discussion. The Heads of State had discussions twice. However, even after that, some countries did not adhere. It is a difficult situation because when COVID-19 came in, countries had to develop their own systems and run their own systems and protect their people. Bringing people together has been a big challenge. 

However, I can confirm to you that right now, we are working on a common vaccination certificate and a common pass so that when you are vaccinated, you are free to move from country to country. When that is done, I will also provide the information. 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of false positives, people test and they are positive while others test and turn out negative; yet, they are positive. Allow me to inform you, honourable members, that this is not unique to Uganda. It is worldwide. Laboratory systems will always have challenges. There are many challenges at many processes but we must appreciate that if 95 per cent of the results that are true are actually true, then you have a good system. There are few that pose problems. Yes, we follow them up but do not over stress them because it is happening elsewhere. 

Turnaround time of results is not unique to Uganda; it is happening in many other areas. In some countries, you may even have to wait for two weeks before you receive your results. It is not easy tracking everybody but we are trying our best and we hope that with time, the system may become a little better. We agree there are many problems. 

However, it is not true that the cost of testing in Uganda is the highest. That is not true. In fact, Uganda is cheaper than many countries. If you go to Ghana, you will pay $ 150 for an RDT test. Thank you. 

We take note of the fact that not all tourists register with the Uganda Tourism Board, which is the wish of Uganda Tourism Board. There are others that come on their own. However, Uganda Tourism Board would want them to register. That is their policy. Now, with the new intervention of allowing everybody to go, they will not have any challenge. 

Madam Speaker, concerning the issue of UPDF at the airport, with due respect and with humility, every airport that I have visited has security personnel. I have not seen any without security personnel. They are there to keep security. The UPDF, who are there - the majority of them are actually medical people; doctors of various categories. They are supporting the processes as well as keeping security. (Applause) They have been doing this with every outbreak. The UPDF have been supporting every outbreak we have had in this country. I really must appreciate them. 

On the day when we had that big challenge, had it not been for the UPDF, we would not have resolved the problems. Therefore, I request the honourable members to appreciate the UPDF at the airport and all the other security staff. (Applause) 

Concerning the use of RDTs, the World Health Organisation has not recommended RDTs for testing of asymptomatic people; people who do not have symptoms because its sensitivity is very low. Its use should be limited to those with symptoms. For best practices, we choose to follow that recommendation. Perhaps, that is why Uganda has not suffered like Italy and Austria. We must take that into consideration.

Madam Speaker, regarding the issue of Elegu that the Government bought machines and surrendered them to a private sector, I cannot confirm that. I request that you give me time to go and verify. What I know is that we have a mobile machine that was stationed at Elegu. I will verify and provide the information. 

Yes, there are many deportees. Even when we were testing at the Peniel beach, there were many deportees. These are our children whom we are exporting out for labour. Unfortunately, they are returning in huge numbers. Sometimes, they are over 200. We do not charge them as long as they come with their deportation letters and whatever information they have, they are tested for free and they are allowed to go. Even when the private sector was running the testing, they were tested for free. 

For the university students, the information I have to provide is that vaccination centres are being stationed in the universities and the students are free to vaccinate. 

A few questions came on the vaccines. I will respond to them as I wait for the opportunity to present. Madam Speaker, to-date, we have received over eight million doses of the vaccines. I have 6.5 million doses of the vaccines with me and by December, I will be receiving another 14.5 million dozes of vaccines, meaning that by the end of December, we will have received about 23 million dozes of the vaccines. 

Vaccines are no longer a problem. Yes, some vaccines coming through the COVAX facility have a short shelf life but what the Government is procuring has a very long shelf life. 

Madam Speaker, according to our vaccination plan, we are committed to running vaccination campaigns regionally, based on the epidemiology of COVID-19, taking into consideration areas of higher attack rates – where there is high infection, like now, the Teso subregion, Lango subregion, Acholi subregion and Kigezi as well as Kampala. 

We are also looking at areas which are hard to reach and many other considerations. 

Next week, we shall be running campaigns to vaccinate in Teso, Lango, Acholi and Kigezi so that we bring down the infection rates. 

However, infections all over the country will still go on. The challenges we have with the vaccination may be two. Mobilising people to go to the health facilities is impossible; nobody will go there. Outreaches? Yes, people will respond but we still need your voices, as honourable members, to talk to your people so that they can embrace vaccination and also report to the vaccination sites when we are there. 

Yes, the health workers are not happy with the Shs 5,000. That is what was available and it will even come to an end in December. Do we need to consider an increment? Even with the other vaccination campaigns that we run – others that we have run before – the health workers are usually facilitated with between Shs 20,000 and 24,000 safari day allowance and transport allowance. If I am leaving my home and going somewhere, I need to eat and I need to transport myself. 

These are some of the challenges they are citing and rightfully so. For us to make the vaccination programme acceptable and also to facilitate the health workers to do their work, we need to support them. This is undergoing discussion but, as I said, we are going to run the campaign. 

Madam Speaker, these were the questions. When you give me an opportunity, I will come and talk more about vaccination. Thank you. 

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, you have talked about a pertinent issue of about $1.5 per day to someone conducting vaccination. This country has got aid support in form of money – and this is real – from the IMF and the World Bank.

We are saying the only way we shall reduce the cost of treatment and unexpected costs, like investment in ICU and others, is through vaccination. 

Now, the basics of vaccination is, one, availability of vaccines – someone asked how many dozes are there – and, two, the health workers that are going to administer this. When the whole country is listening to this august House to give solutions – Shs 5,000 is really not something we can sweep below the carpet. That someone leaves their home every morning to move a distance to administer a vaccine: tell me where you can get food and transport worth this money.

In my view, these are some of the things that should have been captured in the supplementary budget so that we try to devise means. We are not faulting you. This is not your problem. It is something we must get a solution to. These health workers are the frontline workers that must save us. If we are to achieve the goal of opening up in January, it is on their effort that we must base. 

Therefore, it is an issue of how you are going to achieve it. You are only saying the campaign is still rolling out. How do you at least enhance and what would you want them to be paid?

MS MUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, hon. Nsereko for raising the issue of Shs 5,000 as an allowance for the nurses. 

I would like to state categorically that it is not the Ministry of Health which decides the allowance. Those allowances are decided by the Ministry of Public Service. In order for you to increase it, you have got to get a supplementary budget and request – but that is the allowance that was set by the Ministry of Public Service and that has been paid. 

We have been requesting for a supplementary and for permission to pay them more. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Of course, what Members are raising is an issue of motivation of health workers, which all of us appreciate and it should be taken into consideration. 

If you are talking about Shs 5,000 to cater for transport, lunch and all those other things – we must look at that. 

6.17
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. These are comments and recommendations which we always appreciate. We take feedback to ministries other than one ministry assuming it is the responsibility of another ministry. We are one Government, so, we take it as general feedback and we handle it in Cabinet. 

So, I request that all these comments, as captured by the minister, are taken and where Parliament is recommending that “this is lower, this is higher or you need to improve this”, we go and work on all that. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You need to bring it up in your inter-ministerial meeting and see how it can be handled. We need these people motivated so that they can be able to do more and better work. A whole day’s allowance of Shs 5,000, inclusive of transport and feeding, is bad - The minister still has to come back on COVID-19. Actually, we are giving you tomorrow and the following day to present your papers. We cannot finish it today. 

We had papers to be submitted by hon. Nantaba. Please, come and lay your papers for us to determine sub judice – the activeness of a case. (Mr Ssewungu rose_) Hon. Ssewungu, you are about to cross the Floor. I used to think teachers were disciplined. (Laughter)

Just lay the papers as per rule 73(3).

6.20
MS IDAH NANTABA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Madam Speaker, a Motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to degazette Wamale Central Forest Reserve, Kiula Central Forest Reserve and Bajo Central Forest Reserve in Kayunga District was moved by hon. Tebandeke and seconded by hon. Patrick Nsanja and hon. Amos Lugoloobi.

Madam Speaker, I raised a procedural matter regarding sub judice under Rule 73 of our Rules of Procedure. I laid evidence that the cases in court pertained that the land in the Motion. I accordingly requested Parliament to suspend debate on that Motion, basing on the evidence I laid, part of which I did not lay but which I beg to lay today.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a document entitled, “The Republic of Uganda. In the High Court of Uganda, holding at Jinja, Civil Suit No. 88 of 2017; Badduzi Yahaya and Katende Peter Vs National Forestry Authority.”

Madam Speaker, in that matter, the National Forestry Authority applied to be joined as a party, which court allowed. I am going to lay the same document as well. This is their written statement of defence and counter claim to the plaint. 

I had already read the parties. I did not want to repeat but the honourable member is demanding that I should repeat reading them. It is the -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, lay the document. There is one Speaker in the House.

MS NANTABA: Much obliged. The second matter, Madam Speaker, is a document entitled, “The Republic of Uganda. In the High Court of Uganda, holding at Jinja. In Civil Suit No. 67 of 2017 - Badduzi Yahaya and Katende Peter Vs Twinomujuni Leo”

Mr Leo Twinomujuni submitted his written statement of defence and counter claim as well. I beg to lay.

Another Civil Suit No. 2014 of 2021 has the parties: Modern Agri Infra Limited Vs National Forestry Authority. I beg to lay, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Are you done?

MS NANTABA: The last is Civil Suit No. 18 of 2020. The parties are Modern Agri Infra Limited Vs National Forestry Authority. I beg to lay, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Nantaba. I refer those documents to the General Counsel to Parliament.

Members, thank you for today. House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Thank you.

(The House rose at 6.24 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 3 November 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 
