Wednesday, 26 November 2014

Parliament met at 2.44 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I want to amend the Order Paper to postpone item six; Prime Minister’s Question Time because we would like to finish the Public Finance Bill. For Members who have urgent matters, they can be handled tomorrow because as you know, Thursday is when the private members’ business takes precedence in the first one hour. So, those other issues will be handled tomorrow in the first one hour but for now I want us to move expeditiously so that we can conclude the Public Finance Bill. We shall run very first.

PRESENTATION OF PETITIONS

4 (A) BY RESIDENTS OF BUJUMBA CONSTITUENCY, KALANGALA DISTRICT 
OVER THE MV KALANGALA SHIP

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, our colleague hon. Badda brought this petition but he is in hospital. I do not know whether there is anyone who can assist him. The people of Kalangala are having trouble with their transport. Is there anyone who can assist him? Okay, postponed to tomorrow.

4(B) BY THE ELECTORATE OF IGANGA MUNICIPALITY CONSTITUENCY

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask hon. Nanyondo to do the one for Kalangala tomorrow? Can we alert hon. Nanyondo to move it tomorrow?

2.48
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise under Rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda to present the humble petition of the electorate of Iganga Municipality Constituency, Iganga District, on the dilapidated state of Iganga Municipality Central Market represented by hon. Olivia Kabaale, the Woman MP, Iganga District. 

The humble petitioners state that they are the electorate and residents of Iganga District and users of the Iganga Municipality Central Market facilities. The market also doubles as a regional centre of business for the districts of Iganga, Luuka, Mayuge, Namutumba and Bugiri, among others.

Iganga Municipality Central Market was built in the early 1950s to accommodate 200 stalls, but it is currently home to over 7,000 stalls and caters for over 7,000 people conducting business on a daily business. 

It does not have a toilet facility, health services, garbage collection sites, fire extinguishers and has poor and dangerous electrical installations, hence leading to several -

THE SPEAKER: I think you go to the prayers now.

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. Your humble petitioners are aggrieved that the current state of Iganga Municipality Central Market, if not urgently addressed, will lead to an outbreak of the cholera epidemic in most districts of Eastern Uganda.

Now, therefore, your humble petitioners pray, “That Parliament intervenes and urges Government to urgently construct a modern and upgraded market under the Market and Agricultural Trade Improvement Programme in replacement of the current market.”

I beg to lay a copy of the petition and the signatures were already submitted to your office. They are numbered 2,483. Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker and I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the petition is sent to the Committee of Public Service and Local Government for perusal and report back.

Honourable members, in the public gallery we have Members of Parliament and staff from South Sudan. They are here to benchmark with the Parliamentary Commission and strengthen inter-parliamentary cooperation. I invite hon. Ayen Deng Tel to stand up, hon. Victo Omuho, hon. Makwak Majok Akot, hon. John Chwal Tya, hon. Victor Edward Epapura, Mr Robert Abraham Paul. Unfortunately I see no women but you are welcome. (Applause)

LAYING OF PAPERS

5(A) FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012 TO JUNE 2013 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

2.53
MS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay financial statements for the year ended 30th June 2012 to June 2013 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for:

    i. Kabale District Local Government (DLG)
    ii. Mbale DLG
    iii. Serere DLG
    iv. Bulambuli DLG
    v. Budaka DLG
    vi. Kaliro DLG
    vii. Kween DLG
    viii. Mityana DLG
    ix. Namutumba Town Council
    x. Abim Town Council
    xi. District commercial officers support services

    xii. The Oyam District Local Government reproductive health, population and development and gender UNFPA funded project UGA7U101, UGA7U202, UGA7U303 and UGA7U505.

    xiii. Yumbe District Local Government – Population and Development Linkages, Reproductive Health and Gender (UNFPA funded project – UGA7U101; UGA7U202; UGA7U606; UGA7U303 & UGA7U505).

    xiv. Kaabong District Local Government (PG UG 11) – Reproductive Health, Population and Development and Gender.

    xv. Moroto District Local Government – Comprehensive Reproductive Health Services (UNFPA funded project – UGA7U101; UGA7U202; UGA7U303 & UGA7U505).

    xvi. Katakwi District Local Government (PG UG08) – Reproductive Health, Population and Development and Gender (UNFPA funded project UGA7U101, UGA7U202, UGA7U303, UGA7U505 and UGA7U606).

    xvii. Kanungu District Local Government – UNFPA funded project programme components of Reproductive Health, Population and Development and Gender.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay. Thank you very much.

5(B) THE REPORT OF THE PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO
THE 60TH COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY CONFERENCE
HELD IN YAOUNDE, CAMEROON FROM 2ND – 10TH OCTOBER, 2014

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Oboth is not here. Go to (c).

5(C) THE REPORT OF THE FOREIGN AFFAIRS COMMITTEE DELEGATION TO THE 69TH UN GENERAL ASSEMBLY IN NEW YORK, USA SEPTEMBER 13TH – OCTOBER 3RD, 2014
 
THE SPEAKER: He is not here; go to item (d).

5(D) PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP TO SDR 26.1 MILLION ($ 40 MILLION) FROM 
THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO FINANCE THE REGIONAL PASTORAL LIVELIHOOD RESILIENCE PROJECT

2.57
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay, for parliamentary consideration, a proposal to borrow $ 40 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to finance the Regional Pastoral Livelihood Resilience Project. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

5(E) PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP TO $ 110 MILLION FROM THE 
ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK TO FINANCE THE UPGRADING 
OF THE MUYEMBE – NAKAPIRIPIRIT ROAD

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay for consideration the proposal to borrow up to $ 110 million from the Islamic Development Bank to finance the upgrading of the Muyembe – Nakapiripirit Road. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. It is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back and in keeping with what we discussed last week, they must ensure that this road has a provision for rest facilities. Public toilets must be attached to this road for the users all the way from Moroto to Mbale.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PUBLIC FINANCE BILL, 2012

3.00
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, yesterday we had handled provisions up to clause 22. Where is the chairman? You are happily in the company of the Government Chief Whip.

Clause 23

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 23 – yes, minister.

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We would like to rephrase Clause 23 (3) as follows: “A financial donation or a donation in kind, made to a Vote towards responding to a disaster, shall be declared by the minister within 30 days of receipt and the financial donation or the donation in kind shall form part of the report made under Section 16 (1).” This is just for clarity. I beg to submit.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, he has only forgotten one word before disaster; ‘natural’.

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, yesterday the House refused to remove the word ‘natural’ so it would stay ‘natural disasters’ but an example of an unnatural disaster is if somebody removed a railway line like they did in Kenya. That would be a man-made disaster but the House refused so it stays as a natural disaster.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause -

MR NIWAGABA: Sorry, there is an error under 23 (3). In clause 16 (1), (e) should be deleted because it does not appear.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 23 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 24

MR SEBUNYA: The committee proposes, under the supplementary expenditure finance from the contingencies fund, to delete sub clause 3(c). The justification why the expenditure cannot be a virement under section 18 is that we have already provided for it under clause 18 so it is remains redundant.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that sub clause 3(c) of Clause 24 be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25

MR EKANYA: In Clause 25, insert the following new sub clause 4 to read, ‘Notwithstanding subsection (3), any revenue received by a Vote, state enterprise or public corporation in the form of fines or fees, which is refundable at a future date on fulfilment of specified conditions, shall not form part of the Consolidated Fund and shall be held in trust by the government in the Bank of Uganda.” 

The justification is for accountability. Thank you, I beg to move.

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, I have no problem with the proposal.	

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you adding a new clause? Okay, just read it again.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I have given her a copy but I can read it. In Clause 25 of the Bill, insert the following new sub clause (4): “Notwithstanding subsection (3), any revenue received by a Vote, state enterprise or public corporation in form of fines or fees, which is refundable at a future date on fulfilment of specified conditions, shall not form part of the Consolidated Fund and shall be held in trust by the government in the Bank of Uganda.” The justification is for accountability. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed.    

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 26

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, in clause 26 sub clause (3)(b), replace ‘public officer’ with ‘accounting officer’. The justification is that money should not be allocated to an individual public officer so it is the accounting officer.

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, I have no problem with that but permit me also to make an amendment to delete the second sub clause (3) and (4). The justification is that clause 26(1) and (4) refer to clause 27 of the Bill, which the ministry proposes to delete from the Bill and clause 26 (3)(b) is not applicable.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You no longer need the whole clause?

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, I am proposing a deletion.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That means the amendment by the chairperson also collapses if the provision is not there because it is amending clause 3(b). So we delete sub clauses (3) and (4)?

MR OMACH: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 26 be amended by the deletion of Clause 26(3)(a),(b) and (4).

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 27

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that we delete clause 27 and the justification is because of the special funds provided for in Article 153 of the Constitution and these are already in clause 25 of the Bill. The special funds are to be established by Acts of Parliament and not by statutory instrument as stated in Clause 27(1). I so submit. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the proposed Clause 27 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28

MR SEBUNYA: Clause 28, investment of balances on the Consolidated Fund. The committee proposes to replace the entire provision with the following: “The minister may authorise Bank of Uganda to invest any sum standing to the credit of the Consolidated Fund –

(1) with an approved financial institution; and
(2) subject to notice not exceeding 12 months or be in an investment authorised by the law for the investment of trustee funds and approved by the minister. 

The justification is to give legal mandate for investment of idle cash balances in line with good cash management practices. The provision has been redrafted for clarity. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, how do you identify the idle funds? Yesterday there was a provision relating to unutilised funds going to the Consolidated Fund. Are you not endangering those? There is something we passed yesterday on unutilised funds but now you are saying the Bank of Uganda can - 

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, I think the example would be the money that reverts to Bank of Uganda from commercial banks after being unclaimed for a long time. So this money could be in Bank of Uganda and invested by the authority of the minister.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So why don’t you make that clear because this means any credit available can be used. If you are targeting idle funds, which are stuck in the commercial banks, don’t you think you should be more specific about it? We have been battling about funds for the local governments sent late then returned to the Consolidated Fund. That is my worry on this provision.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I beg that we stand over this so that we get the proper wording then we can come back to it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, we can stand over it.

Clause 29 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 29 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, clause 31 bank account management. The committee proposes to replace sub clause (2) with the following: “(2) No bank account shall be opened to receive or spend public money without written authority of the Accountant General.”

Delete the phrase ‘public or official’ whenever it appears in the section. The justification is there is no definition of a ‘public’ or ‘official’ bank account. I beg to move. 

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, I also propose an amendment on clause 31(3) to replace it with the following: “A local government shall not open a bank account without the written authority of the Accountant General.” 

Delete sub clause (6) and the justification is to make it mandatory for local governments to open accounts with the authority of the Accountant General. I beg to submit.   

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In light of the amendment proposed by the chairperson of the committee, Clause 31(4) and (5) should be consequentially amended to replace the words ‘public or official bank accounts’.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 31 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 32

MR SEBUNYA: In Clause 32 under the headnote of “authority to raise loans”, in sub-clause (2)(b) delete the phrase ‘a Treasury policy’. The justification is correction of an error in the Bill by replacing ‘Treasury policy’ with ‘monetary policy’ and ‘monetary policy’ is already there.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I wish to introduce amendments to clause 32(4). Insert the following new sub-clauses 32(4). (4) “The value of Government bills, bonds or stocks issued in a financial year to raise a loan in sub-section (2) except a loan specified in sub-section (2)(b) or a loan raised through the issuance of security shall not exceed the value indicated in respect of that loan in the annual budget for that financial year.” The justification is for transparency and accountability by the government.

Madam Chairperson, I also wish to introduce another amendment to delete Clause 32(7).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, are you deleting the present 32(4) and inserting your new one or you are adding another provision? Because there is already 32(4); loans raised by issuing Government bills etcetera. So are you replacing that?

MR EKANYA: Yes, Madam Chairperson. We are deleting that as well as 32(7), which is redundant.

MR SEBUNYA: The committee still had an amendment in sub-clause (5). Insert immediately after “sub-clause (2)(b)” the phrase ‘or a loan raised through issuance of securities’.

And in sub-clause (6), insert at the end of the provision, “except for a loan raised for the purpose of sub-section (2)(b), which shall be held in a special fund.” The justification is to clarify that the proceeds of issuance conducted from monetary policy must not be available for spending by Government.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 32 be variously amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 33

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, clause 33 under the headnote of “Repayment, conversion and consolidation of loans” in sub-clause (2), insert the words “and Parliament” at the end of the provision. The justification is that Parliament approves the loans. It follows, therefore, that any deviation or alteration is approved by Parliament.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 33 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39

MR SEBUNYA: Clause 39; control of expenditure of donor funds. 

    1. Change the headnote to “Management of expenditure of projects funded by loans and grants.”
    2. Replace ‘donor funds’ with ‘loans and grants’.
    3. Replace ‘donor funded’ with ‘externally financed.’

The justification is that donor funds are external finances.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 39 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41

MR SEBUNYA: Clause 41 under the headnote ‘asset management’ in sub-clause (1):

    1. Delete the phrase ‘of the accounting officer’ in the second and third lines. 
    2. Insert a new sub-clause (9) as follows: “Assets mean physical assets and financial assets. 
    3. Financial assets include money at hand, deposits, cheques, loans, accounts receivable and marketable securities including bonds, notes and shares.” 

The justification is to clarify on the meaning.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chairperson, I have not understood the rationale. Why are you removing the accounting officer here? Who is going to keep custody of the assets?

MR SEBUNYA: I think it is asset management. They were trying to define what assets mean under the assets management headnote. Do you want to put who is responsible for the assets? I think it is there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, you are deleting the accounting officers. So I wanted to know, who is responsible for the -

MR SEBUNYA: Oh, on the first amendment?

MR ODOI: Madam Chairperson, the reasoning behind this can be inferred if you read the entire sub-clause, “An accounting officer shall be responsible for the management of the assets and the inventories of the Vote of the accounting officer.” So the second accounting officer is repetitive. He is responsible for the management of the assets and the inventories of the Vote. That is why we proposed that we delete the ‘accounting officer’ appearing at the end of the sub clause.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But when you read the justification, it does not explain that. It just says, to clarify on the meaning.

MR ODOI: The problem may have been with the justification.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So it refers to the excess words, ‘the accounting officer’.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, if I heard very well, in the definition of financial assets, the chairman included money at hand, which I believe is cash at hand and that is not categorised under financial assets. So I would like to propose that we delete “cash at hand” from the financial assets.

MR SEBUNYA: Honourable member, maybe you are saying we change ‘money at hand’ to ‘cash at hand’. Or we do not include it at all?

MR MUSASIZI: No, do not include it at all.

MR SEBUNYA: Ok. 
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that-

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I wanted to know from the Chairperson of the Finance Committee. I thought we had an interpretation clause where we are supposed to take some of these definitions but you have brought it there – 

Clause 41 should be amended as follows:
“(6) An accounting officer shall not pledge or otherwise encumber the land or any other asset of a Vote without the permission of Parliament.” The justification is land has been included for purposes of emphasis and two, we have been having land encumbered yet it is a source of revenue. So, if an accounting officer would like to dispose of an asset, he should come to Parliament in the policy statement because that is going to form part of the revenue and Parliament needs to appropriate it. That is part of the decision we have taken; that all revenues should be appropriated by Parliament. 

I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 41 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 41, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, in clause 43 under Part Five: Accounting and Audit. Under accounting officers in sub-clause (1), rephrase sub-clauses (a) and (b) as follows: 
“
    a) Control the regularity and proper use of money appropriated to a Vote.
    b) Be responsible for authorising commitments for a Vote.”

The justification is that (a) and (b) have been redrafted for clarity. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 43 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 43, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 44

MR SEBUNYA: In Clause 44 under Accountant General, insert a new sub-clause (1) as follows: “The Accountant General established under this Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 is hereby continued in existence subject to the provisions of this Act.”

The justification is that  the Accountant General is already in existence, having been established under the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003. I beg to move.

MR EKANYA: Those kinds of provisions normally go in the transitional clauses. Why are you putting it here, honourable minister?

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, I think this is covered under the transitional provision rather than putting it here in the law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But is it necessary? I do not think it is necessary because it continues talking about the Accountant General. Now do you establish the Attorney General with every law that you make? The Attorney General is the Attorney General. So the Accountant General is there. Do you have to say, I am now continuing your -

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, we are repealing the-

THE CHAIRPERSON: But are you repealing the office?

MR SEBUNYA: No, we are not repealing the office but we are repealing the law so I thought for emphasis it is established in this Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think that is superfluous. 

MR SEBUNYA: Okay.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 44 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 45

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to insert a new clause immediately after Clause 44 as follows: “Establishment of the General Internal Audit Committee. There is established a committee to be known as the General Internal Audit Committee, which shall consist of seven persons consisting of the following skills: Internal Auditing, Accounting, Economics, Law and one expert from other professional bodies.

2. The members of the committee shall be appointed by the minister and shall serve for a period of not less than two years and shall not exceed four years. The minister shall prescribe the procedures for the business of the committee.

Functions of the General Internal Audit Committee. The committee shall:

    a) Provide advice and support to the Minister of Finance and the Internal Audit General in all aspects of internal audit plans and operations. The state of the art in internal audit practice, the quality and the functioning of the internal auditing in the public sector.
    b) Review and approve the quarterly and annual summary internal audit reports submitted by the Internal Audit General, which are then submitted to the Minister of Finance.
    c) Perform any other duties as may be assigned by the Minister of Finance.”

The justification is that the Internal Audit Committee will be the overall audit committee to which the Internal Auditor General reports. 

We are creating the Internal Auditor General. (1) There shall be, designated by the Public Service, an Internal Auditor General who shall be subject to the terms and conditions governing the Public Service.

(2) The Internal Auditor General shall:
    a) Develop the internal audit strategy and supervise its implementation.
    b) Develop internal audit policies, rules, standards, manuals, circulars and guidelines.
    c) Review and consolidate audit reports from all Votes and externally financed projects.
    d) Liaise with the Auditor General, Accountant General, Accounting officers and Internal Auditors on audit matters.
    e) Consolidate reports of all audit committees on the respective Votes.
    f) Periodically evaluate the effectiveness of audit committees of the respective Votes.
    g) Facilitate the development of internal audit cadres.
    h) Provide evidence to the relevant parliamentary oversight committees when requested to do so.

    (3) The Internal Audit General shall be responsible for the Secretary to the Treasury in the performance of his or her duties.”

The justification is that the Internal Auditor General will consolidate all reports of the Internal Audit Committees and may be a good point of access to internal audit reports by Parliament. I beg to move.  

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I want to seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee especially when it comes to the issue of the Internal Audit Committee. I do not have a copy of the Public Finance Act, 2012 with me but I do not see anything new that you are introducing in terms of the existence or in terms of creating the Internal Audit Committees. These committees have been in existence in the old law. What new thing are you adding?

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, I find myself uneasy to support the chairman’s proposals. When you read ahead particularly Clause 46, it specifically provides for the audit committees and Clause 45 gives all the ways in which the audit committee works with the internal auditor in respect of the Vote.

Now if you create a new office of the Internal Auditor General, in view of the provisions of the National Audit Act and these particular provisions here, don’t you think you are overcrowding Public Service? Aren’t these particular officers under the Audit Committee and the internal auditor mentioned under Clause 45 adequate enough for them to prepare reports for the Auditor General to audit and make the report?

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to respond to the clarification sought by hon. Wadri and hon. Niwagaba. For clarity, we are proposing to create an office called Office of the Internal Auditor General. This office has not been in existence so it is a new office.

Madam Chairperson, once we create the Office of the Internal Auditor General, we must give him or her the desire to be independent in order to operate. Now independence can be achieved when there are clear reporting relationships. The Internal Auditor General shall be reporting to the Auditor General, Internal Audit Committee as well as the Permanent Secretary/CFFT.

Based on this background, I believe I have been clear enough. When you look at Clause 46, we are proposing that we shall have internal auditors at departmental level as well as audit committees that these internal auditors shall be reporting to. 

I believe hon. Wadri is getting the background of this proposal that we are bringing.

MR SEBUNYA:  Madam Chairperson, let me bring to the attention of this House that this proposal was adopted from the amendments proposed by the ministry in regard to establishment of an Internal Audit General. The members from the liberation then said this Internal Audit General should have a board, which they report to and this is the General Internal Audit Committee.

The reports from all the audit committees shall go upwards towards this committee for them to consolidate. I hope hon. Wadri we are together.

MR WADRI: I appreciate your explanation.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am not yet clear about the explanation he was giving because we have the current internal auditors in different sectors. So are you scrapping them such that you establish a new internal audit office that will be doing all that work? Are you scrapping it off from your Public Service and we have a separate organisation under the Ministry of Finance?

DR BARYOMUNSI: I still have challenges, Madam Chairperson, while appreciating the new recommendations by the committee. My understanding of internal audit is that it is a process, which is regular within a department and advises on how things should be managed. 

But for us to now create an institution at the top; I am not persuaded that it adds value because like hon. Niwagaba said, we are going to overcrowd the Public Service and maybe there will also be conflict between this Internal Auditor General and the Auditor General. 

I am persuaded that the provision, which is in the Bill is adequate; the creation of the audit committees so that there is internal audit within the various departments without necessarily creating a top body to coordinate all this. I do not find a lot of value added by the creation of this Internal Auditor General at the national level.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I think we need to rethink this. We need to stand over it because I have seen we are likely to create a law similar to the Land Act, which we created and Government could not implement because I think we focused on other things.

You are saying every Vote, and a sub county is a Vote, should have an Internal Audit Committee. You are even putting the number seven. It is going to be very cumbersome for Government to operate so I want to propose that we stand over this. It is a good idea but we are going to have a crisis. It is something that the minister can put in the regulation so that in case of any challenge, you can adjust it. 

Otherwise putting numbers, qualifications- The other day we refused to put qualifications on Secretary to the Treasury. Here we are now putting qualifications. Are we blocking some jobs for people? Why don’t we leave some of these things to the regulations so that it can be handled easily for flexibility?

MR ANYARWACH: Madam Chairperson, I think we are looking at a situation where you have the accountant for every Board and the accounting officers for that matter, then you have auditors and of course the internal auditors. When you come up, you have the Accountant General and then you also have the Auditor General.

I was trying to address my mind to the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 where some of the functions we are purporting to assign to the Internal Auditor General like reporting to Parliament are actually effectively being - When you read section 8 it says, ‘designation and duties of accounting officers.’ If one of the accountants has been appointed by the Secretary to the Treasury as an accounting officer, he or she can report to Parliament. 

If we purport to create a whole big function called Internal Auditor-General, I need to be educated because my little knowledge in finance is that the Auditor General we have is operating under a complete Act of this Parliament. So now is there a legal framework under which this Internal Auditor General, apart from this Public Finance Bill, is going to operate? 

If that is not clear then I think it is going to be very cumbersome even financially. My brother hon. Omach, the Minister for Finance, General Duties can attest to this because he has experience. I would think that we stand over this and if possible, we expunge it from this Bill as it is redundant. Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not know whether this is really our business. How will these people be remunerated? Are they in the Civil Service? Are they outside? Where are we going to get these seven people? 

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, I think the import of this proposal amendment was because right now, the Chief Internal Auditor reports to the Accountant General. The Accountant General is at the level of a director while the Chief Internal Auditor is at the level of a commissioner so the purpose was to move him to the level of a director and he reports directly to the Secretary to the Treasury because of the importance of the role of the internal audit. The internal audit is the one that does the checking before things are given out.

Already in all ministries, departments and agencies, there are internal audits. So if we could cure this aspect of his reporting level - The other committees already have internal auditors who were working at various levels in ministries and departments. So we could either agree to that and drop out the issue that the committee is proposing or stand over it. But that is the basis of it.

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, I think we can go ahead with the creation of a person, separate from the Accountant General, to whom internal auditors report. That is the import; that we are separating the accounting officers with internal auditors because if they are combined, then there is nothing they are doing. There is conflict of interest and they never take any action.

Two, what we can stop is maybe creating a committee around him but let us separate these two functions.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That means that we abandon your proposal on page 17 but take up the one on page 18, which creates the Internal Auditor General. Is that what you are saying? Is it okay that we get rid of the committee? 

So the proposal for the general audit committee is rejected, we now proceed with the new proposal for the Internal Auditor General. 

Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 45 be amended by introducing the Internal Auditor General. 
             
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 45, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 46

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, it is in 46 where we have this Internal Audit Committee so I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister. What are you thinking about in relation to what we have just passed?

THE CHAIRPERSON: What we rejected was the general audit committee. We were creating a monster and we have rejected that. But we have created the Office of the Internal Auditor General.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, still on the issue of numbers, ‘The Minister shall establish an audit committee for each Vote, which shall consist of not more than five members.’ My concern here is the issue of numbers and it goes back to the issue I raised. 

We need to have the definition of a Vote otherwise it is going to be cumbersome. We need to leave this issue of numbers for the regulations so that we move properly. It does no harm because the sub-county Vote is so small that you may need to borrow from a district in order to work. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, how many Votes do you have? This is so that we can understand the proposal.

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, we have a definition here. Vote means entity for which an appropriation is made by an Appropriation Act or Supplementary Appropriation Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I still want the figures. You have said for each Vote we must have five people. That is why I want to know how many Votes we have so that we can find those five. That is what I am asking.

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, 203.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, 203 times 5. You will need 1,015. Do you have the capacity? Do you still want it?

MR OMACH: These committees already exist so maybe what we could is reduce on the numbers.

MR WADRI: Out of these over 200 Votes, there are those which are very significant especially central government ministries and agencies. If those could be specifically targeted, I would appreciate it, let alone other government organisations of commission level. If they could also be targeted, that would be fine and then the districts. 

But if you go down to the sub-counties and the town councils, I am sorry it will just be a nightmare. So target the big Votes in central government ministries and commissions.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, in your proposal under 46(3), ‘A member of the audit committee shall not be a public officer.’ I want to know, where are these people going to come from? How will you support them? When you brought your Certificate of Financial Implications, did you include the allowances?

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, if we could put it this way, instead of Votes we say each sector will have a committee. Because currently we have only 17 sectors, which include the accountability sector, education sector, health sector - In total, they are 17. This then would help the internal auditors. The two hundred is because they crossed the Nile three times.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Not with present traffic jam.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, my worry is that, that sector business, which hon. Omach has brought in is not defined and I think it varies from government to government. So we may need to have a proper way of getting the numbers correct by assigning them to something that is specific. Otherwise, you will come next week after we have passed this law for a supplementary budget and we may find a problem with that.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I think the proposal of the minister is okay because the Auditor General now audits- They have trained their people and specialised in sector audit. Since internal audit prepares reports, which the Auditor General uses when they are going to audit, I think it is just proper that we take that.

Regarding what hon. Niwagaba is saying, maybe we shall go to the Interpretation Clause and insert it. However, we also need to handle the issue you have raised about not being public officers.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do we do?

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, maybe we can also interrogate what we mean by sector because what expands the number of these audit committees to 200 is the districts. Every district should have five people but minus the districts, the Votes are very few. So we could confine ourselves to the Votes because for example Defence is a vote, Agriculture is a Vote so those ministries are votes. 

So we could leave those five members for each Vote but regarding the number that audits districts, the five can be reduced to maybe three so that a district caters for only three members as their audit committee and they can audit that account. The same would also apply to municipalities.

That is what makes this big number of 203. We can say that for ministries five, for districts specifically three and then we would have reduced the numbers.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t we stand over it and you formulate it properly? Let us stand over Clause 46 and go to Clause 47. 

Clause 47

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 47 do stand part of the Bill.
           
(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 48, agreed to.)

Clause 49

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, Clause 49 under the headnote of ‘consolidated annual financial statements’ in sub-clause (1)(c), insert the words ‘and state enterprises’ at the end of the provision.

The justification is that state enterprises are also handled just like public corporations. 

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, in addition to the definition of state enterprises, we have added on public companies, which are companies where Government has majority shares. These two should be covered under that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, we add public companies?

MR NIWAGABA: Companies where Government has a controlling interest.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 49 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 49, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 50

MR SEBUNYA: There is a proposal by the committee for a new clause immediately after clause 49. Insert a new clause immediately after clause 49 as follows: “Submission of Treasury memoranda to Parliament - The minister shall submit the treasury memoranda to Parliament -
    a) within six months from the date of Parliament’s consideration of the report of the Auditor General in accordance with Article 163(5) of the Constitution; and
    b) Based on Vote by Vote.”

The justification is that it is important that time within which to respond to a parliamentary resolution is clearly indicated.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODOI: I am a little uncomfortable with the construction of the chairperson. If we go by what the committee had proposed and we just strike out only the word ‘off’ so that it reads, ‘The minister shall submit the Treasury memorandum to Parliament -
    a) within six months from the date Parliament considers the report of the Auditor General in accordance with Article 163(5) of the Constitution; and 
    b) based on Vote by Vote.’

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I just wanted to ask, why don’t we give that as a separate clause for the flow of things?

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is a new clause.

MR SSEMPIJA: Is it a new one, not Clause 50?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 50, agreed to.

Clause 51, agreed to.

Clause 52

MR SEBUNYA: Honourable members, we are in part 7; petroleum revenue management. That is now Clause 52 under the headnote of ‘Establishment of the petroleum fund.’

The committee proposes to rephrase sub clause (2) as follows: ‘The petroleum revenues, which accrue to Government shall be paid into the Petroleum Fund.’

The justification is there should be one fund into which all revenues are deposited. It is easier for management and control. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 52 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 52, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 53

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, I beg to move an amendment to insert a new clause after Clause 52 as follows: “Valuation Committee.
    1) For purposes of determining the price of oil, there shall be a Gas and Oil Valuation Committee.
    2) The committee shall comprise of officials from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, Uganda Revenue Authority, Bank of Uganda and two members from the private sector.”

The justification is that issues of setting of price of oil should not be left to be determined by one individual. I so submit.

MR ODOI: Madam Chairperson, the proposal of the minister is very attractive. I have only the following problems; we passed laws here that created the National Oil Company, for example. They are not represented in the committee, which the minister is now proposing. We have a whole authority that we established as Parliament responsible for the control of our oil and gas resources. They are not represented on the evaluation committee the minister is proposing. 

I do not know whether he is terribly allergic to the inclusion of persons or representatives of the bodies that Parliament already created for the management of this particular resource.

MR ISABIRYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The question of these various committees also increases the cost of administration because to my understanding, an authority is not an individual. This is an authority with officials so instead of creating another committee to manage the business, I think it can be left to the whole authority.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, my concern is on the representation from the private sector. There are no specific qualifications so how do you identify those people to be competent in that field? I hope we do not get a situation where you pick peasants who have no knowledge of the matters of oil and prices. So why do we not provide the qualifications for those you will be picking from the private sector and from which particular sector that is private.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I remember when we were discussing the qualifications of the oil authority and company, we said that these should be nominated by the President and vetted by Parliament. They varied from different qualifications; at least the qualifications that we got in the law. Is the minister not comfortable with those qualifications that we put in the law in regard to this valuation committee, which he is trying to propose? 

Why is he or she rushing to think of a valuation committee while arguing that it should not be a one man’s show? The authority is comprised of different people with different qualifications and I believe that when the President is nominating those people, he will be comfortable with the people that will be running the authority rather than creating parallel committees, which might cause conflict within the operations of the business of Government.

THE CHAIRPERSON: For the record, I just want to inform members that about four months ago, we approved the members of the National Oil Company and we partially approved the Petroleum Authority. So we did our part several months ago. I want that for the record. 

Now minister, why are you pinching work, which is not yours? We created the authorities but now you want to take away - Yes, do you want to assist him? Hon. Ssempijja –
 
MR SSEMPIJJA: There are two things, Madam Chairperson and honourable minister. At the time we were discussing the Oil Bill, we mentioned that this Public Finance Act will be superior to the others. If that is not there and if it is consolidating then I think the honourable minister should withdraw this one.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The minister’s proposal of that committee is good because it is looking at strengthening the management of oil especially in terms of setting the price. So to bring those ministries he has talked about to be on that evaluation committee is very good. 

The only challenge is that the minister is bringing it now. If he had brought it earlier on in the committee, maybe we would have had a chance to internalise this and see which other bodies like the Oil Authority and the National Oil Company would come on board. 

So I am of the view that we could also stay this, maybe until tomorrow or a later time as they make further consultations. But the proposal is very good for the purposes of strengthening.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But unfortunately, the petroleum market is not here. Didn’t we create avenues for determination of the price? We must have. Yes, hon. Odoi.

MR ODOI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Speaking plainly, what is apparent is that the Ministry of Finance does not want to relinquish the management of any aspect of the oil and gas revenue. That is what the minister is saying very politely; that we need to set up a committee comprised of people from the Ministry of Finance that will be responsible for the determination of the prices of oil and gas. 

The minister knows and I can see my uncle very uncomfortable. I will come to you after a second. He wants to jump off his seat. The minister knows that the Petroleum Authority is empowered together with the National Oil Company to determine the prices of these resources and this cannot be a function of another committee. So the only value this proposal would add is jobs for the boys. 

Can I request the honourable minister to withdraw this proposal and we move? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, we passed the law and section 123 of the Petroleum Act states as follows: “The pricing of petroleum shall be in accordance with the method prescribed by regulations and shall take into account international oil and gas prices.” It is enshrined here in the law. 

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, hon. Odoi knows that those in the private sector could have come from Tororo so I withdraw my submission. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, thank you very much. So honourable members, I now put the question - We are not going to have a new clause on evaluation, we have abandoned that one. Let us go to Clause 53. I put the question that Clause 53 -

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, under Clause 53, ‘Collection and deposit of petroleum revenues into the petroleum revenue holding account.’ In sub-clause (5), replace the words ‘the entity designated to receive petroleum shall record’ with ‘the National Oil Company shall receive and record’. 

The justification is that the ‘entity’ is the National Oil Company established in the Petroleum Exploration, Development and Production Act.
 
So Madam Chairperson, what we are saying is that they had said in (5) ‘The entity designated to receive petroleum’ and because we have already passed that authority, we are saying it is the National Oil Company. So instead of ‘the entity designated to receive petroleum’, we have replaced this with the words ‘the National Oil Company’. 

In sub-clause (6), replace the words ‘Petroleum Revenue Holding Account’ with ‘Petroleum Fund’ and thereafter, whenever it appears in the Bill. 

The justification is that this is a consequential amendment arising out of the amendment in sub-clause 50(2). We have replaced that so consequentially we are providing for it. 

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, I agree with that proposed amendment but permit me to also make some further amendments. I propose that we delete 53 (2) and (3) and the justification is that these are already covered under the Income Tax Act section 89 (b) so they would be redundant here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: How does it read?

MR OMACH: In this Bill it states that, ‘The petroleum revenue assessed as due each month shall be paid by the 15th day of the following month by the person obliged to make that payment’ and (3) ‘Where a person does not make a payment by the date specified in sub-section (2), the person shall pay, as a penalty, a surcharge of five per cent of the amount in default for each day of the default.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: But we want to hear about - Is it section 89?

MR OMACH: Sections 103 to 113 and section 136 refer to collection and recovery. “(1) Petroleum revenues and other taxes charged in any assessment shall be payable within seven days after the due date for furnishing a return. A contractor shall, in each calendar quota, make a provisional payment consisting of…” and it gives the details.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But minister, yours is talking about seven days and this one is talking about 15 days.

MR OMACH: Yes, we are saying that we should be consistent with the Income Tax Act other than what this is proposing.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, but you are deleting. You are proposing a deletion.

MR OMACH: Yes, once we delete this, then in dealing with this we will refer to the Income Tax Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, you want to send them on a fishing expedition? Why?

MR OMACH: Then we propose to amend the number of days from 15 to seven so that it is consistent with the Income Tax Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 53 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 53, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 54

MR SEBUNYA: Clause 54, withdrawals from the petroleum revenue holding account. The committee proposes to replace paragraph (b) with the following: ‘To a petroleum revenue investment account in the Bank of Uganda for investments to be undertaken in accordance with section 59.’ The justification is that an account is easier for management and control as opposed to a reserve.

So, where it was reading ‘to the petroleum revenue investment reserve’ we have replaced it with ‘account’ and the justification is that the account is easy for management and control.

Madam Chairperson, if I may repeat, in 54(b) we intend to replace ‘reserve’ with ‘account’ to read; ‘to the petroleum revenue investment account’ instead of ‘reserve’. This is for investment to be undertaken in accordance with section 59. The justification is that an account is easy for management and control.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Reserve and account are not the same thing. Reserve means that this is a fund reserved for special withdrawals. An account can be any ordinary account. Mr Chairman, can you clarify that?

MR SEBUNYA: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, it was a petroleum revenue investment reserve but with information from Finance, they said that a reserve is bigger but an account is easier for management and control. So they just want money to go to an account in Bank of Uganda rather than a reserve as perceived.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: The committee went everywhere in the world learning about this oil revenue and I think that even those who drafted this Bill were thinking about reserving money and not looking at oil money as money we get from taxes every day. So it is a reserve fund and the word ‘reserve’ does not mean account. I do not understand the chairman’s explanation. This is a fund reserve, which can be used when we want but not at any time that the minister wants.

MR SEBUNYA: Honourable member, we had used the words ‘petroleum fund’ and now we have gone to- Because it is under the head note ‘withdrawals from the petroleum revenue holding account.’

It reads, “Withdrawals from the petroleum revenue holding account shall only be made under the authority granted by appropriation and a warrant of the Auditor General – 

(a) to the Consolidated Fund to support the annual budget;
(b) to the petroleum revenue investment account for investment to be undertaken in accordance with section 29.”

So, what is going to stay in the Bank of Uganda is a petroleum revenue investment account.

MR MWESIGE: Madam Chairperson, maybe the Minister of Minerals can help us. There seems to be a difference between petroleum revenue holding account and petroleum revenue investment reserve. The two terms seem to be different and the mistake the chairman of the committee is making is to make them the same.

I tend to agree with the Leader of the Opposition that there must have been a purpose why petroleum revenue investment reserve was created. When you look at the term investment, it tallies well with reserve. The reserve is for purposes of investment so you cannot just call it an account. 

Yes, the heading is there and I have seen it. That is why I am asking for clarification on whether there is no difference between petroleum reserve holding account and petroleum revenue investment reserve. The two seem to be different and so you cannot just amend in (b), petroleum revenue investment account because the headnote is account. We need to clarify whether the two are the same.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, do you really want to disturb this provision?    

MR SEBUNYA: What happened is that in 52, we created what we called a petroleum fund. We deleted (2) and instead of creating (2); petroleum revenue holding account and the petroleum revenue investment account, we created a petroleum fund. 

We said that we want one fund for all oil revenues. When we go to – (Interruption)

MR LOKERIS: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. To us these words are not interchangeable; they serve different purposes. The holding account is where all the money goes then when you are moving in the course of the year, you need some of this money to come and bridge the gap in your budget and that is now (a). 

Then the other one is you also provide money for the future generations in a reserve investment. The purpose is to invest.

Usually when they invest this, there are instances where you get this money and bank it abroad to earn money for your institution for future generations. When that expires, the money comes back to this reserve fund, which is purposely for investment. 

Even when you are taking some money from this reserve investment account, some of the money remains there. You do not exhaust it. It only goes when there is need to invest; when you look at opportunities where you can invest so that this fund goes on bulging as years go. As we perish, other people come and find the money there for their own utilisation. So these words are okay just the way they are.

 MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, in financial management, reserve accounts are different from normal accounts. Reserve accounts are specifically provided for particular uses while for general accounts, the monies therein can be deployed at the discretion of the accounting officers and therefore, the provision, as it is, is correct.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So you do not need to disturb our provision.

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, if we can go back to 52, we removed ‘petroleum holding account’ and ‘petroleum reserve account’ and we replaced these with ‘a petroleum fund’. We gave the justification - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The fund was already there under 52(1). You are not creating it, it is already there. We did not touch the petroleum fund.

MR SEBUNYA: I think we deleted the holding account in -

THE CHAIRPERSON: We did not we added a new sub clause. 

MR SEBUNYA: I think it is going to come in 58 where the committee and Minister of Finance proposed that we rephrase the words ‘petroleum revenue investment reserve’ with ‘petroleum revenue investment account’.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But now you are moving ahead, we have not reached there.

MR SEBUNYA: That is a proposal but I think we need to change here in 52 or we leave it there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You can come back and recommit.

MR OMACH: I would request my chairperson of the committee to accept the position that has been clarified by our Attorney General so that we retain what is in the Bill as it is now.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 54 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 55, agreed to.

Clause 56, agreed to.

Clause 57

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 57 do stand part of the Bill -

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I want to propose that we amend Clause 57(2) to read as follows: ‘The minister shall cause to be published, the report specified in this clause, in newspapers of wide circulation and make the report available on the ministry’s website and that of related accounting office by 30th September.’

The justification is, considering the advancements in technology and the need to facilitate flow of this pertinent information to the public, such disclosures should also be published on the websites of the relevant ministry and accounting office.
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 57 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 57, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 58

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, for clarity I wish to introduce an amendment on Clause 58; the headnote and everywhere. Regarding the petroleum revenue investment reserve account and for purposes of clarity, we have said that to open an account you need a letter from the Accountant General. For purposes of audit, if we just leave it as ‘revenue investment reserve’, people may not know that it is an account. So we just add the word ‘account’ at the end and it is consequential. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Who can tell us how are reserves done?

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. All over the world, the word ‘reserve’ is well understood and I think there is no need to add ‘reserve account’. It is adequate as it is.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, it is the term we used in 54; the petroleum revenue investment reserve so we cannot come to 58 and change it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 58 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 59

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 59 -
 
MR EKANYA: In Clause 59(2)(c) of the Bill, we would like to amend (2)(c) ‘Any other instrument which qualifies under the petroleum revenue investment policy’. The justification is it is for clarity.

In Clause 59(2)(c), there is a statement which says, ‘Any other qualifying instrument prescribed by the minister.’ I wish to amend that and say, ‘Any other instrument, which qualifies under the petroleum revenue investment policy.’

The justification is for purposes of clarity. I beg to move. You know in this Act, it is the minister that will be making the instrument and regulation so it is implied.

MR SEBUNYA: Maybe his amendment would still carry the same meaning if it said, ‘Any other qualifying instrument prescribed by the minister and consistent with the policy.’

THE CHAIRPERSON: What are the debt instruments you have in mind?

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, if you read 59(3), it says, ‘An instrument that ceases to be a qualifying instrument due to changes in the rate, rating of the instrument shall immediately or as soon as practicable, be disposed of.’ Now in the investment, the minister from time to time will be issuing instruments to guide the investment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I am aware about that but I wanted you also to look at (2)(a) because these are internationally convertible currency deposits or debt instruments. So it is not just a local matter.

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In addition to that, the policy you referred to was the petroleum policy. Whereas here when you are referring to investment instruments, actually what could be more relevant might be the policy under which Bank of Uganda does investments. 

So even the policy he is quoting might not be relevant or the correct policy. So I would propose that it remains as it is.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Ekanya, what you are doing is to just narrow it and say, anything, which are not petroleum policy, do not cite it. That is what you are saying and you are talking about investments. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, let us leave it the way it is but I had another concern, which you have said about international convertible currency that leaves out East African currency but I will leave the Leader of the Opposition to comment about that.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Chairperson, we can leave it as it is in the amendment that the instruments should be laid before Parliament for information and transparency. This is because the minister can decide to invest in anything and we are giving him all the power to that. So we need Parliament to know that he is going to invest our money in something, which he has decided upon so that we know.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 59 be amended by the introduction of that proposal.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 59, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 60

MR SEBUNYA: There is a proposal by the committee on Clause 60, management of petroleum revenue investment account. Let us first read and say in sub clause (7), replace ‘shall’ with ‘may’ and ‘procurement laws’ with ‘the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2003’. 

The justification is that procurement laws are vague. 

In Clause 7, there is somewhere where they say ‘procurement laws’. This is vague and we are saying we use ‘The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2003’. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 60 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 60, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 61

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, directions of the minister. In sub clause (1) replace ‘directions’ with ‘policy guidelines’. The justification is Bank of Uganda is independent in its functions so policy guidelines would suffice.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 61 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 61, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 62

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Chairperson, where does this Clause 62 fall? Is this to be under the Ministry of Finance or Ministry of Energy? How does the authority relate to this committee? 

MR SEBUNYA: I think this Investment Advisory Committee in Clause 62 is under the purview of the Minister of Finance. ‘There shall be an Investment Advisory Committee to advise the minister on the investments made under the petroleum revenue investment reserve.’ That reserve that you said shall stay in the Bill. So let him not be the only person, let him have an advisory committee that advises him or her on the investments in this fund and it can be resident in Bank of Uganda.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 62 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 63

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, Clause 63; appointment and qualifications of members of the Investment Advisory Committee. Replace sub clause (2) with the following: ‘The members of the Investment Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the minister who shall ensure that at least one third of the persons are of either gender to ensure the gender mainstreaming in all national decision making.’

Insert a new sub clause immediately after sub clause (2), as follows: “The Madam Chairperson of the committee shall not be a public officer.” 

The justification is that best practice demands that the chairperson of such a committee should not be a public officer. This ensures the required efficiencies. I beg to move.

MR ODOI: Madam Chairperson, I have a small problem with the chairman’s proposal in respect to gender. ‘The members of the Investment Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the minister who shall ensure that at least one third of the persons are of either gender....’ 

Madam Chairperson, we all know the composition of our population is 51 per cent female, 49 per cent male. So when a male member of this House says one third of either gender, he is politely saying a third should be women, which is a very patronizing position to take. 

May I propose that we replace ‘at least one third’ with ‘one half’ so that it is 50 per cent female and 50 per cent male? I beg to move.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to concur with my colleague on that subject. We have seen women who have performed in this country and we have no doubt regarding that. So I do not see why members are saying that 50-50 is wrong.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to sympathise with the argument made by my very good friend, hon. Odoi about being sensitive in terms of promoting gender issues. But I think that our Constitution is very clear about issues of gender where it puts a third as a matter of guidance. 

Surely when you say at least a third, it could even mean three quarters could be either gender. It could be women and they said either gender. I support even the entire team to be of women but I think that for purposes of legislation, let us make it “at least a third.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you know I chair the Appointments Committee. But, this “at least” ends up in just being the bare minimum. Yes, the other time when we got 50 per cent was in the Petroleum Exploration Act because it was by law. Yes, they just do enough to fulfil the constitutional -

MR LUGOLOOBI: My view, Madam Chair, is that we should move slowly because speed kills. At least one-third as provided by the Constitution should be adequate enough.

MS KWAGALA: Thank you, Madam Chair. We are living in a global world; so, we cannot be static. I support hon. Fox Odoi’s amendment that we should be consistent, given the recent population statistics. Thank you.

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I think we have been on the one-third for too long. We would like to progress to 50-50. I support the idea of hon. Fox Odoi. Thank you very much.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, I think we cannot win this war; we just have to support the half.

MR ONYANGO: Thank you, Madam Chair. I know our Constitution provides for “at least one-third”, but there is no harm in adding more. I also want to draw the attention of honourable members that actually the African Union provides for half. And, since we are party to the continental body, I think we can go by half.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, certainly, my submission is without prejudice to hon. Fox Odoi’s proposal, which seems to be the consensus now. However, I just wanted to make a little remark. You see, the question of affirmative action in Uganda needs to be critically looked at. As you may know, just towards the end of every term, we come here with a motion for a resolution in respect of Article 78 of the Constitution. 

At first, affirmative action was for a period of 10 years, reviewable every after five years. So, we normally come here. And, you can consider the periods so far we have reached, and instead of fazing ourselves out of affirmative action, we are actually now even entrenching it the more. 

For instance, Madam Chairperson, you know very well that you are now a very strong person to take up anything. (Applause) And, many of our colleagues in the House who have been enjoying affirmative action can now stand on their own. So, certainly, it may not be wise to entrench affirmative action when we should be fazing ourselves out of it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Attorney General, as a custodian of the CIDO and as government, you undertook to take temporary special measures until the end comes; you still have not done that. We have made progress in political representation, but they are talking about investing for this country. Why should women be left out when talking about oil? The investments in oil are for all of us. Honourable, I am disappointed because you are my friend.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Madam Chair, the learned Attorney General is aware that the African Charter talks about 50-50. And, the treaty that establishes the East African Community also talks about 50-50, I do not know why he is trying to think backwards in terms of - (Interjection) - you have agreed?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 63 be amended as proposed by hon. Odoi.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 63, as amended agreed to.

Clause 64

MR KASULE: Clause 64, Madam Chair; functions of the advisory committee. Insert a new sub-clause (5): “In the exercise of its functions, the Investment Advisory Committee may hire persons highly specialised in any field relevant to its mandate.” Justification is to allow the committee appoint a secretariat if so required.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that Clause 64 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 64, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 65, agreed to.

Clause 66, agreed to.

Clause 67

MR KASULE: Clause 67; annual plan for the petroleum revenue investment reserve. Replace sub-clause (3) as follows: “The minister shall submit to Parliament for approval the annual plan for the petroleum revenue investment reserve by 1 April before the beginning of the financial year.” Justification is to clarify on the role of Parliament on the annual plan.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 67 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 67, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 68, agreed to.

Clause 69, agreed to.

Clause 70

MR KASULE: Clause 70, Madam Chair, under the prohibition on encumbrance of the petroleum funds in sub-clause (1), replace “Present or future financial assets” with “The assets generated from future oil production.”

In Clause 70(1), where it reads “Financial assets of the petroleum fund, including present or future financial assets shall not be earmarked, pledged, committed or loaned out or otherwise encumbered by any person or entity.” I think what we have done is to replace the words “present or future financial assets” with the words, “the assets generated from future oil production.”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chairperson, I think it will be very dangerous to remove the “Present”. You know that someone can commit the new expression block – they can claim that the next ten blocks are now committed. It is very dangerous if you remove that.

MR KASULE: I think with your guidance, it can stay.

THE SPEAKER: Do you have another main reason?

MR KASULE: No that was the only one on the –

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, in this Clause 70, I want to ask the chairman why he is leaving all these other amendments in Clause 70. They are so many.
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Where are they? It is only one. What are the imports of those - (Interjection) - okay, honourable members, I put the question that Clause 70 stands part of the Bill.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 71

MR KASULE: Clause 71, under the sharing of revenues from royalties, to replace the word “District” with “Local government. Justification, in line with Article 443 of the Constitution:
2. Insert a new sub-clause (2): “The minister responsible for petroleum exploration and development shall within a month after approval of Cabinet publish the local government eligible to receive royalties”.
3. Delete sub-clause (2) in the Bill. The other (2) was a replacement of this (2). Then replace sub-clause (2) in the Bill. 
4. Delete sub-clause (6); districts may change from time to time. Sub-clause (6) was saying the sharing of revenues from royalties under sub-section (3) shall be in accordance with the formerly prescribed in Part 1 of the schedule. So we are proposing to delete No.1.
5. Rephrase sub-clause (8) as follows: “A local government shall, in consultation with the ministries responsible for cultures and local governments, grant one per cent of the royalties due to the local government to a cultural or traditional institution”. 

Justification: To avoid conflicts between local governments and the cultural institutions – (Interjections)- I think members were not paying attention let me read it again. 

No.5, rephrase sub-clause (8) as follows - the original was reading: “A district may in consultation with the ministries responsible for culture and local government, grant a share of royalties due to the district to a cultural institution”. But now the committee is proposing a percentage - “A local government shall in consultation with the ministry responsible for cultures and local government grant one per cent of the royalties due to the local government to a cultural or traditional institution”.
The justification was to avoid conflict between the local government and the cultural institutions.
6. Sub-clause (9) was reading, “The revenue from royalties shall be appropriated to a district in the form of an unconditional grant”. So the committee is saying it should read: “The revenue from royalties shall be appropriated to a district in a form of conditional grant in the annual budget”. 
7. Delete sub-clause (11) which was reading that “Revenue from royalties transferred to a district in a financial year shall not exceed the total non-oil revenue of that district”.

The committee is proposing that statement is redundant. There is no clear justification for this restriction. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chairperson, you are reading things which I do not have. That is why I am a bit lost.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, where we have so many proposed amendments by clause, would it not be procedurally right to go, proposed amendment by proposed amendment, so that we keep stock of the proposed amendments because if you have over six amendments, under one clause, it becomes a little bit clumsy.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, in support of the recent submission, I just wanted to request the chairman to go one by one, and we start with two because you presented two twos which are not here which we do not see in this one. So let us start from where you started.

MR KASULE: I think that is agreeable members. Let me start with Clause 71(1). Those dots are not numbered. Please number them from 1 to 7.

    1. Replace the word “District” with “Local government” and the justification is that this is in line with Article 244(3) of the Constitution.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, have you heard that? It is that you replace the word “District” with the word “Local government”

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, I would have had no problem but you know when you talk of local government, you literally have – for example, in a district: the district council as a local government, the municipality and the sub-county are all local governments. They are all legal entities in their own rights.

When you replace this particular provision, that means, you are also going to amend Schedule 6 and directly write down all- I can give example of Kanungu which is nearer; write down all the local governments under Kanungu district local council. Will we now not be expanding the arena too much? Why do we not restrict it to the district?

MR KASULE: Honourable members, the proposal is to delete “district”, because we have passed a clause which says the ministry responsible for energy shall designate those areas which shall receive oil royalties. Because the committee was saying you cannot put district here even those that will never see oil in their areas. So we propose to delete that schedule and leave it to the ministry to designate where they will be finding oil.

MR EKANYA: Supplementary! With oil, the ministry and Government need to get a report from the environmental experts because oil has serious environmental issues. 
Tororo or Kamuli may not be having oil, but if Total is moving oil from Amuru and before they cross to Kenya, there is dumping of petroleum waste at that border. If NEMA writes a report on this, we may qualify. 

Therefore, it is very important we give that to the minister to be able to designate based on technical reports that are presented to Government. (Laughter) 

MR LOKERIS: Thank you, Chair. I would like to give information. There is no activity in the area of oil industry that can take place without the recommendation and the certificate from the National Environment Management Authority. It is not there because of associated problems that the world knows are inherent in the Oil and Gas Industry.

When you punch any place; the noise and the dust must be taken care of. In our case that ecology where we are operating from is a fragile eco system so you have to take care of water, the birds or the lizards and everything there including giraffes. Therefore, there is nothing we do without taking due care to get the environmental certificate and this is done all over the world. 

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, I just wanted to affirm that as a committee we did agree that we will continue discovering oil in many other areas that are not actually mentioned here. Therefore, if we maintain Schedule 6 as it is now we will be denying other areas.

Tomorrow you never know, Kamuli might actually have oil and the minister will have to come here and give a report and include that district. That is why we said that we should not have that limitation.

MR LOKERIS: I would like to inform the members that the potential area that we have already discovered oil in is only 40 per cent; 60 per cent of the area has not been exploited yet so there are chances that we shall get more oil elsewhere and not only in the Albertan gravel; there are other basins known in this country. 

There is one in Karamoja -(Laughter)- it is called Moroto Kadam Valley; there is some oil there. We do not know if it is of commercial value – (Interjections)- even Lake Kyoga here has portions. There are about five areas that we think are very good so I think what the chairman said is pertinent so that we only update this Parliament where we have discovered oil from.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think let us first dispose of the issue of whether it is a district or a local government before we go to finding.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I think the term “local government” is too general as hon. Niwagaba has said because the sub county is also a local government. If we do not specify which local government will be the focal point to receive this revenue then we are going to create a lot of conflict when it comes to implementing this law. I would rather we maintain the district local government as the focal unit that will receive the revenue and of course the district will budget for this money. 

But when you just say local government - (Interjection) - it does. The district budgets for sub counties. That is obvious. Yes but you see when they say local government in the Constitution it does not preclude mentioning district local government because a district is a local government.

So, when you leave it general implementing this law is going to be very difficult because sub counties where oil is located will emerge, complain and fight and the wars will be endless. I am giving this information from a position of experience.

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I agree with the minister about the amendments from the experience I have in my district. They are mining a certain mineral whereby the district and the sub counties are sharing the revenue amicably. I do not know how they do it but there are no complaints at all. So, I feel that we are going to deprive the sub county of this revenue and yet they are the ones that are going to suffer more and the district will never give the sub counties that money; they will be spending it at that level. But we can devise means whereby the district can share that money with the sub counties so let us take it as local government as the minister suggested.

The minister said that he was going to amend it from “district” to “local government” – (Interjections) – oh, I see, for me it is local government.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, I want to see a situation where the small governments are protected. In some far places there are constant battles between the district government and the sub county on the 65 per cent. They are supposed to send back some money but it never goes so similarly I want to see a guarantee because you might find that the district is Hoima but the oil is in Kisomoro, so you send it there; my boss might not give me yet you have given.

MR LOKERIS: Chair, can I shade some light somewhere? We have got an existing law which guides and is like the one on mineral revenues. We say 80 per cent goes to the central government, 10 per cent goes to the district, seven per cent goes to the sub county or even the town council where the mineral is found and we give some to the community. We call it the honour, which is three per cent. 

But I want to make it clear that this country of ours is a decentralised administration; it is not a centralised administration where you divide our resources according to population and according to the size of the area. Here we are saying we must be specific and look at the areas according to where you find these resources. If we wish -(Interruption)

MR KAKOBA: Thank you. I want to thank the honourable minister for giving me this opportunity. The information I want to give is in relation to our Constitution that is Article 244; Minerals and Petroleum and in particular it talks about -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you use the microphone please?

MR KAKOBA: Oh sorry. Sub section 2 (3) says, “Mineral oil and petroleum shall be exploited taking into account the interest of the individual land owners, local governments.” It talks about local government so it means that there are more than actually the people.

MR LOKERIS: Thank you for that information. Madam Chair, in fact we had initially said 80 per cent channel of government, 17 per cent to the district. The district could not pass anything to the sub counties and they complain. The case came from Kasese so we say we should now as policy and enactment give them their portion and the moment we have done so there is no coalition and fight between the districts and the sub county. If we can do that it would be better to avoid quarrels and yet these very products that we are trying to get are very fragile because people who are down there must own what we are doing there. 

The infrastructure is enormous on the ground and the wells are there as well; we need the people below to be happy. So, we should give them some small percentage so that they are happy, other than quarrelling with the district.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is what I was telling you, that I want a guarantee that the smaller governments will get access to this money. So, can we have formulation that will secure the rights of the small governments?

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I think the principle should be that where these minerals are found, in that locality, we should make sure that they get the lion’s share because they are the ones going to suffer, if there is any kind of suffering. Otherwise, if we say that let the district share amongst the counties within, then the sharing might be a little bit difficult. We must ensure that where minerals are found, that very county gets the lion’s share.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we are still looking for a formulation, I think we insist on that; we are saying the same thing. Let us get the formulation first.

MR KAJARA: Madam Chair, first of all the solution for the local government, up to the lower government share resides in the main amendment, where you are saying the local government - that means a local government at higher level and also at lower level. That is the first line of ensuring that the local government also includes either the district or the town where that oil will be produced. When you look at schedule 7 of the Act, it provides a formula for sharing revenue from royalties. That time, it was among the districts. But this time we shall have to change it so that it reflects among local governments.

It is at that level that we shall say that the district shares so much, sub-county shares so much, a municipal council or town council share so much. We shall therefore need to go to this schedule and include the other levels of local government, so that they are also captured here, because they were not captured originally and that is why we support this amendment that it is a local government so that this sharing can go down so that it is in line with the mineral Act.

While the mineral Act provides all this formula for sharing, the provision in the mineral Act should be transferred into this, so that we know that even the local governments at the lower levels have a share. There is a schedule here and there is a formula and it says, DRCs owe a share of royalties due to the district, DLPs are able productions of a particular district, PP is the total petroleum produced by the district involved in petroleum, RCD is the total revenue and the formula is in part two, where there are shares rousing due to the district; there is population located within the petroleum exploration area, there is total population of all districts, and there is total revenue. So in that formula, we should include what the benefits to the local government should be. We can work it out so that by the time we reach there, we shall amend this schedule to reflect that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, you want to support the proposal to the committee that we go back to the word “local government” rather than district? Honourable members, I put a question that clause 71(1) be amended as proposed.

MR LUGOLOOBI: It is not clear how this cake that we are sharing is arrived at. It is important if there is any other law that defines how these royalties are arrived at we cross-reference that particular provision in the existing law. We are simply talking about sharing, but we do not say what percentage of the oil revenue are royalties – (Interjections) - If they are there in the other laws then we should cross-reference. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think it is in the Bill.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Seven per cent of what? You know, you are talking about royalties but remember that you begin from the total oil revenue, and then you define royalties out of the total oil revenue.

MR NIWAGABA: The royalties referred to were passed in the upstream law as one of the payment receivable. So, it is a specific payment whose method of calculation is known. However, I would want if we are to solve the problem under Clause 71(1), then we must make reference to the formula at the end of the sentence for sharing the revenues as provided for in schedule seven. So that once we are amending this particular formula, we make sure that the sub-counties, municipalities and districts are all included in that formula.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So we could add there, is it mineral law? You make proposals, do not clarify. Bring what you are saying into this so that we do not have to worry.

MR KAJARA: We can bring that, Madam Chair, but what hon. Lugoloobi asked is really pertinent in that law which the honourable is putting forward. There is a provision that for every barrel of oil produced, 12.5 per cent shall be treated as a royalty payment. That 12.5 per cent is what becomes 100 percent here and 93 per cent is retained by the Central Government and seven percent goes to the local government. So that is the clarification I want to make. It is 12 percent of every barrel of oil produced. It becomes a hundred percent, then 93 percent is shared by the Central Government generally and seven percent goes to the local government.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, can you now bring in the Mineral Act and the formula which we wanted to import here. That is what I want you to do so that we can leave Clause 71(1).

MR LOKERIS: I was the one who mentioned that one. I said that in the Mineral Act, it is said that out of what we get as value for Government from royalties, 80 percent goes to Central Government, 10 percent goes to the district as a local government district, seven percent goes to the sub-county and three percent goes to the community which is the land owner. That is how that one is framed. But I also want to inform you –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Section what of which Act? I want you to tell us the section of the law so that we can say that, as provided for in such and such Bill.

MR LOKERIS: Unless now members open the Acts from their iPads, I did not see it. But I want to tell you something Madam Chair which is very interesting. When you remove 12.5 percent at the well per barrel, what you are left with is the balance of that amount.  You remove the recoverable from what you have left. After the recoverable have been removed per barrel, what you get after that is what we call profit oil. That profit oil is divided between the company and Government in the ratio and percentage that are specified in the agreement which I have made.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, you are taking us into something else; we are dealing with royalties, please do not confuse us.

MR LOKERIS: Thank you very much, I was telling you that we are getting a lot of money.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We know about the money but let us talk about the royalties, you are confusing us. So, how do we close this matter 71(1)?

MR BAHATI: I think we should cross-reference it with the law that defines royalties if it is there. The Attorney-General should let us know where it is and then we will provide for it, if it is not there then we defy. But it is very important to do that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So can we propose that we just defy this for now and proceed with others while the Attorney-General and the minister are looking for the provision of the law?

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chair, I think our point of view should be, either we move as amended by hon. Niwagaba; and we make reference to schedule 7, or to a relevant law as they claim exists. So, the question would be either we make reference to schedule 7 or to a relevant law which they are claiming exists. So then we proceed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is why I am saying let us defy it until somebody produces a law here, because they are talking and no one is telling me which section it is. Bring the law let us go to Clause 71(3) until you produce that law.

MR KASULE: Madam Chair, Clause 71(2)

THE CHAIRPERSON: You had proposed deletion of clause 71(2). That was your proposal.

MR KASULE: Okay we finished sub-clause (2) then sub-clause (3).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Your proposal on sub-clause (3) that is what we want.

MR KASULE: Because as for the amendment, we had finished the one that, “The minister responsible for petroleum and development shall within a month, after approval of cabinet, publish the local governments eligible to receive royalties”. I gave justification that districts may change from time to time.

Then Clause 71(3) there is a proposal that we delete sub-clause (2) which was “The district located within petroleum explosion and production areas of Uganda as specified in schedule 6”, which we are proposing to delete. So sub-clause (2) also remains redundant. And 4 -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, let us go one by one.

MR KASULE: So that one of deleting (2) -

THE CHAIRPERSON: First, we start with a new sub-clause (2); the minister responsible for petroleum should publish a local government eligible. That is the new amendment. So is there a new clause (2)?

MR KASULE: This is a new clause (2) and then we propose to delete the present (2).

THE CHAIRPERSON: We had deleted that. So we have a new one which you proposed here. So honourable members, I put the question that a new clause (2) be introduced as proposed by the chairman.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KASULE: Delete sub-clause (6); justification districts may -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No let us go to subclause (3). Now honourable members -

MR KASULE: Sub-Clause (3) in the Bill?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes sub clause (3), is that okay members?

MR KASULE: Fifty per cent of the revenue from loyalties due to the districts shall be shared among the districts involved in petroleum based on the level of production of each district. So 50 per cent of the revenue from loyalties due to the local governments shall be shared among the local governments involved in the petroleum production based on the level of production for each local government.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay honourable members?

MR EKANYA: Based on the level of production or impact. Impact will be as result of technical report of environmental issues. It is very serious issue world over, environmental impact of oil. That is why I am saying based on the level of production or negative impact or environmental impact. I beg to move. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Hon. Ekanya’s submission tends to make sense to me because sometimes the impact may not be within the sub county where the oil is being produced. Sometimes the impact may be in another sub county or both where they dump. So to me I think we need to include it.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chair, I think I agree with the proposal by Hon. Ekanya. However, on sub-clause (3) again, if we are using the word ‘shall’ ‘50 per cent of the loyalties shall’ that is a mandatory and it imputes a duty on somebody. So in the event that the districts do not receive, here we must come up with a subject who can be held responsible for not submitting the favour re-sent. So we are saying ‘shall’ be divided, by who? 

It should actually - may be the central government shall do this or the minister shall ensure a,b,c and d, so that if the local governments do not receive their 50 per cent, they can take on at least someone to be responsible. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think let us first deal with the 50 per cent sharing and later we can deal with who is going to implement the sharing. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 71(3) be amended as proposed by hon. Ekanya.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then, I think someone will have to formulate the other one of implementation which will come at the end. Let us go to sub-clause (4).

MR KASULE: Madam Chair, sub-clause (4) reads: “The balance of 50 per cent of the revenue from loyalties due to the local governments shall be shared among the local governments as in schedule 6.” But schedule 6 I think goes consequently because we are proposing in the committee report to delete sub-clause (6).

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are on sub-clause (4). I think what you need to do is to remove reference to schedule 6.

MR KASULE: Madam Chair, it will read, “The balance of 50 per cent of the revenue from loyalties due to the local governments shall be shared among all the local governments based on population size of each.”

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chair, thank you for giving me this opportunity. You know we have different consideration in our districts. For example, I recall around 2012-2013, the President of this country His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, communicated to the members of Parliament on how the budget allocation especially physical infrastructure would be handled and one of the issues that he pointed out was terrain. When you look at, for example, the district of the Minister of Local Government, hon. Adolf and who is my neighbour –(Interruption)- yes we share boundaries and when you also look at Kasese, Ntoroko, Bundibugyo, Mbale, Buhweju and Kanungu, you really see that if you only considered the aspect of population, it would be unfair. 

Because, for example, if you are to construct a road with money that has actually been realised from loyalties, you will see that the number of kilometres that will be constructed in a flat land using the same amount of money will not be the same as what you would use in a steep area. 

So, I thought that in this regard, it would be pertinent for us also to include the aspect of terrain so that then we can have those considerations, Madam Chair.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chair, I think we are talking about the geographical area, the size of the area and the terrain. So it is three factors: the population size, the geographical area and the terrain.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No geographical area, you might disadvantage Ntoroko, you might disadvantage a small district. At least talk about population and terrain. 

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much. To me, I do not buy the idea of population because in one sub-county, you may have a very high population but they have the oil is very little in their area. So we would depend on the amount of production and the environmental destruction. That is what will determine the amount of royalty we can give instead of population, thank you very much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We captured the one for environment. Yes honourable- (Interruption)

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chair, you mentioned that if we take the geographical area, then some smaller districts will be disadvantaged. I just wanted to say that there has always been a formula for sharing revenues and it has included geographical areas. Those small ones will be catered for when we include terrain. 

So to me, I do not see any problem, we serve everybody, because even the geographical areas, the bigger they are, the more problems for investment like making roads becomes. So to me I think let us take the three: population size, geographical area and terrain. Then we cater for everybody.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay Members? So we amend sub-clause 4 to include population size, geographical area and the terrain? Okay, honourable members, I put the question that Clause 71 (4) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KASULE: Madam Chair, (5) reads: “For avoidance of doubt, a local government which is involved in petroleum production shall be entitled to revenue from royalties specified in (3) and (4).”

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think there was no amendment on that one –(Interjections)- then that is fine.

MR NIWAGABA: I thought when you read 71 (1), it caters for it, this is being repetitious. The payment to royalties is conditional to the petroleum production, so this particular sub-clause is repetitious -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Will it hurt anybody if it is there. 

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, when you read 71 (1) it is very clear that royalties shall be paid to the local Government arising from petroleum production. Now, this particular sub-clause - (Interjection)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know, honourable members, we should not disturb that one because the first one is dealing with districts - some in exploration others in production. This one just talks about production. I think let us leave it. It is very peaceful as it is. Okay (6). 

MR SSEMPIJA: At this moment mention the lower local Governments -(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have already said it we are only waiting for the formula which will come from the law. I hope someone is looking for it by the way. We have reserved 1 (1) until we get that question on the law -

MR SSEMPIJJA: Once you start with “avoidance of doubt”, then even the others must appear including the villages. (Laughter)

MR KASULE: Madam Chair, the committee proposed to delete sub clause (6) which reads: “The sharing of revenue from royalties under sub-section (3) shall be in accordance with a formula prescribed in part 1 of the schedule 7” and we proposed that schedule 7 shall be deleted so -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we cannot delete schedule 7; it is very important, it has the formula; schedule 7 is very important you cannot touch it.

MR KASULE: Okay, let me read it again: “The sharing of revenue from royalties under sub-section (3) shall be in accordance with the formula prescribed in Part 1 of Schedule 6.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: No please, Schedule 7 deals with the formula for distribution you cannot touch it. What we removed was Schedule 6 which was naming the districts, this one is very important. Let us leave it, leave it. Does anyone have an issue on 7?

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KASULE: Seven reads: “The sharing of revenue from royalties under sub-section (4) shall be in accordance with a formula prescribed in Part 2 of Schedule 7.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes. Honourable members, I put the question that sub-clause (7) do stay and be part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KASULE: (8) reads: “A local government may in consultation with ministers responsible for culture and local government grant a share of royalty due to the local government to a cultural or traditional institution.” The committee proposes: “A local Government shall in a consultation with ministries responsible for culture and local Government grant one percent of the royalties due to the local government, to a cultural or traditional institution.” Justification; avoid conflict between the local government and their cultural institutions.

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Chair, instead of saying “one percent” we say “at least one percent” as the district may decide to give them more than one percent. So, put the word “at least”.

MR SSEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. In many areas where these cultural leaders are, they are complementing government’s work. They are doing a lot of work. So to me I am not comfortable that there must be a consultation; it is like the district and the Central Government consult and discuss, then after that, they go back to what they are supposed to give to our traditional leaders. Besides, when you look at how that is going to be defined, when you have areas where people claim to be cultural leaders within a cultural setup - I don’t know how we are going to go about it. Somebody comes and says that he is also a cultural leader within a given cultural setup which is known. How are we going to go about it? Aren’t we going to create many conflicts within that area?

After knowing the cultural leaders - the people are going to be consulted, the royalties should go straight to those ones and not people that are being formed by some sections within. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But what I know is that the minister for culture gazettes those recognised as cultural leaders.

MR NIWAGABA: I believe the original drafting  was much better because when you make it mandatory for local governments to contribute to cultural institutions when some of the areas indeed have no cultural leaders you are going to see the emergency of cultural leaders in almost each area including Kigezi, which is always known to be republican.

To me I believe the discretion must be left to the local government to determine whether to give these cultural institutions or not.

MR KAJARA: As government, we made a lot of consultations on this matter. First of all we have constitutional provisions governing the exploitation of minerals, mineral ores and petroleum in particular, Article 244(3) provides that “Minerals, mineral ores and petroleum shall be exploited taking into account the interest of first individual land owners, local government and the Central Government”.

In so doing, the land owners benefit because when you find minerals or oil in a particular land the land owner is compensated. That is covered here; the two other people who are entitled are local government and Central Government. This amendment seeks to introduce cultural leaders which were not provided for in the constitution.

We are saying that local governments under this clause 8 - because under the same Constitution the Central Government and local government can do budget for local and cultural institutions.

In the same way, since this is treated as revenue to the local government they can use that parameter to budget for local governments. But if you put a particular percentage for cultural institutions, first of all it would be unconstitutional. But secondly, it would offend the spirit of the Constitution. But as the honourable members have said, the local governments should be given the liberty to budget for infrastructure for other activities but include other cultural leaders where they exist. I think that would be very fair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But honourable minister, I do not know whether it does not offend the Constitution that the Central Government has continued to use free of charge properties of the cultural institutions, isn’t that unconstitutional? 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chair, the issue of realities is actually cross cutting because local governments do not exist in their entirety without the culture of the people. You know that government gives some money to cultural leaders every month meaning that they are not giving them this facilitation out of the blue. Actually, cultural institutions are provided for in the Constitution of Uganda.

How do we make cultural institutions sustainable? I think it would be pertinent that as we legislate here we should also be looking at how we can make cultural institutions and cultural leaders more and more independent in their own operations. They cannot be sustainable unless they access resources. It is not a crime as the minister is saying in his submission that actually, the Constitution provides for the local government, Central Government and the land owners.

It is very difficult to differentiate between the culture, the local government and Central Government because the individuals who are in the cultural institution are the ones who are in the local government and the Central Government.

My opinion is that even the one percent is not sufficient and I feel that when we are dealing with this matter, the Ministry of Gender has already gazetted those cultural institutions that it knows exist in this country.

To cure the problem which the honourable member was bringing forward that cultural institutions will emerge because they want to target this money, I say that only those cultural institutions that were gazetted at the time of the promulgation of this law are the ones that will be considered.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I want implore government that there is a principle of equity. For instance, in Busoga, all the sub county headquarters belong to the kingdom and they have been used free of charge for over 50 years, all the markets. There must be equity.

MR MUWUMA: Madam Chair, to minimise conflict in sharing the royalties, we may have to introduce another clause saying that where we have more than one recognised cultural institution - because we have a district like Bundibugyo where we have the Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu and Obudhingya which was recognised recently. These people will begin clashing over this one percent. The local government will be in a challenge as to who should benefit from this.

For us to minimise conflict especially on the side of the minister for culture on who should take, we have to introduce a clause saying that where there are more than one - in Busoga we have one and we are not complaining if we had fuel but for Bundibugyo we have - hon. Latif was just being polite to say that there are those that are emerging, but in some -(Interruption)

MR MBAHIMBA: Thank you honourable for giving way and thank you, Madam Chairperson. The information I want to give is related to what the honourable member is trying to present here. What you are discussing is a Bill which will finally be an Act, but this Act is not superseding the Constitution, the Constitution provides under Article 246, that any culture that wishes to form a kingdom shall form a kingdom, and therefore if we shall consider only those kingdoms which are in existence, we shall be overthrowing the Constitution which gives powers to the local people and different cultural institutions to establish their kingdoms. So we may not close it like he is proposing. That is the information I want to give.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let him close then I go to honourable -

MR MUWUMA: Madam Chair, as I conclude, I feel and I stick to guns that for us to minimise conflicts in local governments, we need to introduce this sub clause that will help local government to manage or distribute this one per cent. It will be a solution to this long standing problem.

MR KASIRIVU: Madam Chair, we want a law that will minimise conflicts and during the lengthy discussions we have had, we had proposed that whatever percentage that will be given to the cultural institutions, should actually be direct from the centre, but there is, I fear the element of trying to avoid responsibility and you pass it on to the districts so that the districts where the oil is, begin conflicting with the cultural institutions that is not a spirit –(Interruption)


MR EKANYA: Now even under the national order, kings are really even higher than us MPs. Madam Chair, you have issued here guidelines, a king does not come to Parliament, to a committee, we go to the palace, how do you make a king -(Interjections)– those are the guidelines of national order and of protocol; cultural leaders are higher than MPs under national order and protocol. 

So you cannot make a head of a cultural institution, a prime minister to write to these very small districts to go and beg councillors to vote for them. It is really not proper. Let the centre be the one to give the money. That is one principle that we need to adopt.

The second one is, the issue of percentage is also not correct, colleagues. When we are doing budgeting, we do appropriate funds depending on the resource envelop. The Minister of Gender will come here and say, “This is the resource we have and these are the cultural institutions we have”. Then we shall give the money to the Minister of Gender knowing that it is going to the following cultural institutions and that will avoid conflicts. That is the information I want to give you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, he does not want the district to do it because that means the king will have to go and lobby councillors, ‘speaker, please ensure that this is done’. He wants you government that is why it cannot go to the local government.

MR KASIRIVU: Madam Chair, if the spirit is that the cultural institution is recognised, I come from Bunyoro and our history is very clear. Even this oil which is being now explored has been a subject of conflict in Bunyoro, right from the time of the British when they went to drill oil, there was a conflict - there was resistance and they ran away and it was the cultural institution that has been responsible even for keeping this resource. When we say something should go to the cultural institution we are being fair, whether you say one per cent or 0.5 but it should come directly from Finance to the cultural institutions. 

Now, there was reasoning on how the cultural institutions account for this money. That is your job as Government. Create a situation where the money will be released in terms of programmes, the institution brings a programme and say we are going to do ABC and the money is released against a programme or a budget. So I am proposing and I want to move an amendment that at least one per cent is remitted directly to the cultural institutions as a grant and against a programme that would have been provided. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Chair, I speak as a republican who supports kingdoms, I do not know whether I can be protected. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order Members, let us have one meeting. 

MR BAHATI: As a matter of procedure, we needed first to resolve whether the traditional leaders are going to get a share of the royalties and if that is resolved - because the Minister of Finance was suggesting issues of constitutionality and all that. I think if we agree that the traditional institutions should get a share, then the best approach should be at the centre. You imagine the Kyabazinga going to the subject because the district leaders are the subjects of the Kyabazinga! I think if we agree that the traditional leaders should get a share, then that share, we can say, “The Central Government may “-(Interjection)- then that would protect the traditional institutions but to subject the Kyabazinga to the chairperson of Kamuli is very difficult. 

MR KAJARA: Madam Chair, the principle of giving a share to the traditional or cultural institutions is acceptable. But now, what I am saying, the Constitution, Article 246 (3) and (c), provides that a traditional leader or cultural leader shall enjoy such privileges and benefits as may be conferred by the Government and local government or as that leader may be entitled. In other words, it can be either from the Central Government or local government. And that is what we provided here but Government is opposed to ring-fencing a certain percentage. Why doesn’t government weigh, even that is what we are saying; even for local government, we are leaving it between them on the advice of the Minister for Gender to determine. We agree this share should be given but if we put it in the Constitution, it may be too much because you remember we wanted here to budget for the Auditor General and ring fence one per cent of the budget; but we said, “No”, because there may be other priority areas government is looking at. So I agree we can amend to say that it is now the Central Government in consultation with the ministry responsible for culture: “Central Government shall grant a share of royalties to a cultural or traditional institution”, but we do not put the percentage; we would agree to that.

MS KAABULE: Thank you, Madam Chair. I think many things should be decided like what the honourable minister is talking about that we should leave the local governments to determine the percentage. Already we are giving seven per cent royalties but if you leave it to the local governments to determine a percentage, they will not because many of them do not even pay rent to these cultural institutions. So I am moving an amendment that “A recognised cultural or traditional institution shall get at least a one per cent share of the loyalties from the Central Government arising out of the petroleum production.”

MR KASULE: Madam Chair, if I can propose in line with what she is saying, we could say, “The Government may grant a share of royalties due to local government to cultural or traditional institutions”. I have not put the percentage, it is up to you to either put the percentage or not.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, I think that will cause a problem because if you say they take from the portion from the local government - let it come from the other 93.

MR WANGOLO: Thank you, Madam Chair. This is a very big problem because royalty to cultural leaders is very good, but also we need to understand - I am failing to understand because even the honourable colleague from Budama was saying that we are going to share that money and this royalty, is it particularly for that Albertine Region or every royalty in the country – (Interjection) - is it Albert area including Karamoja? Is that what you mean? Now, in Butaleja, we have oil but we do not have a king.

Madam Chair, I propose that we put a one per cent as we had agreed in our report that we give one per cent to all cultural leaders from the Central Government. I thank you, Madam Chair.

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. We are trying to distribute royalty; the issue is cutting our cake and then we have said there must be a share to the district. And then there must be a share to even the lower local councils. 

Now, we are looking at a share or the share that is going to be received by our cultural institutions and the question was, are cultural institutions getting their share from the district or the centre? We have agreed now that to avoid conflict - because there are some districts whereby there is only one cultural leader but in that cultural set up, there are around 11 districts or more than that. So, it is better that the royalty that is going to be given to the cultural institutions come from the centre either from the mother ministry of labour or from Finance straight to them.

Secondly, the minister talked about some kind of unconstitutionality. But I do not think anywhere because a while ago, we have moved away from a third when it comes to giving women positions. And then we have raised them to 50 per cent so that we can we move as a team. I believe if we are to give royalties to institutions - because whatever we are going to do is under the guidance of those cultural leaders and they command a lot of support.

We are very little people under our cultural leaders. So, Madam Chair, I suggest that it should be mandatory for the Central Government to give at least one per cent; then it is up to the Central Government to increase it to two or three per cent. But it is mandatory for the Central Government either from the mother ministry or from the Ministry of Finance.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, one of the reasons we would want to keep the conflict away from the traditional leaders - you image a situation where a chairman has failed to do a road then he says, “You know, I was going to do it, but I had to give one per cent to the traditional leader, that is why I have not finished the work for this financial year”. So, let us protect the traditional leaders, let them get out of this lobbying, and begging.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I stand to portray and indeed fortify the position that this money to cultural institutions should come from the Central Government for purposes of peace, harmony and good Governance. You can image a conflict arising between the district leaders and the cultural institutions, especially in a given district where you have more than one cultural institution because some people will begin claiming we are the majority in this district, others saying “No, you are not the majority”, and it will be chaos. So, let the Central Government take responsibility and award the money. 

Secondly, Madam Chair, we must have a specific percentage given. We can add the word “at least”, because if we do not put a given percentage then the central may not necessarily be happy for one reason or another with a certain cultural institution. Whether it is voting or whatever and the information -(Interruption)

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Madam Chair. The information I want to give is that the committee had several interactions with various communities where the oil was being produced. And one of them is Nigeria. And the local communities had ganged up against Government demanding a lot of the revenue from the Government -(Interjection) - and what they had to do to manage those institutions, even if royalties are to be given from the Central Government at least it was important for them to attach a percentage. Should they over demand, the government would say no, much as you are over demanding, we have been tied up by the law and we cannot go beyond this.

Otherwise, if we are to leave it open and we say, “The minister will give them directly”, these institutions will over demand until they will be in chaos with government. So, there must be a percentage to regulate them. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR KARUHANGA: As I conclude, Madam Chairperson, I would like to appeal to the minister that, having listened to this very informed debate, isn’t it right that you accept the position and we move on? Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chair, my understanding is that the minister already accepted. But, now we are looking at the point of percent, where should it come from? We have 100 per cent; seven per cent is going to the local governments, then you are left with 93 per cent. Now, if we say like the honourable from Luuka had suggested that “A recognised cultural institution”, that means receiving one per cent; it will be too much, why? Let us look at the Albertine Region. The Albertine Region, via cultural institutions composition, is shared by the Alur Kingdom, Bunyoro Kingdom, Jonam Kingdom and part of Toro Kingdom. So, if we say one per cent to a recognised cultural institution, then out of the 93 per cent, we are going to have four per cent going out, that will be too much. Therefore, my understanding would be that, yes, the money for royalty must come from the centre, out of the 93 per cent. 

Now, if we say, out of the 93 per cent, we are taking the three per cent remaining so that government remains with 90 per cent – (Interjection)- I am giving an example, and then we go to calculate that if it made about Shs 100 million, then we begin calculating the percentage that should go, according to the size of the kingdoms - my understanding is, Bunyoro is a very big kingdom - Alur Kingdom is fairly smaller than Bunyoro; Toro is extremely big as well. 

Therefore, Madam Chair, I would propose that there should be a standalone clause that imputes responsibility on government to give one per cent. Actually, we delete sub clause (8) and probably replace it with Central Government giving one per cent to recognised cultural institutions within the area of exploration. But, the question will be, if there is a kingdom, for example, in Japadhola, and you are going to probably dump some of the waste there, is the cultural institution there not entitled? So, it should not only be production area, but also, just like hon. Ekanya has suggested -

THE CHAIRPERSON: But, Honourable member, do not take us back. We already agreed on that one in (3). Please, let us have a proposal, how do we deal with (8)? There is a proposal here.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, I would like to move an amendment to the effect that sub-clause (8) will read as follows: “The Government shall grant one percentage point of the royalty due to Central Government to a gazetted cultural or traditional institution.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Those which are gazetted, as long as hon. Nakadama has gazetted them, then they are entitled - because, it is her work to gazette them. You come and tell us.

MS NAKADAMA: Madam Chair, what I want to say is that we might be having more than one cultural institution in a certain district. Other areas have one, others have more than one. So, what I would propose is that it would be better (Interjection) - and in fact they are gazetted. What we will have to look at is a gazetted institution. 

But, secondly, more are coming on board. You might find that a district has more than one institution. So, it would be very difficult to give one per cent to those people, maybe they are five in a certain area. So, I think it is better they put it at the centre, at the Ministry of Gender so that the centre can sort it out because they are the ones who even receive the programmes and their proposals as a ministry. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, we have been actually supporting your ministry. Let us make the amendment.

MR KASULE: Madam Chair, I was saying, through consultation with hon. Werikhe, that Clause 71(1) the Government share goes from 93 to 94. And then the local governments remain with six per cent. So, the one per cent has moved from the local governments to the central, to be shared among the cultural institutions.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, just speak it again so that we can vote on it quickly.

MR KASULE: Madam Chair, because we had not passed 71(1), I do not know, I think God gave the wisdom to the House, “The Government shall retain 94 per cent of the revenue from royalty arising from the petroleum production and the remaining six per cent shall be shared among the districts located within the petroleum exploration and production areas of Uganda”. Consequently, the one per cent will now come from the 94 of government.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chair, I feel that the committee chairperson should be very clear, because, what we are doing is simply to put back some of these institutions in their previous status quo. Like the example of the Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu, most of our land was actually gazetted as national park. The headquarters for our kingdom were deep in the mountains, and it was gazetted as Rwenzori Mountain National Park. Now, that means that the kingdom cannot trespass into the national park. And I feel that, to this effect, if we just lump it into Central Government maintaining 94 per cent, and we do not clearly state that one per cent will be for the cultural institutions, then we shall have made a mistake. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nzoghu, we have done that, and we wanted to sort it now in the opening paragraph on 71. Because, it was saying “93 per cent”, now we are saying, let it be 94 per cent. The other one per cent is for the traditional leaders. Let us vote on that amendment of hon. Werikhe for sub-clause (8). Let us finish, please.

MR LUGOLOOBI: One small amendment, Madam Chairperson, on hon. Werikhe’s amendment. His amendment read, “The government shall grant one percentage point of the royalties due to Central Government to a gazetted cultural or traditional institution”.

The problem I have is when you say to “gazetted cultural institutions”, we can have more than one cultural institution. So, we are talking about the one percentage oil of that bigger cake going to all cultural institutions. So, it is no longer “a cultural” but “cultural and traditional institutions.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, it is for them. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: For all of them?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, are you making any amendments? We are getting lost. Honourable members, I put the question that sub clause (8) be amended as proposed by hon. Werikhe.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now you can speak. (Laughter)

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, in sub-clause (9), we propose - let me read it for members: “The revenues from royalties shall be appropriated to a local government in a form of unconditional grant in an annual budget”. The committee proposes to remove “unconditional grant” and put “conditional grant” -(Interjection)- I have no justification.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why do you want to tie it?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, I want to go with the word “conditional grant”, because if you say “unconditional”, that means that the local government will use this money as local revenue to pay for their salaries, allowances and other expenses.

This money should go to things that will be seen after us and this local government. Similarly, we need to have projects and programmes that will remain there to be seen by other people in future. So to me, the word “conditional” is very pertinent. In fact, even the money we are going to give to cultural institutions should come in here. We should even amend this to include local governments and cultural institutions. This money should not just be eaten.

MS ADONG: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I stand to oppose what my colleague was saying. This money should not be conditional because these districts have got peculiar needs. Take an example of Nwoya District; we do not have proper local revenue. All the money coming from the Central Government is conditional; the local revenue of Nwoya cannot meet other conditions in the district, for example –(Interruption)

MR ISABIRYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give is that we must bear in mind that the graduated tax was scrapped and most of the districts are depending on the local revenue which is almost not there. So by conditioning this money, we are leaving our districts with almost nothing. Let us make it unconditional because the districts also have their district councils. They plan for this money. It is not really for eating.

MS ADONG: Madam Chairperson, I was still on the floor. Take an example, Nwoya District has peculiar high rate of dropouts, the district priorities maybe giving scholarship. Oil is in the district, but we do not have people who are qualified to work there. What is the priority of the district? Will the Central Government say that we only need roads - 95 per cent of the grants sent to the districts by Central Government are conditioned? Why should we continue with this? We have peculiar conditions in our districts. I submit.

MR SSEMUGABA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to second the motion that that money should be conditioned given the fact that it is a lot of money. If it is to improve the condition of the councillors, then we can condition it that certain a percentage should cater for the allowances of the councillors. But then we can still condition it for development purposes because if you leave all that money, it is a lot of money; it will be abused. 

Madam Chairperson, I am on the Committee of Local Government Accounts Committee, but what we find there and what we bring here - let us condition it but we improve the condition and welfare of those people at LC5 level. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR MBAHIMBA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I also disagree with the issue of conditioning this money. At the district local government, they have planning units; they have administrative secretaries and executive officers. These local governments have the capacity to manage their resources. 

But like my colleague has put it, if we condition every grant that goes to districts, why then do we have planning units at the districts? What are they planning for? And this assumption that all money that we send to the districts which are unconditional is a waste, I wanted members to prove here with specific empirical indices to show that this money is not well used. 

We are thinking of boosting the capacity of local governments. I have always had a challenge of where they will generate revenue and this should be an opportunity for them to have revenue that they can ably plan for and implement. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, honourable Minister of Finance, what was the rationale for giving the royalties? Was it not the placement of the ordinary budget which Kamuli gets – what was the rationale for giving royalties? Is it additional or it is in exchange for the other budget which you give the other people. You tell us then we shall know whether it is conditioned or not.

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, this six per cent is not small money and if not guided can be dangerous. So we shall continue to give the appropriation to the district as it is ongoing now, but the purpose of giving these royalties - (Interruption)

MR KASIRIVU: Madam Chairperson, since we started the debate on oil and gas revenue, there has been this statement “It is big money.” But nobody has ever quantified it. At least, let it be presented graphically, say, six per cent instead of saying big money, how big is it? It may even actually be small. (Laughter) 

MR EKANYA: I think we need to get one principle here. We have in this Bill, Charter of Fiscal responsibility, and we are saying we have to conform to the national development plan. The districts have district and sub-county development plans. We all know that this royalty is a result of the impact from oil. If it is not well guided to conform to the sub-county and district development plan, we may have a situation where the negative impact of oil remains there because the revenue from oil has not been directed to address that impact. 

So, if a district wants to use the money it should put it in their district development plan and this forms a national development plan. Then they should use the money because nobody is stopping them. What we are saying is that do not just send money for people to play with. Even in this law colleagues let me just conclude even –(Interruption)

MR KASULE: Let me just give you some small information here in 10. Hon. Ekanya, I think the word, “conditional grant” in (9) is in line with (10). It reads, “The revenue from royalty shall be considered as part of the revenue of the local government and shall be integrated in the budget of the local government to be spent on priorities determined by the council of the district of the local government taking into consideration national priority areas.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think let us be clearer about his matter. There was a time in my district when we wanted to build classrooms then we were told that the government says we should build latrines – yes, they said, “This year, you cannot build anything except latrines”. I said but I want classrooms - we tried to ask the Ministry of Finance to allow us use that money for classrooms and they said “No” through the district council; and yet our priority was the classroom but they said only latrines. That is conditioning.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, you have a point and I think we can address it in this law. The Central Government has been conditioning them; sub counties and districts make plans but the districts dictate. What we can only do here should be according to the district council’s priority so that if a district council picks and says these are our priorities; they should have integrated it in their national plan.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When we talk of conditional grants it means your hands are tied; you will never divert those funds unless they are meant for that particular purpose. Districts have got various problems. You may plan for school or health centre construction but another problem may come up which is a priority. Therefore, let this fund be unconditional so that the district council will have power to reallocate and appropriate this fund. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chair, I want to give information to the member that the word “conditional” - in fact let me start with your issue.  That condition that you mentioned of latrines was given by the World Bank. It was not our money, so the World Bank said this time we are giving priority to sanitation which was badly off. They said that “Our money must go for latrines”. That is what it was because I was there. 

But now, this money would now be ours and the word ‘condition’ does not really mean that there is no agreement between the district and the centre. They agree on priority areas – (Interjection) - yes that is what it is. And the money being released conditions this money to specific things that have been agreed on in the reviews. 

MR SABIITI: Madam Chair, I think it is high time that local governments were given their due share under our Constitution in the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy. 

We are talking about democratic principles and in (3) we said, “The state shall be guided by the principle of decentralisation and evolution of governmental functions and powers to the people at appropriate levels where they can best manage and direct their own affairs.”

Royalties come from the minerals which are in a given area. Therefore, this is like revenue which is generated by the local people. This money should be given to the council to manage not to control as if we are centralising everything. Surely, we should allow local governments to do their work.

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Madam Chair. I was just trying to help hon. Omach. I do support the stand hon. Sabiiti has just stated but the clarification I am seeking is that when we are making a law, we should look ahead. I see we are focusing on districts. Some of us are preparing a Private Member’s Bill to implement the constitutional requirements that Government does not want to bring. That is to bring regional governments. 

So, if we start planning now and put in the law –(Interjection)- we are talking about districts and yet tomorrow we are going to go for regional tier, there will be regional governments. How shall we handle that? My draft Bill is ready I am just seeking to get a moment to introduce a motion on the Floor of Parliament and proceed. 

People are very serious; it has been a demand all over the country in Bunyoro, in Acholi and everywhere. So, why don’t we plan with the full knowledge of the constitutional requirement that is in place?

MR BBOSA KIYINGI: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. The fears of my colleagues in respect to whether the revenue should be conditional or unconditional is already catered for in subclause (10). And I call upon honourable colleagues not to tie down the work of the local governments. 

We have authorities that are in place that are there to investigate the sub clauses that are provided for in this Bill. They are actually directing the local governments on how they should operate using this money. So, I do call upon colleagues to let it be unconditional basing on the fact that the fear is already catered for in the sub clauses that are coming. Thank you.

MR KASIRIVU: Hon Okumu brought a very serious matter and that is the issue of regional government. The Bill was read for the first time. It was committed to the Committee on Local Government and Public Service; maybe, Madam Chair, you may have to order the committee to bring the report here and we handle that Bill because it is a property of this Parliament. So we do not need a Private Member’s Bill here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, it will be expedited. Thank you for reminding me. Yes, we shall expedite it.

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I support the unconditional grant. The local governments have a lot of things which they have to do. First, Government does not give enough money; for example for water, they just give very little money for water and yet the people need more boreholes. So, they could use that money for additional boreholes.

Secondly, they would like to set up health centre IIs, which are very important in local areas but Government said that they are not supporting health centre IIs. So, let us give the freedom to the local governments to decide what to do. This is their money and if it is on environment, they will use it in the environment. When they need schools, they will use it for schools; let us give them the freedom.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, just to support what hon. Baba Diri has said, when we went for the outreach throughout the country, the local governments were complaining that the centre has taken all their sources of revenue. All the markets, the landing sites - they actually said that you left them with bones. So, you have given them the bones, you have everything and you even want this one? No, honourable members -(Laughter)

MR MBAHIMBA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am seeking simple clarification from the minister as to why he is saying that we should condition this grant. Does the minister doubt the capacity of local governments to manage and plan for this money? I am seeking that simple clarification.

MS ADONG: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to give the experience with PRDP; PRDP was designed comprehensively to handle post-conflict Northern Uganda but because of the conditions that are tied on this money, very important sectors have been neglected. They tied all the money on reconstruction of classrooms, roads, hospitals and the rest and yet we have socio-economic empowerment and psycho-social support needs which Government has completely banned the local government from implementing, using PRDP money. Take an example of Nwoya District; we have other peculiar problems like elephants, which the communities believe it could be the oil activities escalating it. 

Nwoya District may have a plan for such people being disturbed by elephants or even Atiak because it is a hard-to-reach district. The elephants attack health workers so there may be a plan to help health workers by supporting them and if they condition it, how will the district be flexible given the fact that all these oil areas will attract high population and more activities that may even escalate HIV /AIDS spread. What if the districts want to plan for that yet the central government has conditioned it? So, I really believe that we should not condition this money and the local governments should be left to implement their mandate. Thank you.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, I think it is high time we concluded this one. After proposing to amend clause 1 where we provided for 94 percent revenue going to Government and then six percent goes to local government, now here with the amendment, I think sub clause (10) will enforce where the council will sit and decide their own policies. So, it is high time we passed this one given that sub clause (10) is conditioning that money to go to the budget and the council to sit and deliberate on their priorities.

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, all this is information to me because I was on the Floor. The point I was raising on sub clause (9) is that at the national level, we are saying that all the money arising out of this will go for development and not for consumption. So that will be the only conditionality that will be attached to (9). That is what I wanted to explain. If this goes for consumption, then the whole of this will be just wasted and one of the things –(Interruption)

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you, honourable minister. I can see the spirit on the Floor and the hope the members have in me. But honourable minister and members, I want to inform you that we are misunderstanding the word “condition.” This money belongs to the district but conditioning means that it will go to specific areas. The second part is, how else are we going to plan for the 93 percent that is going to remain at the centre? Will it be unconditional also? We must tie it –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we are not talking about the 93 percent; leave the 93 percent. We are dealing with the seven percent. Do not confuse us.

MR SEMPIJJA: Honourable minister, I want to inform you and the members that this conditioning they are talking about - nobody should say that this money does not belong to the local governments; it belongs to them but planning process –(Interruption)

MR LOKERIS: Madam Chairperson, these oil revenues are not coming from Uganda only. Practices are everywhere in the world. The oil prices can fluctuate. There is a time of boom and a time of complete collapse. According to our overall objective, we said the oil money must create long value for the people of Uganda and that is the objective we have. Even when this goes to the district and even when it is too much, we should not rush with it; we must plan. What are those things that will bring long term value for the people of that area in future? But if it is going to go to the bellies, what will be the long term value for the people of tomorrow? 

So, that is why they condition it and then you make the budget; that we are going to use this for this and that. It is your money. And when you are trying to implement the project, there are also operational expenses enlisted for the implementation of those projects. But if we become excited, today it is too much and tomorrow it is not there, then it will collapse and you will never run any budgets in those districts. After all, revenue from Government will continue coming to you. It is not that when you have those, you will not build anything. You must create a difference by coming up with something that people can see tomorrow. They will never see our stomachs tomorrow. Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what are you talking about?

MR SSEMPIJJA: In view of that, if the word “conditional” really disturbs the members, we can change this word. To use words like “development issues” or “purposes” – (Interruptions)- so that this money does not go to waste. People are going to plan to buy vehicles for counsellors and marry second wives. Madam Chairperson, please let us restrict this money.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, please let us conclude on sub-clause (10).

MR OMACH: So, I am proposing that we amend clause 71(9) as follows: “The revenue from royalties shall be appropriated to a local government in the annual budget for development purposes.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is better. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 71(9) be amended as proposed.
(Question put and agreed to.) 

There was no proposal for amendment for sub clause (10). 

Sub clause 11

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, we had proposed to delete sub clause (11) which says, “The revenue from royalties transferred to a local government in a financial year shall not exceed the total of the non-oil revenue of that local government.” We found that there is no justification and we propose to delete.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that sub-clause (11) be deleted -

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, the purpose of clause 71(11) was to avoid the Dutch disease. The Dutch disease is when the district which receives excess money than what they need would end up over utilising it and as you are aware, oil is financed and at the time when this Floor is off, then the district will not have the capacity to continue with the sort of luxury that they were in. So, we propose that this particular clause and sub clause remains as in the Bill.

MR EKANYA: But hon. Omach, the district council, like Parliament, have work plans and procurement plans; they say we are going to construct these kilometres of roads, they have a contracts committee. Let me give you a town council like Kakira which receives a lot of revenue; they do not have the Dutch disease. Really, I think we are expecting too much. If these guys have a work plan and they do not exhaust the money, we have passed other clauses that the money returns to the centre if it is not used. So, I think let us not go there, I beg you. You remember the others were passed; if we don’t –(Interruption)

MR WERIKHE: I think sub-clause (12) may be a cure of what we are talking about. Let us look at sub-clause (12).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I have a problem; I do not know what revenues the districts get. Are you saying that the non-oil revenue which is received in Jinja District should be static and the other one should not exceed that one? Is that what you are saying in this clause?  If I receive Shs 30 billion from the revenues in Jinja, you cannot give me more than Shs 30 billion? Now you are under-funding the district, they have no revenue, how can you say you do not - I do not support it.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I was on the Floor and then hon. Werikhe - really I want to beg the Minister of Finance; we have passed other clauses which take care of your fear. We have said an institution that receives Government money and does not exhaust it within the end of the financial, the money returns and is re-voted to them.

So, the question of the Dutch disease and sub-clauses (12) and (13) are all redundant clauses that we should delete. Allow these people plan, allow some members of Parliament to go to the district because it will be juicy, allow some ministers who retire to go there and make things move. I beg to plead with you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Actually I want the minister to tell us what the non-oil revenue of Nebbi District or Bullisa is now at this moment so that we can understand what you are trying to say. What is the non-oil revenue of Kalungu?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Shs 50 million.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Shs 50 million? So are you saying that Kalungu should not get anything beyond Shs 50 million? Is that what this law is saying?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, that is very unfair and that sub-clause should not even waste our time. We should just expunge it please.

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, I do not want to scare you with the amount of non-oil revenue that my district gets; so, I concede. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I thank you. So, clause (11) is deleted.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, since we have deleted sub clause (11), then clauses (12) and (13) subsequently also go.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that sub-clauses (12) and (13) be deleted. Clause (14) stays.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 71, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 72   

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, before clause 72, the committee proposes to insert a new clause under the head note “Parliamentary Budget Office”.

“
    1) The Parliamentary Budget Office in existence immediately after the commencement of this Act is continued in existence subject to the provisions of this Act. 
    2) The functions of the Parliamentary Budget Office shall be to provide Parliament and its committees independent, objective and timely analysis; to assess economic and budget proposals including analysis of the economic and fiscal planning and reporting documents and annual budget documents, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing shall -
    a) conduct professional research and advise Parliament on matters related to budget and other revenue generating Bills;
    b) prepare analytical studies of specific subjects such as fiscal risks proposed by government-owned or partially owned by enterprises and other sources of risks;
    c) annually provide a review and analysis of documents tabled in Parliament by the Executive in terms of this Act;
    d) monitor and report on potential unfunded mandate rising out of the legislative policy or budgetary proposals;
    e) examine and advise Parliament on the certificate of gender and equity presented with budget framework paper, proposed budget and the policy statement; 
    f) examine and advise Parliament on the certificate of financial implications;
    g) examine and advise Parliament on the Treasury memoranda;
    h) prepare analysis of specific issues including financial risks posed by Government policies and activities to guide Parliament;
    i) consider budget proposals and economic trends and make recommendations to Parliament;
    j) examine and advise Parliament on requests for deviations from the charter of fiscal responsibility;
    k) examine and advise Parliament committees on economic and financial impacts on a Bill making reference to the charter of fiscal responsibility and its principle of fiscal policy;
    l) report on any other matter relating to fiscal policy and performance requested by a committee or initiated by the Parliamentary Budget Office;
    m) generally give advice to Parliament and its committees on the budget and national economy;

    3) The Parliamentary Budget Office shall ensure that all reports, studies, evaluations, findings, recommendations and other inputs, outputs are presented in a user-friendly form and that all inputs are published in a timely manner unless publication is not in the public interest.”

Justification, this is to strengthen the parliamentary oversight over public finance management in Uganda. I beg to move.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I think we have a legal issue as regards separation of power. Parliament is self-accounting, the staff are under different administration and disciplined separately and the service. Therefore, if you introduce it here under the law where the chairperson of the Parliamentary Commission cannot make rules and the administration, we shall have a legal problem because the staff of this office will say we are under the Public Finance and Accountability Act. Who makes the regulations and terms of service? It is the Minister of Finance and yet they are staff of Parliament. I think we have a legal lacuna. 

What you are proposing is very good, it is better to be in the Rules of Procedure, the terms of service of staff and administration of our system. So, I think, Madam Chairperson, I would advise the chairperson that these are very good proposals that the Parliamentary Commission may need to find where to put it if it is not being handled. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, honourable members, I do not know how the Minister of Finance can administer a law that is working in Parliament administered from somewhere else. So, if I want to amend, I must seek permission from the Ministry of Finance. No, for this one, we are not going to surrender our powers to the Ministry of Finance.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, then if that is the ruling of the Chairperson, I have no alternative but to concede.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I have an amendment. Clause 72 is about cost estimate for Bills –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is that?

ME EKANYA: That is 72 –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, you are running fast. That was a new proposal, we do not accept that. Let us go to part 8 clause 72. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 72 –

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, clause 72 is about cost for Bills. Some months ago, you issued here a directive regarding certificates of financial implication and therefore I would like to introduce clause 72 (4) and it reads, “The minister shall within a period of 60 days issue a certificate of financial implications to a private member or a committee seeking to move a private member’s Bill. Failure within 90 days, the certificate will be deemed to have been issued.” 

Madam Chairperson, this is in compliance with the parliamentary power of legislation, in compliance with the directive that this House has already adopted that the role of Parliament is appropriation, legislation and our hands cannot be tied. I beg to move.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Chairperson. I equally had a similar amendment. However, mine kind of differs a little and I am proposing that we add clause 73 (4) reading “Notwithstanding the provisions of clause 72(1), (2) and (3) a certificate of financial implication shall be deemed to have been issued after the passage of 30 days from the time of request.” 

The justifications is that:  1) other than the Constitution specifically giving powers of legislation to Parliament, in Article 91, we have a provision in the Constitution that even where the President is given 30 days in which to assent to a Bill - and I think the framers of the Constitution had foreseen situations almost similar to what we are dealing with now; that the power to legislate must remain with Parliament and therefore, in no way should the Ministry of Finance curtail that authority that is given to Parliament to legislate and we have seen several members on different occasions seeking for certificates of financial implication for months and some even for years and we do not see these certificates. So, Madam Chairperson, I pray that if 30 days pass, it is deemed granted. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Ekanya has talked about 90 days you have talked about 30. Yes, Attorney-General.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, the concerns of the members moving this motion are genuine and of course in one way or another I think also the Ministry of Finance can always justify its own area of why sometimes it takes long to issue certificates of financial implication. 

But with all due respect to my brother in the legal profession, yes it is true that the powers to legislate are with Parliament but in Uganda unlike say in the UK, the situation is different. In the UK, Parliament is more or less supreme because they do not have a written Constitution; we have written Constitution. The mandate to legislate and the mandate for the Executive to do its role are all governed by the Constitution. So, you cannot for instance import the provisions of Article 91 in your submission unless you are proposing to amend specifically Article 93.

MR KARUHANGA: The information that I would like to give to the senior learned counsel is that my comparison and my importation of Article 91 in this very discussion was to remind us that whereas it is true that ours is a conventional system, we have a written Constitution that the powers to legislate, specifically the powers to legislate remained a preserve of Parliament. And it is clear, we are not absolute and the Parliament at no point should seek Executive powers because that is not what our Constitution envisages but the powers to legislate, in no way can they be restricted or constrained or failed by any other institution unless they are overstepped or otherwise misunderstood. 

So that is why I would like to inform my senior colleague that Article 91 was basically a comparison and surely, anything that fails Parliament to legislate certainly undermines the Constitution.

MR RUHINDI: Well, Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank hon. Karuhanga for that information but that information is not convincing because you are talking about nothing should fetter - the Executive should not fetter the works of Parliament, I agree; but the Constitution can. Now, let us look at Article 93 and let us read it in detail for purposes of record it says, “Restriction on financial matters. Parliament shall not, unless the Bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of the Government- 

 a) Proceed upon a Bill including an amendment Bill that makes provision for any of the following: 
    i. the imposition of taxation or the alteration of taxation otherwise than by reduction;
    ii. the imposition of a charge on the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda or the alteration of any such charge otherwise than by reduction;
    iii. the payment, issue or withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda of any monies not charged on that fund or any increase in the amount of that payment issue or withdrawal; or
    iv. the composition or remission of any debt due to the Government of Uganda; or 

b) Proceed upon including an amendment to the motion, the effect of which would be to make provisions for any of the purposes specified in paragraph (a) of this Article.”

So, unless we are going through a constitutional review process.

MR EKANYA: I just want clarification from the Attorney-General. After we have passed a Bill here, who is in charge of its implementation to create this liability or contingency liability? Isn’t it the Executive? What we are saying is, don’t tie our hands from doing our work. Our work is to cook food, allow us cook it; it is your responsibility to serve it to the children who are hungry.

We want to come up with a law, it is the Executive that then will decide to budget, to implement or put the structure but what we are saying is simple; this provision of the law does not stop us from legislating. It does not say that when we legislate and create an institution, we are to appoint an accounting officer, we are going to appropriate money for it; it is a decision of Government to implement all Acts and decisions of this House. Show me in Article 93 any sub section which says that after Parliament has passed a law, its work is to appoint officials, administrative staff and discipline them, there is none. It is the Executive. So our work is to legislate the remaining. When we enact a Bill here it turns into an Act to create an authority or board, Government can decide to say we have no money but we shall have done our job.

MR ODOI: I have listened attentively to the submissions of my two colleagues - hon. Geoffrey Ekanya from Tororo and hon. Karuhanga. I have also listened to the submissions of the learned Attorney-General. I do not see any fundamental variance. The only problem I see is that the learned Attorney-General did not address his mind to the submissions of my two honourable colleagues. Hon. Karuhanga has said that it is simple, we apply for a certificate of financial implication, we recognise the fact that it is a legal requirement; we recognise that there is Article 93 that prohibits this Parliament to proceed on any matter that imposes a charge on the Consolidated Fund. It is your duty as the Executive to so state so. Respond, give us a certificate of financial implication and we impose a timeframe within which you must respond. We just can’t sit down for years and wait for you to do nothing. The Constitution does not give you that power - the non-issuance of a certificate of financial implication is a fetter on the legislative powers of Parliament and it is unconstitutional. 

Madam Chairperson, I think we should go ahead and legislate; it will compel our colleagues on the Frontbench to expeditiously move, to state that this Bill will be unconstitutional and you cannot move it as a private member because it imposes the following charges on the Consolidated Fund. It is as simple as that.

MR RUHINDI: Let me as usual try to be accommodating. Madam Chairperson, if I understand hon. Fox Odoi well, he is saying that what Parliament is expecting from Government and from the Ministry of Finance, if it can be stated clearly is that within 30 days, they should respond either positively or negatively. If that is the position, I don’t think there will be any problem, either we are giving you the certificate or not and we stop there.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I slightly differ from the Attorney-General because it is about the certificate of financial implication. You should indicate the financial implication to the Bill because it is the responsibility of Parliament to do appropriation. There is parliamentary power to legislate, representation and appropriation. So you need to indicate that this Bill you want to introduce will have a contingent liability to Government in the following year and our budget is a, b, c and we cannot - so that when we are looking at the medium term expenditure framework or during the budget process, then we can provide because that is our power. So, you don’t just reply a blanket letter because the law is about financial implication.

MR KARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, what we are saying is that what is contained in the certificate of financial implication could either be positive or negative but let that certificate be granted. Do not use the granting of that certificate as a means to curtail, fail or fetter the legislative powers of Parliament or of an individual member who wants to move a private member’s bill. We are not saying that you should give or you should not give. We are saying that grant the certificate of financial implication, state what you believe is the position in that certificate.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: We should read:

    1) Every Bill introduced in Parliament shall be accompanied –“ 
So, hon. Karuhanga, are you saying that whether they say no or yes the Bill should be introduced in Parliament?

MR KARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, if I could just be clear. We are not in disagreement with clause 72(1)(2) or (3); we are only saying that let there be a time limit within which to grant this certificate. As to whether the ministry wants to write to say that this is going to be Shs 100 billion expensive or it is not possible in the circumstances, let them state in that certificate and then Parliament legislates or debates with that information but do not deny that certificate or do not delay with it for one, two or three years like you have done.

MS KIWANUKA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I just like to update honourable members that as from the beginning of November, the Ministry of Finance has started to self-police and every request for a certificate of financial implication now has a 60 days turn around and if it does not happen, please contact me personally.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, for instance we have a request on the minimum wages Bill; it is more than a year old. Health insurance -

MS KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, those ones are lagging because since we started November they have been clearing the backlog. So, some Bills may not have yet come up to the starting point but please inform me personally.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I attentively listened to the Minister of Finance and she is saying they are doing self-policing about granting certificates of financial implication; then what does she lose by us capturing this in the law since they have started policing themselves? I thought she would be more comfortable if we capture it. Thank you.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chairperson, I also want to put it on record; I belong to the Committee on Health and we have a Bill on health insurance and I can assure you right now that the certificate of financial implication for that Bill is not yet given and I want the Minister of Finance to listen to me; that certificate is not given, we have been waiting for it, we do not know why you do not want people to get health insurance. Now tell me, when are you going to give it to us? (Laughter)

MS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We sent that certificate back to the Ministry of Health for some information which we are still waiting for. And for clarification, Madam Chairperson, when I gave the update, it was not to resist the amendment; we have no problem with the amendment.

MR ODOI: Madam Chairperson, another proposal. I was rising to request hon. Ekanya to withdraw his proposal so that we process the one of hon. Gerald Karuhanga, for the simple reason that the construction of hon. Karuhanga was more appealing. I am also requesting that we increase the time limit from 30 days to 60 days to accommodate the minister’s submission.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I have no problem.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you have a problem with the 60 days? 

MR SSEMPIJA: Madam Chairperson, I think this would be a very good addition to sub clause (1). We do not need to create a fourth one.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, let it be a standalone because we have had problems. Honourable members, with the amendment that the period is reduced from 90 days to 60 days, I put the question that the new sub-clause be introduced in clause 72 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 72, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 73, agreed to.

Clause 74

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to introduce a new clause before Clause 74 and it reads: “Notwithstanding clause 73, the minister shall not enter into any agreement that grants tax exemptions or creates liability or contingent liability or varies the cost of utility bill or that will involve the use of public funds to the advantage of private companies without parliamentary approval.” The justification is to avoid Government incurring debt or borrowing indirectly without parliamentary authority in contravention of the parliamentary power to appropriate and approve borrowing.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it a new one? Is it a new 73? Honourable members, I put the question that a new sub clause be introduced as -

MR OMACH: Could you please read it again, is it completely new?

MR EKANYA: No, this was part of the amendments that you sent to the Minister of Finance and we discussed it and I even have your comment here. You had no objection. Clause 73(e), it is in this matrix, in the document we shared with hon. Omach. 

MR OMACH: Kindly read it in special English so that we can follow. (Laughter)
 
MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, with your permission I can pass this to hon. Omach. [Hon. Members: “Read it.”] It reads, “The minister shall not enter into any agreement that grants tax exemption or creates liability or contingent liability or varies the cost of utility bills or that will involve the use of public funds to the advantage of private companies without parliamentary approval.” I beg to move.

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, I request that I be given time to study it. Let us stand over it, give me some five minutes to look through it and then I will come back to you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, we can defer it for a few minutes; let us go to the others, we will come back to it. I put the question that clause 74 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 74, agreed to.

Clause 75, agreed to.

Clause 76

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: There is a proposal in regulations (f) and (g) to include virement and classified expenditure under the headnote of regulations; that regulations shall be made for virement and classified expenditure. Honourable members, it is under regulations. Regulations shall be made;
”
    i. The minister may by statutory instruments make regulations for the better carrying into effect this Act and they have mentioned in; 
    ii. Operations of the public accounts, regulations shall be made; recording and controlling expenditure commitments, regulations shall be made; management of Government assets, regulations shall be made; management of Government debt, regulations shall be made; abandonment of claims and write-offs and then (j) virement and classified expenditure.”


THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Chairperson, where did you get that commitment? I do not have it.

MR EKANYA: But, Madam Chairperson, I have an amendment on 76.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not have what he is reading. 
 
MR EKANYA: We had framed it differently. I think somebody took his paper. That is the one we agreed on.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, in the document or the matrix where there is proposed amendments at the committee stage by the honourable members of Parliament, clause 76,  there are proposals to include in sub-clause (2) insert after sub clause (f) the following paragraphs:

“Accounting for classified expenditure, (h) virement and (i) unexpended funds and multi-year expenditure commitments.”

2), to insert after sub clause (3) the following new sub clauses (4) because it stops at sub clause (3). “A statutory instrument made under this Act shall be laid before Parliament as soon as possible after its publication in the gazette.

5) Parliament may by resolution annul a statutory instrument laid before Parliament under sub clause (4); and 

6) The minister may, with a resolution of Parliament, make a statutory instrument which has the effect of the instrument annulled under sub clause (5).”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, I still want to know, is it connected to the others which he was reading on regulations? So, is it a new clause? 

MR KASULE: No, Madam Chairperson. Under the regulations to be made under this Act, the minister may by statutory instrument make regulations for the better carrying into effect of this Act. 
2) Notwithstanding the general effect of sub clause (1), the minister shall make regulations for -

a) Operations of the public accounts; and
b) Recording and controlling expenditure commitment; and it stops at (f). 

So, in those meetings we made, they included (g) accounting for classified expenditure. Honourable members, you remember we talked about the system or regulations to be made and for virement which is (h) and (i), unexpended funds and multi-year expenditure commitments.

In clause (2), insert the following new sub clauses after sub clause (c) (4), (5) and (6). (4) Reads: “A statutory instrument made under this Act shall be laid before Parliament as soon as possible after its publication.”

And sub clause (5), “Parliament may, by resolution, annul a statutory instrument laid before Parliament under sub section (4).” Just in case somebody has laid a resolution here and they are not in conformity with the law as far as Parliament is concerned, Parliament may by resolution annul the statutory instrument laid before it.

And (6), “The minister may, by a resolution of Parliament, make a statutory instrument which has the effect of the instrument annulled under sub clause (5).”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposal for a new paragraph -


MR SABIITI: These regulations mean a lot as far as the accountabilities are concerned. So, it should be “the minister shall” and not “may.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Because “may” the minister may decide not to issue any regulation. So, with those amendments, I put the question that Clause 76, be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.) 

Clause 76, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 77

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes under the amendment with the Bank of Uganda Act Cap. 51, Income Tax Cap. 340 and the National Audit Act to insert a new sub clause (4). 

It goes from (1), (2), (3) and sub clause (4) to read: “The Interpretation Act is amended in section 7 by substituting for sub section (2), the following:

(2)A reference to the ‘treasury’ shall be construed as a reference to the ministry responsible for finance.” The justification is that over time, practise has shifted from the treasury being a person to an institutionalised entity. International best practise shows that a reference to treasury is construed as a reference to the ministry responsible for finance. 


And another sub clause, insert anew sub clause (5) as follows:
”
(5) The Administration of Parliament Act Cap. 7 is amended –“ No, this one will not be admitted because consequentially you had removed the Budget Act from being amended. I beg to move.

This is Clause 77 but we had wanted to talk about the Budget Parliamentary Act to be amended as in the other previous clause that you refused. So, let me stop at inserting a new subclause (2), in reference to the treasury.

MR SABIITI: Could the chairperson explain this because the heading is “Amendment of the Bank of Uganda Act Cap. 51, Income Tax….”

MR KASULE: Clause 77 is amendment of Bank of Uganda Act Cap. 51. We are amending that Cap. to allow the money in the petroleum fund to be kept by that bank. It is amended in section 4 by substituting for section (2)(e), the following:
e) Act as a financial adviser to Government. So, we want that Bank of Uganda Act to be changed to allow Government to use them as their financial advisor. 

And in subsection (3), by inserting immediately after subsection (3) the following:

“The bank shall not guarantee a payment to any person on behalf of Government or make an advance to the government or to any person on behalf of Government without prior approval of Parliament.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think I have some difficulty here. I am asking whether we can amend an Act which is not before this House. The Bank of Uganda Act is not here, the Income Tax Act is not before this House, the National Roads Act is not before this House, how can we just amend another law through this? I create one law and then amend several laws and life goes on? 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, you are stating a crucial problem; certainly it is not good practise but more often than not, we have done it and in many legislations.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: For instance which one?

MR RUHINDI: Oh my God -(Laughter)- let me give you the example of the Budget Act that we passed here. The Budget Acts, as a good example, have always touched on many laws that enable –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Those are Finance Bills.

MR RUHINDI: Rather Finance Bills have always touched on many laws that enable Government to generate revenue. That is just an example. I will not go further but they are many and any lawyer in this House would agree with me. It may not be good practice but sometimes it is inevitable because you have to move. By the time you want to bring every law that has got to be – because the power to legislate, if I may go back to my young brother, hon. Karuhanga – for as long as it is within the ambit of Parliament- because touching any other provision of the law for as long as it is not the Constitution, because if you are amending the Constitution, there are rules for that. But if it is any other legislation and Parliament is making a law, you can actually say by this law, such and such other provisions in another law is repelled or modified or amended. Hon. Fox Odoi is nodding his head in approval. Thank you very much.

MR ODOI: Madam Chairperson, the Attorney-General has made a very good point that it is legally permissible to amend an Act that is not before Parliament but, the bigger point to make is that it is not a prudent practice. So, I think that he has advised us against it because I am sure the Attorney-General cannot advise that we engage in a practice that is not prudent. So, I suggest that we drop this amendment and move on to other business.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the examples which the Attorney-General has given are the Finance Bills, which we do every year because they are related to the budget and each of them is inter-related; the Income Tax, Revenue - those money raising Bills.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, I have always come here with Finance Bills but more often than not, we have amended even the schedules of other Acts like the minerals, we have varied the rates. May be for revenue but the fact is that we have amended other Acts on this very Floor. So, even this one is operationalising this Act and we are not amending the whole Bank of Uganda Act or Income Tax but to the effect that they shall be the advisors of Government in as far as that oil fund is concerned. And for the Income Tax, we are defining what “tax” means. “Tax” means tax charged on the income derived by a person from petroleum operations, to include the petroleum issues that we have already passed in this law.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I have here the Bank of Uganda Act. These amendments are very prudent; we badly need it although we are in a very difficult situation especially number 4 which says, “The Bank of Uganda shall not guarantee any payment to any person or Government or make advance to any person without parliamentary approval.” But the other one, which the chairperson is saying and that is Cap. Section 4(2) (e), I need clarification why we accepted to change it. What difference are we making because, (4) (e) of the Bank of Uganda Act reads, “Act as financial advisor to the Government and manager of public fund and debt.” We are now using it only as “advisor”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what happens to the other part? The other part remains somewhere else -

MR EKANYA: The Act is here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: (4) (e) “Act as financial advisor to the Government and manager of public debt.” Who else is going to manage the public debt?

MS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. It is true that function used to be under the Bank of Uganda but it is now under the Ministry of Finance.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where have we provided for it? Where have we said that?

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. It would be prudent for the minister to give justification for that because for as long as it is still provided for in that law - and they are simply abandoning part of it - so, can the minister give a justification why it should be transferred to the Ministry of Finance instead of being retained by Bank of Uganda?

PROF. KASIRIVU: In any case, whereas it is the Ministry of Finance that is responsible for bringing requests to us for the country to borrow, they are also culprits in misusing these loans. So, why wouldn’t we leave the Bank of Uganda to manage public debt independently so that they advise Ministry of Finance that either you are borrowing, you are using the loan very well or something of that kind?

MS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, it is catered for under clause 38; management of public debt - and as to why it is under the finance ministry now is that it was always under finance but was delegated to the Bank of Uganda. But we found that the mixing of fiscal and monetary policy was not optimal. So, we reverted to the practice that is common over the world to put this back in the ministry, which is the fiscal authority and the Bank of Uganda concentrates on the monetary debts.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I think the Minister of Finance has a point because one of the challenges we have been having is to mix monetary debts and fiscal debts. It leads to distortions but the principle is, we have to agree whether we are going to amend other Acts or not.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the rationale for amending the National Audit Act? Why are you changing the months?

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, reducing this from nine months to six is to make it be in line with the new budgeting calendar.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What are the nine months for? I think we do not have one of the sections here. That is the problem of amending clauses - can you read section 19?

MR EKANYA: Section 19(2) says, “The Auditor-General shall within nine months or such longer period as Parliament may, by resolution, appoint after the end of the financial year to which the account is examined and audited under section 15, 16, 17, and 18 relate certify in respect to each account the result of the examination and audit.” That is what Section 19(2) is about.

Madam Chairperson, 19(1) is about certification and the report of audit but we also need to read the Constitution and harmonise because the Constitution says six months after the end of the financial year. That is why we had agreed that the Speaker of Parliament shall be able to vary the calendar for the budget. When we put it here, we shall have a problem because the internal reports always take about three months after the end of a financial year; that is why we have not been able to get unspent balances from the Ministry of Finance because they need time to close books. They close books and then prepare the reports thereafter. The Auditor-General needs time and when we reduce it to a very limited time to meet the cycle – so, honourable minister, I request that it is better to leave the issue of the budget calendar to the Speaker who chairs the budget cycle in the House to be able to vary and you can put it in the regulations. 

I was saying section 19(2) which we want to amend, that “The Auditor-General shall within nine months or such longer period as Parliament may, by resolution, appoint after the end of the financial year to which the account is examined and audited under section 15, 16, 17, and 18 relate certify in respect to each account the result of the examination and audit.” So we need to read sections 15, 16, 17 and 18 relate, certify in respect of each account the result of the examination and audit. 

I was just telling you that the timeframe for the Auditor-General to audit is also provided for in the Constitution and the objective upon which we were amending the National Audit Act is to bring the Auditor-General in the cycle. That is why I was proposing to you, if you do not mind, that the calendar issue should be put in the regulation and the Speaker should have the power to vary it in consultation with the Minister of Finance so that we are not tied up. We may have serious campaign time where we need to juggle certain things and only pass the budget. So, we need to have the Speaker in consultation with the Minister of Finance to vary the budget calendar -(Interruption)

MR KASULE: I have got information from - because we interfaced with the Auditor-General but they have referred us to a clause already passed in 11 where we passed, 11(8): “The minister shall present the annual budget. 

8(b) The treasury memoranda specifying the measures taken by the ministry to implement the recommendations of Parliament in respect of the report of the Auditor-General of the proceeding financial year on the management of the treasury.”
So, they are saying that the Auditor-General’s report can now be relevant and by the time the budget is read, the answers will have come back in form of a treasury memoranda such that if somebody has misappropriated money and he wants the accounting officer not to receive money, then you can make a decision. 

So, the Auditor-General agreed to six months instead of the nine months because nine months are too much and given the new budget calendars we have already approved, we needed information earlier than the nine months which is six months. That is the justification.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I remember we agreed with you and the minister and I said I have no problem with that but on the calendar for the budget cycle, we agreed that the Speaker -(Interjection)- which section did you put the amendment, where the Speaker will be able to vary the calendar for the budget? Can you remind me?

MR KASULE: I think hon. Ekanya is forgetting but we passed that clause and I remember it is clause - there is some where we said the Speaker will be - in clause 12 on Approval of annual budget by Parliament, there was amendment on (2) where we said the performance of this section, Parliament may approve up to (1) that was rejected for the Auditor-General and (2), the Speaker may extend any period for consideration and approval of the annual budget by Parliament for a reasonable period and we passed this amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 77 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and greed to.)

Clause 77, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 78

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I do not know. I am introducing an amendment on clause 78 to read: the minister may by statutory instrument amend schedule 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this Act. I am introducing clause 78(4) that the instrument issued under clause 78 shall be laid -(Interjection)- now this is 78(4). I am in amendment of schedule 3. I just want to say that the statutory instrument in regard to schedules 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 to 7 shall come in force after it has been laid before Parliament.
And that has been the practice as regards to subsidiary legislation so that the minister does not come up with a statutory instrument that does not conformed to this Act. I think we agreed with the minister on this matter. 

MR KASULE: I am sorry I did not follow hon. Ekanya but I have an amendment on clause 78 where the committee proposes to delete Schedule 2 – I think we shall get there.
 
In clause 78 (2) where it says, “The minister may, by statutory instrument in consultation with the ministers responsible for local government and petroleum production, amend Schedule 6 of this Act” and it was said earlier that we are going to delete Schedule 6.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So we are deleting sub-clause (2), isn’t it?

MR KASULE: Deleting Schedule (2) and also -

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are deleting sub-clause (2) because if there is no Schedule 6 there will be nothing to amend.

MR KASULE: Okay, we are deleting sub-clause (2) of clause 78.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, (1) is the currency points and (7) is the formula.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I think this amendment I introduced was to introduce amendment that encompasses 78. I think we just need to state that all statutory instruments under 78 shall come in force after it has been laid before Parliament so that it takes care of 1, 2 and 3.

MR KASULE: Like an overriding clause?

MR EKANYA: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It does not affect the substance. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 78 (2) be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 78, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 79

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, clause 79 is to the effect that we delete the Public Finance and Accountability Act and the Budget Act but in repealing the Budget Act, I have tried to analyse the mapping that was presented in the report. I have noted a number of clauses that were omitted but with a proposal to retain them.

The mapping is in the report of the committee. For instance, there is clause 18 (1) which reads: “Where any department, institution, organisation or commission fails to meet any requirement under this Act, Parliament may compel the relevant minister to appear before it and give an explanation on the circumstances leading to the failure.” The proposal, I think by the Ministry of Finance in this matrix is that this provision should be retained.

I just read one of them but there are a number of them where they propose that it should be retained. I am not quite sure I consulted with him and a number of these have not been imported in to this Bill. So, we may not hurriedly repeal the Budget Act. My view is that having passed this Bill into law, we could proceed to amend the Budget Act accordingly, putting into account the new amendments and proposals in the new Finance Act. I submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I see no conflict between the Public Finance Act and the Budget Act. I do not know why people want to repeal it. It is not disturbing anybody. I think if you want to repeal then repeal the Public Finance and Accountability Act and leave the Budget Act and we use it and strengthen it. So, honourable members, I put the question that the repealed only applies to the Public Finance and Accountability Act.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 79, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 80

MR EKANYA: Clause 80 had an issue with construction - transitional clause. Mr Chairman, you may recall that there was an issue which we said we would move to the transitional clause and I want to ask the Attorney-General - we had agreed on transitional clause 2. I do not know how we did it. So you can bring it if you remember.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, clause 80, we propose to amend the word “substituting” instead the word is “subsisting”. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is not part of this.

MR KASULE: Yes, it is in the other matrix of the ministry and that is why hon. Ekanya was reminding me that it is a spelling problem.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay read it. I want to update.

MR KASULE: It is in clause 80(2) -transitional provisions.

“All Bills, bonds and other securities issued under the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 and subsisting immediately before the commencement shall be continued in effect and be binding in the same manner as the same extent as if they were issued under this Act.” The word we have changed is “substituting” for “subsisting.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think that one is okay for continuity. Is there any other amendment on clause 80? Honourable members, I put the question that clause 80 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 80, as amended, agreed to.

Schedule 1, agreed to.

Schedule 2

MR KASULE: Schedule 2 is proposed by the committee to be deleted and the justification and effect is the consequential amendment arising out of the amendment of clause 6.

Clause 6 was about the charter of fiscal responsibility. I think Schedule 2 was a format for the charter of fiscal responsibility. 

I think it is a format because when you read the schedule, it is a format and in 1 they say “Statement of Fiscal Policy” and the objective is that the statement shall indicate the nature, objectives of Government for fiscal policy in the medium term which were consistent with the principles of section 6.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, I just want clarification. Did we pass clause 6 (4) of this Bill because if we did, it was referring to schedule 2; so, can we just delete?  

MR OMACH: Clause 6(4) was passed as is, “The Charter for fiscal responsibility shall be in the format of schedule 2 of this Act.” We can only amend schedule 2 but not repeal it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that schedule 2 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 2, agreed to.

Schedule 3, agreed to.

Schedule 4

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, for schedule 4, I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister. We have exemptions from the law relating to lottery and this has a financial implication even on the budget if introduced.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is that?

MR EKANYA: That is on page 78; this is schedule 4. This has implications on the budget we passed but if you want it, you can have it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, are you exempting the lottery? What is the rationale for the exemption? 

MR LUGOLOOBI: The provision is okay because we are trying to protect these bonds from gambling.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that schedule 4 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 4, agreed to.

Schedule 5, agreed to.

Schedule 6

MR KASULE: On schedule 6, the committee proposes to delete – this is a consequential amendment arising from the amendment on clause 71. Honourable members, we deleted the schedule of districts.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that schedule 6 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 7
 
MR KASULE: We had proposed to delete it but we did not; we left this formula in. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that schedule 7 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Honourable members, how about the title?

MR LUGOLOOBI: I thought we would create a third part involving the sharing of revenue among the local governments within a particular district - it was implied from the provisions of clause 70.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I was just waiting for someone to find the law. I doubt anybody has come up with it. We need to fill it before we finish.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, we can put it in the regulations because all the regulations and the statutory instruments shall come before this House so that we can conclude this Bill today. We have said that all regulations and statutory instruments made under this Act will be approved by this House. So, we need to give ourselves time to look for the right formula and put it there.
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: But where is the minister for minerals? Has he gone? He was supposed to give us the formula.

MR EKANYA: But, Madam Chairperson, this formula is on the iPads. The problem is that I do not have my iPad but it is there under the mining Act, in the regulations and that is what hon. Lokeris wanted us to import.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us get it so that we can look at it and we complete the Bill after we have read it. With that I want to ask the minister to move for the House to resume. Those clauses we have stood over, we shall complete tomorrow. They are only four.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

8.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The House resumed and the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Public Finance Bill, 2012” and passed the following clauses, some with amendments and some without: clause 23, clause 24, clause 25, clause 26, clause 27 and we have stood over clause 28. We passed clauses 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45 and stood over clause 46. 

We passed clauses 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73 and a new proposal under 73(a) was stood over. 

We passed clauses 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80 and passed schedules 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, deleted schedule 6 and passed schedule 7. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM 
THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
8.29
THE MINIST THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, we intend to recommit one of the clauses tomorrow that we had proposed to amend under clause 52(a) which is about the committee that would help to deal with the issue of assessing the oil for purposes of taxation. When we accepted the amendments raised by hon. Fox Odoi, we had mixed it up with the issue of giving prices to oil.

The purpose of that committee is to evaluate for purposes of taxation. So we request that we be allowed to recommit it tomorrow. Hon. Ekanya is travelling tomorrow, so I may not look at what he is trying to give me. Madam Speaker, he is saying clause 32(4) - thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Does he want to recommit clause 32(4)? So are you delegating the minister that responsibility? Honourable members, I think the proposals for recommittal have been noted. I want to thank you very much for your commitment. It is 8.30 p.m. but you are still here and I want to really thank you very much and I will not forget the faces that are here at this time! (Laughter) House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 8.31 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, 27 November 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
