Tuesday, 9 November 2021

Parliament met at 2.08 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to welcome you to today’s sitting and express my gratitude to you for the great work you are doing for Parliament. I have seen many committees working; people are in the field, sports and everywhere. Thank you very much. (Applause)

Colleagues, we have learnt, with sadness, of the demise of the following persons this week: 
    1. Mr Manzur Alam, the owner of Casements Africa Limited. I know most of you know him. He has contributed very much to the economy of Uganda and has been very instrumental in the revival of the Uganda Manufacturers’ Association (UMA).
    2. Mr Robert Elangot, the former Deputy Governor, Bank of Uganda. He also served as Secretary, Bank of Uganda from 1971 to 1981. Therefore, he has been very instrumental in the banking industry. 

Honourable members, I request that as usual, we rise and observe a moment of silence in their memory.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, I would also like to inform the House that our She Cranes – the girl children – are in Namibia and are doing very well. We expect good results from the She Cranes, as we keep praying for them. They will bring the trophy home. So, keep them in prayers. 

I have also got communication from the Chief Opposition Whip, designating hon. Bashir Mbaziira to represent the Opposition on the delegation to the African Caribbean and Pacific-EU; and Hassan Kirumira to the Organisation of Islamic Countries (OIC). 

Again, I want to thank you very much but I also ask Members to be very careful. I have just seen a bus - as I was coming in - blow up around Mpigi. We need to be very careful about the places we go to and the people we interact with. We also need to tell the people to be very careful. I think there is something that we do not know that is happening that we may need to know. It is not an easy time but we need to be very careful – (Mr Aogon rose_) – Yes, point of procedure?

Mr aogon: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to appreciate you for the good job always and I also appreciate colleagues on both sides. 

You have just touched a very pertinent matter on an issue of security. If indeed a blast has taken place within our borders, it is very important that this House is given adequate information. Therefore, I would like to ask whether it is not procedurally proper that we demand for information from the relevant ministry because it concerns issues of safety, not only of the Members, but the entire public. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you, hon. Silas. Before the minister speaks, whereas we appreciate that we are observing the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), we cannot have the Frontbench so empty like this. It is unacceptable. It is a shame to us. 

I do not know what the appointing authority thinks when he looks at it like this. We have very many of these Backbenchers who wanted to be here. (Applause) (Members rose_)

Honourable members, I was only expressing my disappointment and it is not for debate. It is very bad. 

2.16
The Minister Of state for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (General Duties) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have just broken our hearts with a story –(Interruption)

Mr macho: Madam Speaker, I have risen on a point of procedure on whether we are proceeding well because the matter that you have communicated to the august House is very important. With the submission of my neighbour, hon. Silas, I do not know whether we are proceeding well because the honourable minister does not have any knowledge concerning the issue of security. In fact, if they shoot a bullet, he can run and hide - 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Macho, what we are interested in is a response from the Government and the Government is responding. Can you respond?

Mr musasizi: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the wise ruling. You have just announced a heart-breaking story. This is neither the first time nor the second. I cannot guarantee that it will be the last time but what we can guarantee is that the relevant security agencies and minister will come to the House and give a comprehensive statement from the Government. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I said before, as we wait for a report – if it is coming – we need to be very careful and we need to tell our communities to be careful with the people that they deal with. If somebody comes with something that you are suspicious of, it should be reported.

MR ZIJJAN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. While we have made great strides in our fight against Coronavirus, it is still a major concern. I would like to seek your indulgence as to whether we are proceeding well with some Members on the Government side seated in the House without masks over their mouths. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not seen anybody not putting on a mask. If you are not wearing your mask, please ensure you follow the SOPs. The person I saw alternates her mask because she is expecting; we do not want to suffocate our baby.  

2.20
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let us talk about insecurity and the M23 movement. Those rebels have attacked and are seriously fighting in DRC. There are very many refugees, in fact, the first of its kind; the influx is huge. They have entered Uganda and even humanitarian workers and our Ugandan officials are overwhelmed by the numbers. They have even abandoned screening them. That is serious health insecurity because of the ravaging COVID-19, which they are not testing for. 

Secondly, severe Ebola outbreaks have been emanating from DRC and yet they are here in their thousands.  
Madam Speaker, we need an urgent statement because this is a matter of urgent public importance regarding our state of affairs. 

I also have a follow up on the statement that the Leader of the Opposition made here through the shadow Minister of Works and Transport. It was on the arbitrary Presidential directives that are in total contravention of the established law, especially on contractual obligations of infrastructural developments in Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, you directed that the learned Attorney-General comes to this House and gives a legal opinion on these Presidential directives that have contravened the law and constituted himself and the office into a PPDA. This has also contravened the Public Finance Management Act and other laws and regulations. 

The Attorney-General, who was supposed to have come last week on Wednesday, has not shown up at all. Up to now, there is no sign of him furnishing this House with that opinion. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Minister of Security, we will need a comprehensive statement on the M23 rebels and related security matters. 

Regarding the Presidential directives, since the same matter was raised before, I referred it to the Committee on Infrastructure, which is handling the issue of roads and those directives. 

I am not sure if the Attorney-General is competent enough to make those follow ups because they are directed to a ministry. They will make a report and it will have the learned Attorney-General’s input.  

MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have mentioned something in relation to the security of this country. I am mindful of the fact that the security forces in this country are mandated to take care of the security of Ugandans and their property.

Madam Speaker, we need to look at all angles that can lead to insecurity in this country. Recently, the Commander of Land Forces, Gen. Muhoozi Kainerugaba, has made it a habit –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kiwanuka, why are you smuggling in an issue? What procedural matter are you raising?  

MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA: We have been talking about insecurity in this country – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What procedural matter are you raising? We have moved to the next item, which is matters of national importance. If it is an urgent matter, raise it. Is that okay? You will raise it as a matter of national importance. For now, let us hear from hon. Ronald Balimwezo. 

2.26
MR RONALD BALIMWEZO (NUP, Nakawa Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 29 October, which is about a week ago, my area was attacked by an organised criminal gang armed with concrete pavers, iron bars and pangas. They hit and injured 18 people from one zone called Mutungo Zone 3 and another five from Mutungo Zone 2. These people injured the victims and some of them had their skulls broken, like Mr Obongole. 

Surprisingly, when the community mobilised and arrested one of them, the gang reorganised, stormed and hit the community and then rescued their counterpart. The head of the gang had a panga. Insecurity is on the increase. 

On the Tuesday of the following week, the same group – I suppose – attacked the people of Kasokoso and terribly injured 18 people. Surprisingly, the police is not doing enough. In such circumstances, we expect police to secure the people and their property but it was not available. Majority of them were staging roadblocks and arresting boda boda riders.

We have also come to note that Nakawa Division was given 900 LDUs but there is a report that 400 of them are being sold out to private people for money. I hope Gen. Wilson Mbadi is aware of that. 

My prayers are: first, I would like to task the Minister of Internal Affairs to explain to us what extra effort they have put to combat such criminality because that is how criminality begins and trickles down to other areas like it was in Masaka. 

Secondly, I want to task the same minister to tell my community the arrangements they have put in place to make sure that my people are secure. 

Then the other one, I would like to task our Parliament to help in investigating the forces that are supposed to protect our people.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For your information, Parliament does not investigate.

MR BALIMWEZO: I would like to still task the minister to carry out an investigation to that effect.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, when you have a matter of national importance, do not take a long time. We have over 20 people who have matters of national importance. We have understood your issue - it is very serious. So, briefly, state the matter and then ask Government to act on it. 

In addition, when you have that kind of activity happening in your area, make sure that you inform the police and the security forces before you wait to come to the House. 

2.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Madam Speaker, I have noted the concerns of the honourable member –(Interruption)

MR LUBEGA-SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I am the last person to raise a point of order against a colleague, especially senior to me professionally. When we were in Law School, they taught us how to wear a necktie. (Laughter) Is it in order for my brother to wear a necktie in such a manner I do not want to describe for purposes of protecting the record? Is it not in order for him to reorganise his necktie before he addresses Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Sseggona, the honourable minister is used to wearing the army uniform. When you address in military uniform, you do not generally wear a necktie. Therefore, honourable minister, it is about substance over form.

GEN. MUHOOZI: Thank you, hon. Sseggona. I have been out of neckties for a long time but I am learning. Thank you nevertheless. 

Hon. Balimwezo raised concerns of security in his area. Madam Speaker, I have noted, we will verify and return with an answer. However, for the record, I have another version; I do not know if this is a separate incident but I think it is important to inform the House. 

I am informed that on the 1st of November around 11.00 p.m., you organised a meeting in your constituency regarding controversy over a football pitch. During that meeting, the residents became rowdy, destroying property, including a vehicle registration number UAU 174K Toyota Premio. Police was called in to restore order and some people were arrested. These included Fred Obbo, Ibrahim Abdullah, Vincent Ahimbisibwe, Wilson Rurangwa and Ibrahim Kyeyune. They were charged but released on bail. This may be that incident or it may be different but I will find out and revert to the House with better facts. (Hon. Macho rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are you raising an order on?

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Mbwatekamwa, who is not even a chairperson or vice chairperson of any committee, to go and sit and pose as if he is in the Cabinet of President Yoweri Museveni? Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Macho, because there was a lot of space on the front bench, I allowed free sitting. (Laughter) However, Members, let it be matters of national importance; something that is really so urgent that it must be resolved quickly.

2.34
MS SARAH NAJJUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning a bomb blast that took place in Nakaseke District on 29th October, killing three children; Pius Kiwawu aged 12 years, Michael Kiyingi 14 years and Odongo, nine months. This took place in Ssegalye Village in Semuto Subcounty

Madam Speaker, you are aware that Nakaseke District is one of the areas of the Liberation War of the 1980s. We have been losing lives due to the explosive devices that were abandoned during the guerrilla war.
 
On this note, I request the Minister of Internal Affairs to give a comprehensive report on this matter and a way forward because we are losing our people. Last year, an incident happened in Kalagala Parish, Wakyato Subcounty, injuring three people and a life was lost in Kinyogoga. 

I request the minister - I am happy he is around - to give a comprehensive report on this matter and I also request the Government of Uganda to compensate these affected families. I have seen the President of Uganda several times, meeting people like those of Masaka – (Hon. Ssegona rose_) - hon. Ssegona, please, give me information?

MR LUBEGA-SSEGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Najjuma - because it is a matter of national importance -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, hon. Najjuma has now become the Speaker. (Laughter)

MR LUBEGA-SSEGONA: No, I said “Thank you, Madam Speaker.” The information, which is critical and is a matter of national importance, is something I thought the minister would have addressed Parliament on - the news circulating on social media of a new bus having been burnt in Mpigi, which is scaring. I thought the minister would also advise us whether it is true or it is just alarming in relation to bombs.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you give us a clarification on that? It was in my communication because I saw it on social media. 

GEN. MUHOOZI: No, it is not, Madam Speaker and honourable Members. There was, indeed, an incident at Kamengo along Masaka Road. A bus caught fire and the information filtering in at the moment - and not yet complete - is that it developed mechanical conditions, which forced the driver to stop. The passengers alighted, fortunately, but it caught fire nevertheless. The fire fighters are on the way and once the fire is taken out, we shall verify in order to know the cause - whether it was something not related to the current threat of terrorism. That is what I can say for now, regarding that incident.

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point procedure. After listening to hon. Balimwezo and now the honourable from Nakaseke and what the minister has replied - 
Madam Speaker, I appreciate the concerns of colleagues and the security issues in the background. 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, even when it is a matter of public importance, to first sort it from the police or even with other security agencies and when it fails completely, then we come and task Parliament? I see it is coming here repeatedly yet some of the things can be sorted out before coming here. Whereas I appreciate that we can speak for our people, let us also consider parliamentary time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, that is what I mentioned in my statement to hon. Ronald Balimwezo; that when such an incident takes place, you need to report to the security agencies first and see what happens. The issue is, did they report? What was the action taken and what is the current situation? That is where the issue is. 

Of course you cannot stop Members from talking about their constituencies. That is why they are here. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Parliament has a lot of business to handle. One of the reasons we are making Parliament less interesting is that we only dwell on matters of national importance. Some of these issues can be resolved at local level. We even have Thursday when Members can raise their business. 

I have watched this Order Paper, Madam Speaker. The NSSF Bill has been here for a while; it is even here today. I do not know how many times it has appeared on the Order Paper yet this is a matter that should have been resolved for our people.

Madam Speaker, I know your office is very good and everybody wants to come there but these matters of national importance –(Interjections)- Order on what? I have refused the point of order. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, let us take this very seriously. We have a congested Order Paper. It would be in the interest of the rest of the country to see us debating. 

MS NAJJUMA: Madam Speaker, my prayer is that the minister in charge of internal affairs gives a comprehensive report to this House. 

Secondly, that Government compensates the affected families. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it is not just about a comprehensive report, it is about the action that you are going to take on the ground. You will bring that next Tuesday. 

2.42
MR MEDARD SSEGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I concur with those that say and insist that we need to seek local remedies where they are available. 

Secondly, that matters must be national in character. 

It is in that spirit that I rise on a matter of national importance, with respect to management – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nathan, when you are not in the House, the House is very peaceful. 

MR SSEGONA: That is correct, Madam Speaker. Mine is in relation to land management and ministerial use or otherwise of power. 

Article 238 of the Constitution requires that there should be something called the Uganda Land Commission. And this is appointed by the President with the approval of this House of Parliament. 

For the last one month, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, hon. Judith Nabakooba purportedly suspended the Uganda Land Commission unilaterally and without due process. 

But that is not enough; a commission, which is a constitutional Commission, appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament, has no provision for interference by the minister. Not under the Constitution, not under the Land Act, not under common sense. 

Secondly, a week earlier, her deputy, the Minister of State for Lands, hon. Sam Mayanja had gone to Wakiso Zonal office, closed the Government office, locked out staff and fired them temporarily. 

Just today, a video was circulating on social media that the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. Robinah Nabbanja, had grabbed land belonging to orphans, which they had occupied prior to their father’s death. 

Hon. Nabbanja sent a contingency of military officers who sealed and fenced off the land. These young orphans have walked to police and have not received assistance – not even recording a reference. 

Prayers –(Interjection)– someone is apparently giving me valuable information. I accept it. 

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. As a result of the confusion in the lands ministry and the commission, that commission has not sat for the last one month and they have not been able to conduct any business. 

As a result, we, the consumers of the services of that commission have been disadvantaged. For purposes of information and to highlight the problem in that place, as we speak, the chairperson of the lands commission and the secretary do not see eye to eye. No one can show the other a snake. Where would they meet in the first place? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sseggona, before you make your prayers; first, for someone to be appointed as a minister of lands, one must have some sense. In your statement, you said it is not even with common sense. To be appointed as that minister, she has common sense. You cannot use that word. 

MR LUBEGA-SSEGGONA: With your indulgence and with your permission, Madam Speaker, it is not just about possession. It includes application and use of the same. (Laughter) If it was not demonstrated, I beg that you do not compel me to observe it. 

The functions of the commission, under the Constitution are to hold and manage any land in Uganda vested in or acquired by Government of Uganda in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution, and shall have such other functions as may be prescribed by Parliament. We have prescribed those functions under the Land Act, and those under the Constitution. 

The minister went ahead and said that in the meantime, she shall, herself, execute those functions. 

Prayers:

    1. For the Prime Minister and her two ministers to appear in Parliament and explain that egregious abuse of their power.

    2. For Parliament to compel the ministry to reinstate the commission because the suspension is illegal for want of authority. The President has never had any problem with the commission he appointed and we approved. The minister cannot usurp presidential powers; these are powers which cannot be delegated, under the Constitution. I so pray. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. On the issue of the Prime Minister – the video moving around – I do not know how much you trust what is on social media. Maybe the other information we would like to know is, which police did they report to? What is the reference number where they reported that case and who are those complainants? There is some kind of a social media war out there. So, you need to come out with all the facts on where they reported and who those people on social media are. 

2.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Sseggona raised a specific issue in the Constitution and he goes further to mention the minister responsible for the actions which have been taken. I commit that we shall task the minister to come and explain to the House at an earliest opportunity and, in any event, not later than Thursday this week.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister should come and report on Thursday. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Matters of national importance are supposed to be responded to instantly. However, because of the Frontbench going on unannounced holidays, matters of national importance end up returning on the Order Paper as ministerial statements, making our work look shabby. What was supposed to be responded to instantly, under our rules, becomes a ministerial statement.

I like hon. Musasizi and I do not doubt his competence but the appointing authority made him a junior minister. He would make history to become the first acting Leader of Government Business when he is not even a full minister. (Laughter) The business that we transact here belongs to the Government. That is why, under our rules, they have priority over any other matter. 

If you look at the budget of Parliament, we spend more than Shs 1 billion every single day. For every matter raised, hon. Musasizi says, “We are going to ask the minister to come.” Why don’t you wait for them and transact business? 

The procedural issue I am raising is, first of all, whether hon. Musasizi has been designated the Leader of Government Business today. Second, if he has been designated the Leader of Government Business, is he proceeding well by not executing that responsibility? For every matter appearing, he says he will go and report -(Interruption) 

MR LUBEGA-SSEGGONA: The Office of the Prime Minister is a creature of the Constitution. In fact, it was brought by way of an amendment, having recognised that there was a lacuna then. 

Article 108A provides for that office. It states:

“2. The Prime Minister shall–

    a. Be the Leader of Government Business in Parliament and be responsible for the coordination and implementation of Government policies across ministries, departments and other public institutions; and

    b. Perform such other functions as may be assigned to him or her by the President or as may be conferred on him or her by the Constitution.” 

The Prime Minister is consistently absent, except when she comes to bring a statement. I am also made aware that the President, in his wisdom, appointed a Deputy Prime Minister, who is also the Deputy Leader of Government Business. 

Is it, in the same line, procedurally correct that we keep receiving ministers performing functions which are not conferred by the Constitution or the President, thereby relegating this House to a secondary position when it is actually their primary responsibility to attend to?

MR SSEMUJJU: You can see that hon. Musasizi even fears to sit where the Prime Minister sits. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, I got communication delegating hon. Musasizi as the Government Chief Whip. I did not get any communication from the Prime Minister. Therefore, hon. Musasizi is acting as the Government Chief Whip and he is going to deliver the information to the responsible ministers. 

Of course, we cannot suspend the House because people are not here. We need to do our work. At least, a warning can go out that we have many ministers in the Prime Minister’s office and we should, at any one time, have a minister representing the Prime Minister here and performing the role of the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to give a historical background to the procedural issue I am raising. In the last Parliament, whenever the Leader of Government Business and the Government Chief Whip were not there, hon. Bahati from Kabale in Kigezi, was always the one delegated. Today, I see hon. Musasizi, again from Kabale in Kigezi, being delegated. (Laughter)

The procedural issue I am raising is whether it is only Kabale people who are capable of being delegated when the Prime Minister and the Government Chief Whip are not around. By the way, they are always state ministers. Wouldn’t it be better that the President appoints the people of Kabale to be Leader of Government Business and the Government Chief Whip?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, just like the Bible says that the wise people come from the east; maybe the wise people from the west come from that constituency. It is not by mistake that he has replaced hon. Bahati. Congratulations on being wise. 

Honourable members, we are taking a long time on this. Can we go to the next item? 

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of women from the Equal Opportunities Desk of Moroto Catholic Diocese. They are represented by hon. Faith Nakut and hon. Ochero. They have come to follow the proceedings of this House. Please, stand up for recognition. You are most welcome to this House. (Applause) There is a motion that is going to be presented by hon. Faith Nakut on issues of Napak. 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON PROGRESS IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF A LOCALLY-MADE VACCINE FOR COVID-19 AND ACCOUNTABILITY FOR THE FUNDS RELEASED FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE VACCINE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Science, Technology and Innovation.

3.00
MR YONA MUSINGUZI (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you. Madam Speaker, on Thursday, you tasked me that I should not lay myself there because I was a moving encyclopaedia, yet I had all the information. 

Since you asked for documentary evidence, I think it would be procedurally right, before the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development takes up the docket of the Minister of Science, Technology and Innovation, to first give me chance to provide more information. This will help us not to discuss this matter piecemeal; we discuss it from an informed point of view. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I asked for documentary evidence on the allegations. Please, lay the documents on Table before the minister comes in with a response.

MR MUSINGUZI: Thank you. Madam Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You should also tell us the source of the documents.

MR MUSINGUZI: Madam Speaker, as a Member of Parliament, I know that our oversight role does not only involve talking but includes us helping Government and the ruling party in discovering some of these irregularities. That is why, with no resources, I offered to bring this information for the consumption of the House. So, I should be protected from intimidation especially by asking for the source of this information. 

Anyhow, the information is here - you can go ahead to find out the truth about -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You cannot say – actually that is intimidation itself. (Laughter) I am only asking for the source where the information came from. For instance, if you are saying that the information is from the Clerk’s office, say it. If the source is a whistle-blower, say it, please. And if it is from the ministry, say that too. 

MR MUSINGUZI: Madam Speaker, I cannot intimidate the Chair. I did not mean that. What I meant is that when I came here the other time and talked about this, I was followed by two unknown double cabin vehicles while I was going back home, trying to intimidate me. I did not mean to say your office is the one intimidating me; not at all.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Yona Musinguzi, nobody will intimidate you, if you are giving facts. That is what we are saying. Give us the facts. 

MR MUSINGUZI: Thank you. Madam Speaker, the first document I want to lay on Table has evidence to prove that what I talked about the other time is true. It is empirical evidence, showing the Shs 31 billion, which was first released to that organisation called Presidential Scientific Initiative on Epidemics (PRESIDE), which was under the directorship of hon. Monica Musenero, who is now a minister. This money from the budget we appropriated. And here is the overview of the budget release for financial years 2016/2017 to 2021/2022. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I want to also lay on the Table, a summary of project budget allocation. When this money was sent to PRESIDE, it is purported that PRESIDE disbursed it to a group of scientists but some of them have denounced and dissociated themselves from the fact that they received that money. One of those is a doctor at Uganda Virus Research Institute, whose name the minister mentioned as having received money to a tune of Shs 1.8 billion. That doctor has never seen the money. He even refused to be part of this report - and many other doctors who are here. I want to lay this.

Summary of project budget allocations
Indeed, when you asked her the procedures she followed in channelling the Shs 31 billion to the different doctors, she could not do it. She handpicked a few of them but even some of those who she handpicked have denied. I lay it on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just lay the documents.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank hon. Yona Musinguzi, for giving way. The clarification I want to get from him is: this money was appropriated by Parliament. To which organisation was it appropriated? Is it a Government entity? Is it a private entity? Is it a particular person, like it happened in the case of Atiak? What kind of recipient is this you are referring to?

MR MUSINGUZI: Thank you, dear colleague. PRESIDE, in its definition, is a company not registered anywhere although it is accessing big sums of money under the disguise of being a group of scientists who have come together to produce for us a vaccine called Corona Vaccine. That is how I can define it. Otherwise, it is not a Government entity. It is an initiative. She can give more definition about it herself. Otherwise, we have appropriated Shs 31 billion to it.

As we speak today –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Niwagaba, there was an issue regarding the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation on how much money has been expended to individuals in the name of research and getting medicine for COVID-19. Hon. Musinguzi alleged to this House that some of the recipients of that money are fictitious institutions. He said he had evidence to that effect and that is the evidence we asked for. That is what he is laying on the Table.

So, we will ask the minister to come and make a comprehensive statement to that effect on the monies that were received and how far she has gone with the creation of COVIDEX B, another medicine that treats COVID-19.

MR MUSINGUZI: Madam Speaker, the same PRESIDE is now seeking more money – a Shs 50 billion supplementary budget. I lay it on the Table here.

PRESIDE is so strong that it can even be stronger than institutions of Government. I have a letter from PRESIDE, to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, requesting it to halt, transfer and expenditure of funds for Financial Year 2021 -

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Yona Musinguzi, on what ground is PRESIDE asking for a supplementary? Is it as a Government or private entity?

Mr musinguzi: If I can read everything here – “Supplementary expenditure for Financial Year 2021/2022.” I see that they are writing to the Auditor-General's office.

“My ministry – which is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – has received an additional supplementary funding request to finance recurrent and development activities under various institutions in the Financial Year 2021/2022 as detailed below:”

In that demand, there is funding for vaccine manufacture (PRESIDE) of Shs50,400,000,000 – (Interjections) – the letter is here.

The Deputy Speaker: Please lay it on the Table.

Mr ACHIA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am the Chairman of the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation. My brother here, hon. Yona Musinguzi, is a member of that committee. Over the last few months since the committee started its work, we have been engaging the Minister of Science, Technology and Innovation to see the sector’s direction after its Vote was transferred to State House. A number of these questions are already before the committee. 

A week ago, I asked the minister to prepare five reports. One of them is on PRESIDE. PRESIDE is actually an abbreviation for “Presidential Scientific Initiative on Epidemics.” It is an initiative of the President but put under the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation.

We also requested for a report on Sericulture; a report on bananas. We requested for a report on Uganda Industrial Research Institute. What I am driving at is that some of these documents are already before the committee. The report of PRESIDE is before me.

Therefore, the information I am giving is that this piece of information –(Mr Macho rose_)

The Deputy Speaker: Let him finish giving his information. Maybe, it is good for you.
  
Mr ACHIA: The information I am giving is that a comprehensive report has been presented to the committee on this particular matter. My prayer is that we are allowed to complete – it was only until yesterday that we got some of the information for the Auditor-General – to complete the inquiry, which the committee had started on this matter – so that we can effectively inform the country and this House on what is going on about PRESIDE. Thank you. 

Mr musinguzi: Madam Speaker, I have not benefited from –

The Deputy Speaker: This House did not have information that the committee is looking at that aspect. The issue that came up was during a presentation of a paper by the minister last week. Therefore, since the House has asked the minister to come and present a report here, let us get all the documents. 

If we get the documents, it will help the minister defend herself on the allegations that hon. Yona Musinguzi brought to this House.

Mr musinguzi: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. I thought I would benefit from my chairperson giving me information but he has only confused me. (Laughter)

We have a WhatsApp group as members of the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation. I remember that your vice-chairperson was here. She sent the recordings of what transpired in Parliament when we tabled our issue here. 

Chairperson, I remember you saying that you have requested for reports from her and that she had refused to give them to you. You said, “Let them grill her.” Now, why are you lying to us that she has given us a report? When did she give it to you? Did she give it to you alone? Come and give us that report. Show me that report, Mr Chairman.

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Yona Musinguzi, could it be that you are smuggling information from the committee to the House? Are you already looking at this report in the committee?

Mr musinguzi: Madam Speaker, the committee has never had any meeting to ask for a report about this, neither has it ever written a report about this. This finding came to this Parliament because of the prior knowledge I had in the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation and because of the love and zeal I have for science and the National Resistance Movement (NRM). I well know that in Agenda 2020, we all know that science is ready to take this country a step forward. That is why I am here crying.

I beg you that I lay the papers.

The Deputy Speaker: Can you lay those papers and I will refer that issue to the committee and report back to the House.

Mr musinguzi: Madam Speaker, I want to lay a paper where the minister – by then when she was a director of PRESIDE and was writing to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to halt – “A request to halt transfer and expenditure of funds for the Financial Year 2020/2021 for the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation.” Signed, Dr Musenero. 

In this letter, what was her interest? She was not yet sworn-in as a minister but still writing to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development not to fund the ministry. What was her intention? To serve Uganda?

The Deputy Speaker: Lay the papers.

Mr musinguzi: I beg to lay it on the table. Madam Speaker, to make matters worse, I have a big report from the Auditor-General querying PRESIDE itself. The Auditor-General on 8th June wrote; “A special audit finding on COVID-19 related funding to the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation for the first three quarters of Financial Year 2020/2021.”

The Auditor-General is asking; how did PRESIDE begin? They did not do any feasibility study. A project that does not have any feasibility study is doomed to fail. That means they are going to do nothing – shoddy work. The Auditor-General says – 

The Deputy Speaker: You lay it on the Table.

Mr musinguzi: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay –(Applause)– I have a letter from this Parliament. The Speaker of this Parliament on 22 September 2021 writing to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development: 
“Parliament resolution on re-allocation of funds from Vote 23: Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation to Vote 001: Office of the President.”

I do not want to read the details but this letter is talking about insubordination and contempt of Parliament by the minister – not adhering to a lawful resolution of this Parliament. I beg to lay. (Applause)
 
Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table this paper that talks about PRESIDE officials impersonating Government civil servants. One of them is Dr Michael Masanza who is the minister’s husband. We are allocating money to PRESIDE and this is a serious conflict of interest. 

There is also another person called Abel Winston Wereka who is the minister’s nephew. We have allocated Shs35 billion and the chairman is comfortably seated in his chair. Thank you for being a chairperson. 

This information has come from the public but I can read it for public consumption and for Parliament. I have just received a letter dated 15 March 2021 written by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation, Mr OO Obong to Dr Musenero, a Vet doctor. By then, she was still a Senior Presidential Advisor on Epidemics. She was being asked to account for Shs 31 billion. If I am lying, why was the permanent secretary writing to her?

I have a memorandum of understanding between PRESIDE and the serum company in India called SAMRI, which is the biggest manufacturer of vaccines in India. It signed a memorandum of understanding with PRESIDE. Are we going to buy the vaccine from Serum or we are going to innovate it? (Applause) 

I beg to lay on the Table this memorandum of understanding, Madam Speaker. 

As a scientist of this country, I would like to assure this House and all Members that research and development for a vaccine can only be done in a bio-safety lab level 4. My former Guild President is here. He is a scientist and we were in the same class. Level 4 in Africa is only in South Africa. We have lab level 2 in the Uganda Virus Research Institute. 

Madam Speaker, I do not want to underestimate our doctors’ knowledge and information, which they have acquired overtime because we know that some of the best doctors in South Africa are Ugandans. However, do we have the laboratories to do the work they are doing in Uganda?

I have no intentions – as a former scientist, when I lost my position in Parliament, I presented my paper about postharvest in America before Monsanto and the Bill Gates Foundation, which earned me some money. I brought it here and the Government taxed me.  

As a scientist, when I see masquerades like a veterinary doctor saying that she can make a vaccine – we appropriate the money and she uses this Parliament to give her money - I am uncomfortable. She has come here and lied to the Parliament that we have been talking about this. Where is the report if we have talked about it? 

I implore this House that the honourable minister, who was charged with the responsibility – the President is suffering a lot, going by his last national address. He said this Parliament should help him – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Yona, if you are done with -  

MR MUSINGUZI: He said, in his speech, that this Parliament should help him to curb corruption in this country. As a Member of Parliament for Ntungamo, I know that when we are going to campaign, the NRM suffers a lot. Why do we suffer? It is because – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Yona, are you done with laying your documents on the Table? 

MR MUSINGUZI: Madam Speaker, give me a minute to conclude. Why do we suffer?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you debating your papers? Lay the papers. If you are done – 

MR MUSINGUZI: There is one last one, Madam Speaker. In conclusion, corruption is a vampire that has sucked the blood of this nation; we sit and dine with the vampires. We should no longer call them mafias but they are vampires that should be arrested and brought to book.  

Madam Speaker, I keep this one for myself but for my security, on Thursday, two vehicles followed me. I know you have enough security so I will not move out of this Parliament before you give me one security vehicle. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister -

3.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (MR HENRY MUSASIZI): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I note with concern the issues my brother, hon. Yona Musinguzi, has raised. At the same time, I would like to acknowledge the contribution of scientists to this country and economy.  

With this new development, together with the submission from the chairperson of the committee, I would like to beg that if we are to have a meaningful debate in this House, we are allowed to, first of all, examine and verify the documents presented before the House and also be given chance to fully sit down and respond. 

In this regard, Madam Speaker, I would like to ask that we come back on Tuesday and respond – (Interruption) 

MR SSEMUJJU: When hon. Musasizi became Prime Minister at the beginning of this sitting and Government Chief Whip – although annoyingly – but he was doing the ordinary: consuming information and pledging, “I am going to take it and the owners will come and answer.” Now, he wants to answer. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, there is no document that has been laid here that accuses hon. Musasizi, even of a smaller thing such as accompanying Musenero to go and pick money. These accusations are specific to someone now holding the portfolio of science.
 
Is hon. Musasizi, who became Prime Minister and Government Chief Whip at the beginning of today’s sitting, proceeding well to become the Minister for Science and Technology and to even pledge to Parliament that he wants to go and check the documents and come back to answer? 

Last week, when hon. Musinguzi raised this matter, we wanted to debate it but you ruled that we allow the minister to come and present a statement today. That is why it is on the Order Paper. Is it a coincidence that this minister has run away and hon. Musasizi wants to claim that he is that minister we are talking about? Maybe his crime is that he has presented Shs50 billion for a supplementary to this fake company. 

Is hon. Musasizi proceeding well to take over a responsibility that is not his and then, wanting Parliament to stop demanding that the particular minister responsible for this mess comes here to explain? 

Madam Speaker, that was your order last week – that she comes here today. I thought hon. Musasizi, being wise, would explain the whereabouts of this minister – either she is in hospital or she has been arrested by police and then, Parliament would know. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Musasizi was just giving information and an apology of the minister that she would not be available to present her report today. She will be available on Thursday. However, with a new twist of things – we did not have all information that we now have – I am now referring this –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Given the trend of things – I listened to hon. Musinguzi. Before he could make a statement, the Chairperson of the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation jumped up – you recall he was the one of pension before he became the one of science and we know what happened in pension. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, given that this matter touches the people of Uganda and given the fact that the chairperson is already - and given that we are dealing with a matter where there is an audit report, wouldn't we be proceeding right that this matter be referred to PAC, the committee is given three days -(Interjections)- Yes, please, Shs 50 billion – income and expenditure. Just looking at lines and accountability – even three days are too many. 

Madam Speaker, please, refer the matter to PAC so that by Thursday, before the minister, who studied veterinary, comes and makes a report, PAC will be having a report on whether she spent money rightly or wrongly and to avoid the Budget Committee passing a supplementary of Shs 50 billion before we understand this. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, Madam Speaker? (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, I have heard your submission. However, I have also seen the chairperson of PAC very interested in this thing. Therefore, I am not sure whether it will be in safe hands. On that note, therefore; 

    1. Minister of Internal Affairs, I want you to avail hon. Musinguzi with security.

2. 	Under rule 190 of the Rules of Procedure, I will have a select committee to handle this issue. (Applause) I will announce the members of the select committee tomorrow. Next item.

MS BEGUMISA: Madam Speaker, I think we are not proceeding right if –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are making a ruling yourself?

MS BEGUMISA: Sorry [Mr Nandala-Mafabi: “Order.”] This is a maiden speech.  

MS BEGUMISA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have my letter. I asked for your protection. The same security that is taking hon. Musinguzi home, I kindly ask that it takes me home as well. You have my issue - I came to your office. Thank you – (Mr Mbwatekamwa rose_)-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members. Hon. Mbwatekamwa, before you bring your issue – honourable members, let us handle issues in the right place. If it is an issue of security, Minister of Internal Affairs, kindly avail Members with your number so that they are able to get in touch with you. The issue you have raised should not come here. It is something that we are handling as Parliament. It is not for the public. 

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the 10th Parliament, I was on the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation. However, anything that concerned the presidential initiative on science and anything –(Laughter)- had a very big challenge.

The procedural matter I am bringing is, if you just look at the Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development, it is in Bushenyi – my district – but I cannot fail to say it has not benefited the community but only an individual, yet that is taxpayers’ money. 

There is another presidential initiative on a drug treating bilharzia. However, when you go there, there is nothing on the ground. Therefore, the procedural matter I am seeking is that with this select committee you have put in place -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I have not yet put it in place. 

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Okay. Shouldn’t it be procedurally right to include the so-called Presidential Initiative on Innovation and everything – to make sure that we have a comprehensive report to save taxpayers money? I doubt this chairperson - even the face looks as if he has “eaten.” (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I have the word “eaten” withdrawn because you do not have evidence to prove that. 

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I presumed that maybe he is not fasting and he took lunch. I sat with him in the canteen and I am sure he is satisfied. (Laughter) I saw him. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are saying nothing. Honourable members, on the terms of reference of that committee, that will be permitted. 

MOTION WITHOUT NOTICE

3.38
MR MEDARD LUBEGA-SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, a lot has been said about my sister, hon. Dr Musenero, including matters that touch integrity, in her absence. To the extent that even her family has been mentioned – I am talking about the husband and nephew. 

For purposes of giving a comprehensive framework, where an honourable member of this House would be given an opportunity to defend herself, is it not procedurally right, therefore, that you permit me to move a motion to this House, under rules 16, 57 and 190, formally, as I humbly do, that the House constitutes a select committee, with comprehensive terms of reference incorporating and encompassing whatever has been said about the honourable minister and tasking the said select committee of your choice, in accordance with the rules of this House, to investigate the matter and bring a report.

I know, Madam Speaker, that you had already made some undertaking, on behalf of this House. May I pray, therefore, that it pleases you, to constitute, on behalf of this Parliament, that committee with detailed terms of reference, to investigate all those matters that have been raised against the honourable minister? And noting that the minister was given an opportunity to come and present to this august House and has failed to utilise that opportunity. 

I do not want to go to the extent of saying that she sent hon. Musasizi because some of the matters have risen on the Floor. But this is a perfect opportunity for the honourable minister to defend herself, especially when we are faced with a request for supplementary, going to the same person when there are all these queries. 

I am also alive to the fact that we have a committee responsible for this particular ministry. However, with the confusion that you have seen on the Floor displayed between the leadership and membership of the committee, I think the committee may find itself compromised in terms of providing comprehensive results for this House. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded - you are discussing; do not discuss the merits of the matter. I put the question that the House constitutes a select committee to investigate the Technology, Science and Innovation ministry.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion, adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will give the select committee terms of reference. 

The Members who are talking about PAC, look at the rules to know what PAC is supposed to do. Look at the audit reports. 

STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION ON ISSUES PERTAINING TO HALF-YEAR RELEASES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2021/2022

3.44
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For your information, I am holding fort for my superior, the Leader of the Opposition. The statement is being moved under Rule 53(1) of our Rules of Procedure and it pertains to the half-year releases for the Financial Year 2021/2022. 

As you are aware, execution of our national budget is controlled through quarterly releases. The analysis is only in respect of Quarter I, from July – September and Quarter II, from October – December. 

I am going to usher in my line shadow minister of finance, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, to read this statement on behalf of the Leader of the Opposition. 

3.45
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Muwanga-Kivumbi, kindly give the summary. The presumption is that we have read it because it was uploaded. 

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, I will try to summarise my presentation; I will keep it short and simple. 

The spirit in which we come should be understood. Ordinarily, this is not what we do, as the Opposition. Ordinarily, the execution of the budget is the exclusive mandate of the Cabinet and we normally only go for accountability after that. 

However, we have noted with concern that oversight functions of Parliament should now be extended to it monitoring how money is released because once we do not monitor how money is released, then we cannot monitor implementation and execution of Government programmes and this affects the overall performance. 

Quarter I and Quarter II releases have been done. The categorisations are two. We have looked at recurrent and development expenditures. We have looked at agencies that have received money and we have looked at agencies – even the best that have been here like Ministry of Health, and the intentions of Government to see how they have followed up commitments with funding. 

Out of the approved budget for the Financial Year 2021/2022, amounting to Shs44.77 trillion, releases for Quarter I were Shs9.7 trillion and Quarter II was Shs 11.9 trillion. 

This translates to Shs 21.6 trillion, which is 49 per cent of the releases. Ordinarily, that is close to 50 per cent after two quarters and we would say that is good enough. 

For those of you with the report, turn to Table 1. I will speak to tables, to be able to summarise. This table shows that out of the budget we have, Shs 29 trillion is recurrent expenditure. Development is Shs 14 trillion, which totals to Shs 44 trillion. 

Half year release is as follows: 

Of the Shs 21 trillion, recurrent so far is Shs17.7 trillion, which is 60 per cent of the money that has been released. 

Development expenditure so far is only Shs4 trillion, which is 27 per cent. I can even stop there and you tell the story. 

We are going to look at the prioritisation of these releases. Out of the money released so far, we can see that recurrent expenditure is supposed to 67 per cent and development expenditure 14 per cent – I think I have spoken to that. 

Out of the Shs21 trillion released so far, Shs17 trillion is recurrent expenditure, which is 82 per cent of the money released. Eighty-two per cent of the money that we have released in the two quarters has gone into recurrent expenditure. Development expenditure, therefore, has attracted only 18 per cent. These were half-year releases.

That means that most of the money in our constituencies is for salaries and other things. There is no money whatsoever for doing development work in half a year. 

I have also highlighted, in Table 4, the agencies that have received big sums of money.

    1. In the last two quarters, of the Shs 21 trillion, Shs 9.8 trillion has gone to treasury operations. “Treasury operations” means money that has gone to pay our debts. (Interjections) Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you were once the Leader of the Opposition. You had your time, Sir. 

    2. Shs 2 trillion has gone to local government. 

    3. The Ministry of Defence – because of security – has attracted Shs 2 trillion of the half-year releases. 

    4. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has attracted Shs442 trillion. 

    5. The Uganda Police Force has attracted Shs501 billion. 

    6. The National Medical Stores – the one that buys drugs – attracted Shs348 billion. 

    7. The Parliamentary Commission has attracted Shs476 billion.

    8. Uganda Revenue Authority has attracted Shs267 trillion.

    9. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has attracted Shs177 billion.

I seek the attention of hon. Nandala-Mafabi because he is interfering. The reason we are tracking money that way is that on the second table; Table 5, we are trying to see the categories of money. There is a supplementary, which I will skip because that matter is before a committee and if I speak to it now, it will – 

It is important to note that many agencies were suppressed and there are cuts. I will skip it and speak to it when we come to the report of the Committee on Budget, that is considering –

On this table, I have noted agencies that, in the last quarters, have consumed more than 51 per cent. 

    i) One of them is the Office of the President that has consumed 100 per cent in two quarters. It has consumed all the money that was given to it and even exceeded.  

    ii) The External Security Organisation has consumed 67 per cent. 

    iii) State House consumed 62 per cent. 

    iv) The Uganda Prisons Service consumed 56 per cent. 

    v) The Uganda Police Force consumed 55 per cent. 

    vi) The Inspectorate of Government has consumed 53 per cent. 

    vii) The Ministry of Internal Affairs has consumed 51 per cent.

    viii)  The Financial Intelligence Authority has consumed 49 per cent.

These are the big agencies in terms of receiving – The point to note is that none of these agencies is in the productive sector and yet they are the ones that have consumed a lot of money. 

We have what I call “trillion votes”. These are votes, on our budget, that attract trillions of shillings. We want to see, on the releases, how they are performing. 

    i) Treasury operations, which out of our budget takes Shs 15 trillion. It has done well. It received Shs9 trillion and it is at 65 per cent.

    ii) The Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, which has a total of Shs 3.8 trillion. It has also done well. It has consumed Shs 2 trillion, which is 63 per cent. 

    iii) The Ministry of Health, which is supposed to have Shs1.2 trillion. It has so far received, in two quarters, Shs299 billion, which is equivalent to Shs25 per cent. 

    iv) The Uganda National Road Authority that does our roads has a budget of Shs3.3 trillion. It has consumed Shs 622 billion, which is 19 per cent.

When you track the ‘trillion shilling’ agencies, other than treasury operations – which I have told you is for paying debts and the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, the rest – even the Ministry of Health which you were crucifying here has not been given money; only 22 per cent of the releases. A lot of its money remains –

We have delayed implementation of development projects. For the information of Government, as earlier highlighted, development expenditure only constitutes 18 per cent of the half-year releases. It has been noted with concern that releases for development expenditure are usually done in quarter three and quarter four. It is at this moment that accounting officers commence procurements to comply with section 15(3) of the Public Finance Management Act. 

By the time the procurements are concluded, the financial year is closing. This explains the dismal performance of development projects in past financial years and it will not be different in this financial year. 

In the Financial Year 2020/2021, out of the 68 core projects in the National Development Plan, only nine were on schedule. This translates to a performance of 13 per cent. Such a performance cannot transform the country and ultimately results into low economic growth. 

However, such scenarios of delayed releases should not exist anymore given the fact that the national budget for the next financial year is approved before the closure of the preceding financial year. 

Delayed implementation of Government’s commitments Let me speak to this:

It has been noted that there are accumulated disbursed funds amounting to Shs11 trillion, which is approximately 45 per cent. This is money that is not dispatched and out of this, we pay huge interests. 

We pass a budget here strenuously and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development does not release the money at the end of the year. We also have the issue of unspent balances. When money is released in the third and fourth quarters, agencies do not spend that money; it comes back to the Consolidated Fund. In our budgeting system, there is no trace of unspent balances. We never have an opening balance nor do we ever see a closing balance. 

Therefore, it is important to note that much as agencies want money to be spent in the second and third quarters, the intention for the money not to be spent comes back to the centre and disappears in thin air. 

Recommendation

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should immediately report to Parliament the extent of unspent balances in the closed financial year. We want you to tell us how much money you received as unspent balance in the last financial year.

The Speaker is urged, when exercising powers, under section 24 of the Public Finance Management Act, to appoint a member from the Opposition. 

Madam Speaker, I have jumped a section on classified expenditure because it consumes a lot. Last year, it was Shs 5 trillion. This year, it has received a member.

Madam Speaker, in your powers, appoint one person to classified expenditure. The law says it is the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget, the chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and one other member appointed by the Speaker.

What we are urging you, Madam Speaker, is that this other member should be from the Opposition. When you have a member of the Opposition, put him under oath not to reveal state secrets forever, so that we have another eye outside Government that looks at classified expenditure. Otherwise, it is becoming a haemorrhage.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before you finish your statement, the powers are vested in the Speaker to appoint a member in that classified committee, as you have recommended and just for your information, that was the first thing we did when we came to this Parliament. 

Like the name says “classified”, we appointed members of the Opposition and they are classified. That prayer should not even be there because it was done.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, I thank you but the committee is not classified. It is the expenditure that is –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We appointed - the chairperson is automatically a member and we appointed other Members to be on that committee. So, that was done.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, I thank you and I do not intend to have a cross argument with the chairperson. It is not my argument in any way. I will speak to my Leader of the Opposition on that issue. I think he should be in the know.

The third recommendation, Madam Speaker, is that the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development should make regulations for classified expenditure, as required under subsection (81)(2)(g) of the Public Finance Management Act. 

We are clamouring now to streamline classified expenditure to close that gap. When we have these regulations, all those things will be very clear. We are not imputing in any one – we should not be misunderstood – that classified expenditure is about stealing. I mean, as a country, we know the needs of security but it can be stretched to another level.

The other recommendation is on Section 78 of the Public Finance Management Act. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should make a report to Parliament with an explanation on why:

    a) Government adjusted the approved budget beyond the permitted thresholds and undertook subsidiary appropriation without parliamentary approval. On this one, I preserve it because it will be discussed when we come with a supplementary report from the Committee on Budget. I will skip to the second recommendation.

    b) Releases were made beyond the approved budget of the Office of the President. The minister will speak to it.

Subsequently, Parliament should review the budget cuts made by Government. That will also come when we report back.

Lastly, Parliament should, in the Financial Year 2021/2022, place a moratorium on Votes with poor absorption of the development budget. Madam Speaker, we have votes that perennially do not absorb their budget, yet, we continue to heap them with a lot of money. We want the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come here and tell us the Votes that do not have absorption capacity so that in another year, we do not waste money that should have gone somewhere and give it to those Votes.

Madam Speaker, with those remarks, attached is a copy of each vote. If Members want to follow, you can do so and find out what is going on because you told me to summarise the statement. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Shadow Minister and thank you for the good report. 

4.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Kivumbi for this analysis. However, as he was presenting, I was looking forward to the gaps, which he was leading to. I find that his report is largely information to the House and actually, good information.

What I can say is that we release funds four times a year; quarter one, quarter two, quarter three and quarter four. His observation is consistent. We are now at 49 per cent half year and we are leading – we still have two quarters. I believe by the end of the financial year, we will be at 100 per cent or close to that.

On concerns about classified expenditure; Madam Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, since the report that the shadow minister has given us is in writing, wouldn’t it be prudent for you to go and make a rebuttal? Ideally, we are supposed to debate this report under rule 53(2) but because you have realised there are gaps – (Interjections) – are there no gaps? 

However, even if there are no gaps, wouldn’t it be prudent for you to go and bring a rebuttal in writing so that we debate all of it at once, other than debating this one and then, we debate what will come from you?

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg your indulgence that I state that I do not see why I should go back to prepare written information about this because hon. Kivumbi has picked all this information from our records and it is a true record. I am just wondering what I am going to write and bring to the House. I take this as information to the House and thank him for giving this analysis.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Fine. So, it is open to debate. 

4.06
MR MARTIN MUZAALE (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, hon. Kivumbi, for a good report. I also thank the minister for accepting that this is true information.

Madam Speaker, development expenditure, according to leases, has a very small percentage. Under development expenditure, we have agencies like UNRA, Ministry of Works and Transport and the Ministry of Health that contracted contractors to do some work. Most of these contractors are crying; they have not been paid their money. 

In a situation where everyone has been battling with the pandemic, most of these contractors have loans. Their money is being held up by the Government of Uganda. 

We are talking about economic stimuli – the Government aiding people to revamp the economy – but in a situation where the Government is holding funds of contractors, I do not find it fair. 

Comparing with other agencies, which have already consumed 100 per cent and we are in the second quarter, I do not know what the minister will explain to us. Why have some agencies already consumed 100 per cent, yet others, which are also very important to our country, have received peanuts? Thank you. 

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you, hon. Martin. Honourable minister, I hope you are taking note. 

4.08
Mr Nathan-nandala-mafabi (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, under section 15 of the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA), it is clear that Parliament is the one that approves the budget. This budget will consist of the procurement, work and recruitment plans. Of course, the cash flow in the ministry is released according to that.

Also, the cash flow is in respect of the money collected. I would have been very happy if my brother, hon. Kivumbi, the shadow minister, told us how much has been collected vis–a-vis how much has been spent. 

Having said that, under section 16, every three months, every accounting officer shall submit to the Secretary to Treasury the forecast of the commitments and the cash position of the Vote. The Secretary to Treasury will use this for purposes of releases. 

Madam Speaker, one of the things which I was waiting for my brother, hon. Kivumbi, to talk about is that treasury operations are taking a huge amount of money to pay debts. If we do not pay, we shall have a problem. Our thinking was that he would come up and say that we should reduce our appetite for borrowing. If we do not, eventually all the collections we are going to make will go for debts and we will be left with nothing. 

That is the reason the Government is spending. If we do not pay the 9.8 trillion, we will be declared bankrupt. If we are declared bankrupt, then we shall never borrow anywhere. 

Recurrent expenditure is basically for salaries and administration, among others. If you do not pay Members of Parliament salary, I am sure, Madam Speaker, you will not enter and if you do not enter, you will not chair this House. 

Therefore, recurrent expenditure will always be priority number one because it deals with the day-to-day operations, which include salaries.  While with development – you can hold on to build a road but not hold on to pay salary of the workers. 

I was hoping that my colleague would say we rationalise salaries. For example, an engineer in the Ministry of Works and Transport is paid about a million shillings. However, an engineer in Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), I think picks about Shs 30 million yet they were in the same engineering class and UNRA is also just a procurement entity.  That is one of the causes of the highest recurrent expenditures, which, as a country, we should rethink.

Under the Public Finance Management Act, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is supposed to submit quarterly reports. I do not know what happens to people. When hon. Musasizi was the chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, he used to demand these quarterly reports. (Laughter) Now, he is there but not producing them. I want him to explain to us; why were you demanding at that time when you knew the purpose and you are not producing them? What has gone wrong? 

The purpose of the quarterly reports is to make a decision on how to move on the expenditures. The Budget Committee should have put the first question; why bring a supplementary when others have not got money? 

I am aware that my brother, hon. Kivumbi, is a member of the Budget Committee. He should be talking at that stage; that before we pass this supplementary, where are we getting the money from? You should not come and say, “These are funded 19 per cent,” yet, again, you are going to pass a supplementary to do further technical reallocations, cutting from the other ministries, which are already disadvantaged.

I think the Budget Committee should do us a service by looking at these expenditures before they bring the supplementary here. The moment they bring it here, then they will be one of those who have committed a crime because you should have rejected it at that level by saying: “No, first of all, let us settle those ministries, which have not yet got money.”

The places which are suffering most are local governments. They are also using this advantage to mismanage the little they get. They say, “We never got money from the Centre.” When you ask about a road, they say that the road was washed away by rain, when it has not even rained. 

Therefore, local governments, where service delivery should be, are suffering. It would be very important today that the Budget Committee comes with a better explanation to us on what they have done about local governments. 

Service delivery is a question which we are raising every day. When you go to the Auditor-General’s report, it is giving unqualified reports to local governments – they have no problem but when you ask about what happened, there is a problem. 

Offices like the Auditor-General’s, internal Auditor-General and procurements need to be reviewed. You could be talking about the budgets - the dog we have sent might be seeing what is being taken and partaking of it. The earlier we do that, the better.
 
My colleague raised the issue of classified regulations. I want to state that these exist. Maybe, you need to give him a copy. The chairman of Public Accounts Committee (PAC) is a member. I am sure you know it.

Finally, it looks to me that Parliament is just for purposes of coming to rubberstamp a budget. What happens after, nobody bothers. It would be important that before we deal with the supplementary or the other budgets, we must always review the performance of the previous budget, not only in relation to money but activities. Supposing, we gave the Ministry of Water and Environment money to make 1,000 boreholes and we released the money, you must come and show us that you have either done 1,000 boreholes or explain if you have done less or more. 

However, every year, we have incremental budgets – 

The Deputy Speaker: Let us conclude.

Mr nandala-mafabi: Madam Speaker, I am going to conclude. This incremental budget is, in fact, where corruption is. They know that last year, we got Shs 100 billion. Plus 20 per cent, we are going to get Shs 120 billion. That means that they have to plan. They know that our budgets are basically incremental and not asking about the outputs in reality, like activities.

I would plead with colleagues who are on sessional committees, plus those on the Budget Committee, to kindly review those activities – (Interruption) - Okay, Sir. Madam Speaker, I will allow him. He is a colleague.

Mr okot-ogong: Madam Speaker, I am trying to understand what my brother is talking about because according to my understanding, we have a ministerial policy statement presented to Parliament. In the ministerial policy statement, they must detail what they have done in the past - the budget and also the budget performance on what they were given. Then there should also be projection of the plans that they have for the next financial year. That is how they should do it. 

They present it to Parliament before it is referred to the respective committees. It is the committees to examine those reports, the output, outcome, the money and the budget. They are also supposed to do value-for-money accountability. I do not know whether that is not good enough; maybe they can clarify. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, that is what it should be but it should also be about all the activities you want to execute. They should give us a timeframe. I do not know why you complain that there is no water. You would say, for example, that we are going to construct 5,000 boreholes in the country over a period of five years. That means you construct 1,000 each year. After five years, there should be no budget on boreholes. Otherwise, having a budget on boreholes in every budget - where do the boreholes go? It seems they are never constructed. That is why I am trying to say that it must be interrogated further.

You know I am a coffee farmer. The easiest one -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When you are raising a point of information, you do not switch on the microphone immediately. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, every other person wishes to speak. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, I am going to conclude. Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence. You need to carry out an induction course. I see Members just get onto microphones anyhow; it does not make sense. When you get up, you should say, “I want to speak.” It is only when the Speaker gives you time that you switch on the microphone. 

The last issue I would like to speak about is coffee. If you counted the money we have invested in coffee, even tarmac roads would have coffee trees. Where did the coffee go? Those are issues we should raise. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report is about half yearly releases vis-a-vis the appropriation; how much was appropriated to that sector? How much was released? Why was that amount released and yet that was not what we appropriated? That is what the report is talking about.

Of course, what you have said is very important; we need to look at our budget before we increase monies during appropriation. We need to know why there should be an increment vis-a-vis the actions. What was done the previous year? Why are you increasing the budget? What is that, that has not been done that you need to do? I think that is what he has raised.

You have also talked about the expenditure vis-a-vis income. What was collected? The heading is very clear and it reads: “release.” He is a lawyer and not an accountant like you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you are right. They release but you release what you have collected. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is good information for the House. Probably, like what has been said, the Committee on Budget needs to interest itself in the local governments. They are suffering. We need to keep an eye on them. Before we talk about anything, let us look at the local governments and the recurrent expenditures, like he has said. The moment you come to this House and it has not “rained” you might ask hon. Musasizi to not come near Parliament. 

As you are aware, under rule 53 of our Rules of Procedure, debate on such a statement should not take so long. You have got all the information. Can we now have a response from the minister? 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, with due respect, I think hon. Nandala-Mafabi is an economist. He spoke for the sea and the forest at the same time. Some of his comments deserve some response. 

Recurrent expenditure is supposed to drive development. It is like you buying a vehicle and you do not fuel it – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The day-to-day operations. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: It is like paying Members of Parliament when there are no sessions taking place. What are you paying them for? Therefore, without corresponding performances on recurrent and development expenditures, you will never see service delivery. 

That is why we are saying that if you are going to release money for recurrent expenditure, release the equivalent money that is required to drive development. That is why we set aside a percentage for you and said, “As the percentage expenditure, they have spent 82 per cent on recurrent and on development, 18 per cent.” Therefore, such expenditure is screwed and cannot spur growth. I am not saying it is wasteful but it is a ‘funny’ expenditure and it is in not any book of economics. I expected a learned economist like hon. Nandala-Mafabi to understand those things properly. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have had complaints on the recurrent expenditure. There is the issue of the oversight role. Recurrent should be 100 per cent because you cannot do a number of things without having all the money there. You cannot sit in the House when you are not paid.

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, that is the point that I would like this House to understand; that hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s submission looks to imagine that Government should be there to pay salaries – no. The Government, in essence, is supposed to drive development. I shudder what Government you will be in if you go for that kind of expenditure. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, there are some recurrent expenditures that have no corresponding development. For example, if you are paying a debt of Shs 9.8 trillion, what development – because you borrowed money to carry out a development activity sometime back and now the debt is due and you must pay. If you go by that then you will not pay a debt because you will want to release equal money to development. 
Therefore, is my brother –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You borrowed money for capital expenditure. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It has been done; so, what you have to do is – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, when you are paying, it becomes your recurrent. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, so what I am trying to put across, Madam Speaker, is that the Shs 9.8 billion is corresponding to development for the other time, if we assume that we put it to proper use. If it was put it to wrong use, that is when you will get upset because you are paying Shs 9.8 billion wrongly. 

Madam Speaker, what I am putting across is that there is no way you will not pay me salary because you have closed Parliament, unless my contract has ended. If it has not ended - There are fixed contracts; whether there is work or no work, you must pay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have got an alternate report from the Opposition and it is very good. I really appreciate it. The Opposition is putting us on alert that as much as we do certain things, this is what we should consider. We appreciate that. We are not in an accounting class. Can we have a response from the minister?

Maybe just for purposes of clarification to hon. Kivumbi, we have the classified accountability committees but we also have the classified budget at the budgeting stage. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, I know what I am talking about. Actually, the Chairperson of PAC, by law, is supposed to be part of the accountability committee for classified. That much I know. However, classified as an expenditure part of the arm - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have it.

MR KIVUMBI MUWANGA: Yes, the law says you have a chairperson Committee on Budget, Chairperson Committee on Defence and one other person appointed by the Speaker to ensure accountability. That other person appointed by the Speaker is not classified. He has to be public and answerable to the public of Uganda. That person cannot be classified; it is not in any regulation but I chose not to oppose it. 

However, I strongly think that that person should be announced here so that we know him, so that if things go wrong -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it in the law that we should announce it here?

MR KIVUMBI MUWANGA: Yes. Every appointment of the Speaker is announced here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I am saying that person of the classified expenditure committee.

MR KIVUMBI MUWANGA: Madam Speaker, I know the last person was Col Fred Mwesigye, he was announced here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable minister was on the Floor. Members, when we announce the members of the committee - you know the problem, hon. Kivumbi, we even gave a copy to your office – the Office of the Leader of the Opposition. We came and announced in the House that we have classified and I remember I chaired it; it was under the tent.

Maybe, because the tent was so big that you could not hear what was being said but we will give you a copy of what we gave to the Opposition. Honourable minister - but I thought you had delegated your Member to speak.

MR NAMBESHE: No, I was citing the dictates of the Public Finance Management Act.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am saying the minister is still on the Floor because it was a procedural matter –

MR NAMBESHE: Before the minister comes, he was claiming there were no gaps but I would want him to commit himself -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, please, let him first respond.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate hon. Nandala-Mafabi - my senior in the profession and my senior in the House - for the analysis he has made. I appreciate him because in 2015, when we enacted the Public Finance Management Act, we gave it comprehensive provisions as far as management of public finances is concerned.

In addition, one good point he has raised is on the cash flows. We release money based on the collections and we normally do cash flow projections - not actually projections but realities. We call them “cash limits”. 

I want to say that whereas it is our desire to release all the money we budget for, when the revenue performance is not good, we release what we have and this is what hon. Nandala-Mafabi stated. However, the other point he touched on was the point on reporting to Parliament. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you know very well that section 18 of the Public Finance Management Act requires the Minister to report twice to Parliament as far as managing public expenditure is concerned. 

I would like to inform this House that on a quarterly basis, we release funds after scrutinising the cash flow plans, the procurement plans and other relevant documents - which the law requires us to look at. 

Madam Speaker, I do acknowledge where hon. Kivumbi is coming from - being a lawyer of some sorts, according to what the Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I did not say that and it was not for you to repeat it.

MR MUSASIZI: Then I withdraw it if that is the case. However, in this case, hon. Kivumbi not being an accountant, he wants to compare recurrent expenditure with development expenditure; that when you make a release on recurrent, it must correspond with some release on development, which is not always the case.

I also want to inform him and the House that there are some activities of development in nature which exist under recurrent expenditure. 

Madam Speaker, going forward, I want to say that Uganda has the best budgeting system in the whole of Africa; we pick this from the fora we go to. It is very transparent; whatever we do in the budget is known to all the stakeholders, including Parliament. 

Therefore, as I conclude, as the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we shall always release funds timely - and that is when the quarter begins; from 1st to 10th we shall have released the money and we shall release the funds, which we shall have collected from the taxes and other sources we use to finance the Budget.
 
In addition, we commit that we shall always report our performance –(Interruption)- I will get clarification from Aisha - 

MS AISHA KABANDA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I would love to know from you if the Ministry for Presidency has spent 102 per cent by the end of the first half of the year without even coming back to Parliament. First, where did they get the extra 2 per cent before coming back? Secondly, when will the Ministry for Presidency ever learn to budget because there is no single year they have gone without coming back for supplementary?

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you my friend, hon. Kabanda, for raising the point of clarification. How the 102 per cent arises is that this Vote received a supplementary and this report is comparing the release to date, vis-a-vis what you have spent. 

Therefore, there are a number of Votes, which received a COVID-19 supplementary. You are likely to see them performing above 100 per cent so far. However, as we get close to the end of the financial year, you might find that they will get less releases in the third or fourth quarter and when we get to balance, it will come to –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for giving way. Why did they spend more than one or two per cent before coming here?  

In the same law, whether we need to cure it now, we have allowed the Government to spend 2 per cent before coming to Parliament; that is where we have an issue, which we must deal with as Parliament. We have not put guidelines on where to spend the two per cent. So, they can spend it in anyway and you will just get retrospective authority but we have -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, you gave the 3 per cent as Parliament but you did not give the guidelines. Therefore, the 2 per cent could be from the 3 per cent. Therefore, you gave them unlimited powers.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, hon. Mafabi for the information. Actually, you enhanced hon. Kabanda’s question that what was the source of the over-expenditure? 

The law provides that Government has a window to spend 3 per cent of the previous budget and report to Parliament within four months. This is Section 25 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

Any excess beyond 3 per cent, we must first seek Parliamentary approval. The same rules that govern supplementary spending apply to even the 3 per cent before we come here. These are; it must be an item that is unforeseen and unavoidable if it is to qualify to be financed under this. 

Like I was concluding earlier, I would like to say that we are committed to –(Interruption)

MR HERBERT TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, budgeting is a costed work plan. A work plan must be done in accordance with the timelines. You cannot plan to do everything in one day. In the course of the year, you have planned activities in different months accordingly. And you plan and cost those activities based in those months. 

Therefore, I find it difficult to say that in half a year, you have spent Shs17 trillion on recurrent expenditure, when in actual sense you should have spent Shs14.5 trillion because the total cost recurrent for the whole year was Shs29 trillion. But you have spent 82 per cent instead of having spent half. 

That means that you are spending on what you did not plan to do in this period. You are bringing nearer what you had planned to spend in the other months. 

How could it be possible? My thinking is that your activities are done back to back, one today, another one tomorrow until you finish your year. Thank you. 

MR KAMBALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to clarify on what the colleague has just presented. According to the report, when he talks about 82 per cent having been allocated to recurrent expenditure, it does not mean that it is the 82 per cent of the overall budget. It is the 82 per cent of the release for the two quarters. That is Shs 21 trillion that has been released for the half year. Out of it, Shs 17 trillion, which constitutes 82 per cent - we are talking about 82 per cent of what has been released so far. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As opposed to the 100 per cent, which was supposed to be released. 

MR KAMBALE: So it does not mean that they have already used 82 per cent of the overall budget of the year. So – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The difference would come in the budget cuts that have been there. That instead of releasing 100 per cent, you have released 80 or 82 per cent as opposed to the 100 per cent. This aspect can only be discussed by people who know figures. Honourable minister can you – 

MS LILLIAN ABER: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before the minister concludes, I would like to seek clarity over the functionality of these newly created administrative units. 

As you are aware, it has been a norm that we create new sub counties and town councils but these administrative units are not functional. 

The honourable minister mentioned that we are going to immediately and timely release funds. I would like to know from the honourable minister when we are going to have these small administrative units begin functioning and whether they will be funded. Thank you. 

4.42
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Divisoin, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi raised an important issue that has been reiterated by hon. Aber; the issue of revenue and expenditure. You have well and ably explained. 

The hon. Kivumbi put the facts clearly to you and you conceded on that matter. However, the most important thing at the moment and the questions that Members keep meeting in their constituencies is the performance at local government level, their accounts being centrally controlled. 

The fact that people raise revenue and the revenue is taken to the centre and they do not know what time the remittances are done and for what performance. Councillors and district councils formulate their budgets, present them and before you know it, they are useless. 

We are not respecting the principle of decentralisation. That is why you see that our budget performance is still poor. On paper, we have amazing paperwork. Like you said, in Africa, our budgetary principles are the best. But now we are killing the same baby based on deep centralisation on implementation. 

That is why hon. Nandala-Mafabi told you that you reach local governments and districts and people tell you they worked on roads and culverts and yet they have worked on nothing. But they are there being paid wages and salaries for zero performance. So you incur costs with zero output. 

That is what this august House wants to know. That as we are giving you money, what is the value for the money you keep asking for? Value for money. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the one thing you need to know is that the NTR that is collected from the local governments has a deadline as to when it should be submitted to the Consolidated Fund account but it does not have a deadline for when you should return it to the local governments.

They are suffering, as Members are saying. They cannot even collect garbage. You find smelly cities because they are not able to get the releases. The release that you send from finance reaches the local government so late that they cannot even do anything. You need to address those matters even when you are doing the budgeting. The report is not just for fun. It is raising issues.

4.45
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute Couty South, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue raised by hon. Kivumbi is closely linked to the matter that has been before this House about how the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development tampers with budgets and they do not come back to this House. 

The honourable minister knows that when we approve a budget, we do not approve it as figures only. We approve with the work plan, including the disbursement plan. If you tamper with the disbursement and you do not release money as it was scheduled, it is only proper that you come back to this House and work with the agencies. The agencies revise their work plan but also revise the disbursement plan so that you can then release the money according to the new schedule.

That is the point I wanted the minister to speak to. Whether he is going to come back to this House and lay the new work plans for the various ministries, departments and agencies with their disbursement plans. Thank you. 

4.46
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Madam Speaker. I wanted to make a comment on the argument that local governments are suffering and there is no money. The country moved and adopted decentralisation and it set categories of activities that are supposed to be performed by local governments and those which are centralised.

The challenge now is that roads that are supposed to be under the districts and the sub counties are being worked upon by the ministries. You find Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries constructing roads, you find the Ministry of Local Government constructing roads, you find the Ministry of Works and Transport constructing roads. Even primary school classrooms that are supposed to be constructed by the local governments are being managed by the Central Government.

The idea was that the local governments were supposed to do these activities themselves under the supervision of the ministries. This time, you find it is the ministries. Sometimes they say these projects are being financed by World Bank but they are still decentralised projects. In some cases, they will say that they have given this to the local governments and the local governments are supposed to get contractors. 

However, what actually happens on the ground is that the contracts are ring-fenced. They say that the local governments can contract but “they should pick the contractors from among the following…” -(Interjections)- Let me build on my point, I will give you time to give information later. 

They will say, “The local governments should pick out of the six contractors.” Therefore, they ring-fence the contractors. Most of these contractors, however, are related to these people. When they are carrying out their activities on the ground, they do not pay attention to –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Chairperson, Committee on Public Service and Local Government, why don’t you give this House a report to that effect because that is your docket?

MR ONZIMA: I was just submitting on that but we are coming up with a report – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you need to give a comprehensive report.

MR ONZIMA: Madam Speaker, we are going to give you that report. I was just giving information. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable minister, can we have – [Members rose] - Is it on local governments?

4.48
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu City): Madam Speaker, you know this issue of sending revenue collections from the local governments to the Central Government is something that has worked for about two years. Centralising local revenue at the centre is a new thing. Taking the funds from the centre back to the local governments for them to do their work is a big challenge. It is important you review that so that this collection does not come to the centre again. You make it very difficult for the local governments to operate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the Committee on Public Service and Local Government and Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) come up with a comprehensive report for Government to be able to see what to do. If it means reversing that decision, it should be based on documentary evidence.

Honourable minister, can you give us your final – Chairperson, Committee on Public Accounts Committee (Local Government), you are going to handle the thing, not so? 

4.50
MR MARTIN OJARA (Independent, Bardege-Layibi Division, Gulu City): Thank you. I just wanted to offer some clarification. About a month or two ago, there was a motion moved by the shadow Minister of Local Government urging the Government to reverse the decision to have locally collected revenue sent to the Consolidated Fund. This Parliament passed a resolution in support of that motion. It would be fair for the minister to tell us how far they have gone. It is important that the decision of this Parliament is respected. 

Secondly, at the end of every financial year – of course we know the financial year ends on 30 June 2021 - the local government entities are required to return unutilised money to the Treasury. I would like to know from the minister – because we know the financial year ends on 30 June but by 20th or even 15th of June every year, they are already disorganising local governments by switching off the system and harassing them. The local governments fail to perform. They then collect a lot of money and send it back to the Treasury. That is unfair. Therefore, the minister needs to clarify that. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, we have a team from Napak up there. I want to recognise the members in the public gallery. We have Mr Usher Uwere from the Workers Union, Mr John Okecho, Mr Musa Okello, Mr Moses Mauku, Mr Stephen Abima, Mr Joseph Mbabazi and Mr Moses Baleka. You are all most welcome. 

Honourable minister, can we conclude with this debate?

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to conclude by responding to the following issues raised by Members. 

Hon. Lillian Aber is concerned about when we shall avail money to the new administrative units. I wish to inform the House that in the Supplementary Schedule No.1, which is under consideration by the Budget Committee, we have provided Shs 29.2 billion to cater for the new administrative units. 

There is a concern on how much money we send to local governments vis-à-vis what we spend at the centre. Before I respond to this, I would like to inform the House that the budget of the local governments is being released 100 per cent. The budgets under local governments are both recurrent and development expenditures. 

The only challenge, which is there and which we are resolving, is this new development of requiring the engineering brigade of the UPDF to do contracts under the World Bank projects. We are still involved in negotiations with the World Bank to see how best we can actualise this new directive. That has caused some delays but I want to say that whereas the local governments may want to access all the money to do activities, also from the centre, the direct interventions have caused significant impact in the local governments where most of us come from. 

On why releases reach late, as I stated earlier, we release money by 10th of the month. After we have released, there is another step to take. First of all, there is a warrant and there are requirements that you must provide, including reports from the previous quarter etcetera. Most of the CAOs from the local governments take long to bring these reports. That is why their moneys sometimes take more than two weeks or a month to reach the account.

Hon. Odur asked whether we are going to make another work plan. The answer is, no. We implement the budget in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act. Whatever we are doing, like hon. Nandala-Mafabi stated earlier, is consistent with the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Opposition, you have heard it.

4.56
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a procedural matter in regard to Section 24(2) of the Public Finance Management Act. When you constitute that committee, its membership is for the consumption of the House. What ought to be convened or done in a closed session are those meetings that scrutinise the classified expenditure but not the membership.

Secondly, I expected the honourable minister to give credit where it is due. This statement –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just a minute. Let me read that section 24(2). It says: “A committee of Parliament, comprising of a chairperson of the Committee responsible for the Budget: a chairperson of the Committee responsible for Defence and Internal Affairs and another member appointed by the Speaker, shall scrutinise the classified expenditure budget in a closed session.”
I thought there was a continuation that talks about the names being brought to the House - anyway, you can continue but what I can tell you is that the committee is available.

MR NAMBESHE: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. The minister dismissed this statement as a mere piece of information. Honourable minister, you have not been fair to yourself because if the development expenditure constitutes 18 per cent of the half year releases, doesn’t it worry you? Doesn’t it raise grave concerns of how - in fact, this should be a wake-up call to you as a ministry to lay strategies on how to fast-track the absorption of these funds because most of it meant for development budget are mobilised through loans. Even Parliament does not know the performance of most of these loans.

What we end up with is lack of absorption; there is very poor absorption of funds. Most of the funds meant for development expenditure –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Nambeshe, how do you absorb what you do not have?

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, I suppose these funds have been allocated –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why hon. Nandala-Mafabi asked us to look at what has been collected. How much have you collected? You have been having a problem of COVID-19 and the economy is not doing well. It is not that the money is not absorbed - the money is not there. Why don’t you learn to speak the truth to your country?

MR NAMBESHE: In fact, Madam Speaker, you have even aided me to remember – and I would like the minister to explain –(Laughter)– how unspent balances are incorporated in the new budget. That is a gap and now, you go mute. You should explain to this House how these unspent balances are incorporated. That is one.

Question two, which I am concluding on anyway, is, he talked about gaps. He knows very well that the law mandates the ministry to make regulations but up to now, the minister has completely failed to commit himself to make regulations for classified expenditure. We would like him to tell this House why he has failed, up to now, to make regulations for classified expenditure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you conclude? Do you have regulations on classified expenditure?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, that is why I was seeking clarification because sometimes, when it comes to these matters, irrespective of which side of the House one falls, we must all benefit.

We have the Public Finance Management Act 2015, as amended, whose enactment, I got an opportunity to extensively participate in, together with hon. Nandala-Mafabi and others. Subsequent to the law, we made regulations. Each section in this law has got a corresponding regulation that operationalises it. 

In this regard, I refer him to section 24 – if hon. Kivumbi can confirm - on classified expenditure. When you pick a copy of our regulations, you will find a regulation that operationalises this. I am wondering which further information the honourable colleague would like me to provide. (Mr Nambeshe rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you, please, allow the minister to finish? What he is telling you is that section 24 has an enabling law.

MR MUSASIZI: The regulations are comprehensive enough to cover all aspects of public finance management in this country. 

Madam Speaker, I thought I had finished but hon. Nambeshe brought me back to this. The last point I would like to clarify in regard to his submission is that we need to differentiate between absorption and disbursement. You cannot absorb what you do not have.

If we have not released funds, the issue of low absorption cannot arise. You cannot spend what has not been disbursed to you. When the House approves a loan, that is one stage. There is another stage where the funders have to disburse money before it subsequently finds its way into our financial and budgeting system. So, these two must be clearly interpreted, if we are to squarely debate these matters of the budget, Madam Speaker. 

On the unspent balances, the law also provides that appropriation will expire at the end of the financial year, which is 30th June and opening a financial year starts on 1st July. Our budgeting system does not provide for carry forwards; we start afresh every financial year.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to help the minister. Under section 17 – that is expiry of appropriation – says: “Every appropriation by Parliament shall expire and cease to have any effect in the close of the financial year for each is made.”

A Vote which does not expend money that was appropriated to the Vote for the financial year shall, at the close of the financial year, repay the money to the Consolidated Fund. That means you refund.

And the same law says, “A Vote that repays money under sub-section (2) shall revise its work plan, annual work plan, procurement plan and recruitment plan to take into account the unexpended money and the minister responsible for the Vote shall submit, as part of the budget for the proceeding year, the revised work plan, procurement plan, to the minister.”

You see, what it means is that every Vote, which has repaid money to the Consolidated Fund should adjust its work plans to take care of that. If for example, you were constructing a building and the money came in the financial year - you have not paid and there is an outstanding certificate –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, that is understood. You have helped the minister.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So, he should pay me now. Madam Speaker, I wanted to make one comment before the minister comes in.

You are aware that the regulations are there. I want us not to put the end. How do you appoint the chairperson for the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) to chair classified? It is under the regulations. Therefore, which regulation did we use? It is there.

Madam Speaker, if the problem is regulations, maybe you need to amend them. Members should raise that. However, there are regulations to operationalise the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. 

Honourable minister, it is not an amendment. We removed the Public Finance and Accountability Act and brought the Public Finance Management Act. 

Madam Speaker, the conclusion is that this law is the best. Many countries have copied it and I would like to thank the Member who made it but the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is diluting it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

Mr musasizi: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Kivumbi for igniting this debate. This is a debate I enjoy most as a Member of Parliament for Rubanda County East. 

I also thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for helping me –(Interjections) – I am making a speech, please. 

The Deputy Speaker: When you start giggling that it has not been answered – If you do not know accounting, you do not know –(Laughter). If you are a historian, then you are a historian. What we are discussing here now – hon. Kivumbi’s report – is not a report for any ordinary person; it is a report of substance. We are talking about the budgeting process; how the expenditure and income of the country is spent. Let us not just giggle around that it is not answered. 

Mr musasizi: Lastly, I would like to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for enhancing my submission today. 
Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving us an opportunity to go into the depth of this debate. 

Colleagues, let us work together to improve financial management in this country by respecting the good law we made in 2015. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Kivumbi, I thank you very much for being a watchdog; putting the checks and balances. You are doing a good job. By this report, you are making this side wake up; that we are watching you so you must do the right thing at the right time. Thank you for the report; we appreciate it.

You need always to come up with an alternative policy for whatever is being done on the other side to help Ugandans. 

petition on the unsatisfactory and unfair service delivery by various telecommunications service providers in Uganda

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mbaziira, just give us a summary of your petition.

5.09
Mr bashir kazibwe (NUP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am moving under Rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

The humble petition of the subscribers of all telecommunication companies doing business in Uganda, including MTN Uganda, Airtel Uganda, Star-DTV trading as StarTimes Uganda; Tangerine trading as Lycamobile; Smile Communications Uganda Limited; Roke Telecom; and Huawei Technologies. 

This petition shows and states as follows:

Your humble petitioners, inclusive of Hassan Mbuga, Allan Paul Musoke, Hanifa Nakaliisa, Phillip Mwesigwa and Juma Lubega, are Ugandan users and consumers of the services of the various telecommunication companies. 

These services include and are not limited to the following: making phone calls, data and online communication, mobile money transfer transactions, short message services (SMS) as well as watching digital terrestrial television channels. 

Despite continued pleas and public outcry from the general public to these service providers, there is an increased poor delivery of these services by the operators and this comes at the cost and expense of the end-user. 

Poor network by these providers has increasingly made it costly to your petitioners to make telephone calls. To worsen matters, dropped calls increase on this very burden. When a call is made, for example, and it is dropped due to poor networks - this is, of course, on the side of the service provider - the operator charges the user for the entire minute even when less has been used – (Interruption)

Mr odur: Madam Speaker, under Rule 30(4) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament that the Member is proceeding, he must confine himself to the parties to the petition and the signatures of the people alleging the material facts therein. He is not supposed to proceed and give the details here. 

Therefore, are we proceeding right when we allow him to present the details of the petition when the rules prohibit that?

The Deputy Speaker: Actually, the petition was delivered to the Speaker's office by the petitioners themselves. There are signatures. The Member was only requested to come and present because the Speaker cannot. Therefore, he is proceeding well. We have heard the matter that is being raised by the Member. We will refer that petition to the Committee on Information, and Communications Technology and National Guidance, which will report back in 45 days. 

Honourable members, allow me to vary the Order Paper and we look at the issue of Napak because the team wants to go back to Karamoja.

Mr kazibwe: Procedure, Madam Speaker. I did not make prayers for this very petition. Is it procedurally right for us to end like that? I presented a petition but did not make prayers for the same. 

The Deputy Speaker: Make the prayers and lay it on the Table.

Mr kazibwe: Now, therefore, your petitioners, in view of the above matters as laid on the Table in the petition, we are praying that Parliament investigates the quality of the services provided by the telecommunication companies to enable the subscribers realise the value for their money. Not even a single coin of a Ugandan user of these telecom services should be lost and exploited by the companies. 

I beg to submit. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you. It is referred to the Committee on ICT and report back in 45 days. 

Mr kazibwe: Here, I do lay it on the Table.

The Deputy Speaker: What is the title?

Mr kazibwe: It is “The petition to the Parliament of Uganda expressing the satisfaction in the service providers, especially, the telecommunication companies in Uganda.”

motion for a resolution of Parliament urging government to respond to the plight of Karamojong children enslaved in streets begging and child labour

5.15
Ms faith nakut (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to respond to the plight of Karamojong children enslaved in street begging and child labour moved under Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda.

“Whereas Article 34 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 recognises the rights of children that include protection of children from social or economic exploitation and employment likely to be hazardous or to interfere with their education or social development; 

AND WHEREAS the Trafficking in Persons Act, 2009 expressly prohibits trafficking in children and the Children's Act of 1996 and the Employment Act of 2006, prohibit employment of children below 12 years except in such light work as the minister may prescribe and employment of children below 14 years in hazardous labour conditions; 

AWARE that Uganda ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child, which obliges member states to ensure that in all our actions concerning children, the best interest of the child shall be a primary consideration and that the State should ensure, to the maximum extent possible, the survival and development of the child. Also, the International Labour Organisation, Convention Nos. 182 and 183 on elimination of worst forms of child labour and minimum age of employment respectively, which aim to protect children from the worst forms of child labour; 

COGNISANT of the fact that Uganda and indeed this Parliament, have committed themselves to the full implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals, including ending abuse, exploitation, trafficking and all forms of violence against children; 

FURTHER COGNISANT of the fact that Government has made interventions to address the plight of street children, including development of a Multi-sectoral Street Children Strategy, with a focus on Karamoja, which emphasises the withdrawal of children and their families from the streets, their integration, empowerment with livelihood skills and strengthening child protection mechanisms as well as the establishment of a coordination office for trafficking in persons under the Ministry of Internal Affairs with the National Task Force against trafficking in persons; 

CONCERNED that despite the interventions by Government and other actors, the number of Karimojong children on streets in urban centres has increased with approximately 686 out of 739 children from Napak District alone reported that the destination point was Kampala in 2020. A women empowerment and opportunity desk of Moroto Diocese survey indicates that a total of 871 children left their homes in specific areas in Napak District, of which, 561 were girls compared to 310 boys; 

FURTHER CONCERNED that these children are exposed to various forms of abuse and exploitation including forced labour, slavery, street begging, street hawking, commercial sexual exploitation, physical assaults and poor living conditions for those that are lucky to find accommodation; moreover, in a bid to clean up the city, law enforcement agencies round up children on the street and wrongly charge them; 

NOTING that these children find themselves on the streets and other exploitative conditions due to various circumstances that still persist, for example, poverty, food insecurity, lack of economic opportunities, trafficking, demand for labour, lack of family support, maltreatment, domestic violence, sexual abuse and obligations on children to contribute to the family livelihood; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that:

    1. Government strengthens collaboration with local authorities in Karamoja region and urban centres to ensure that there are coordinated efforts in rescuing the children following proper procedure. 

    2. Government addresses push-factors as many of the children are victims of trafficking and other forms of violence.

    3. That Government revises the street children strategy to ensure that it also focuses on supporting child victims of trafficking that end up on the streets or in other exploitative conditions. 

    4. That Government prosecutes all perpetrators involved in aiding, abetting and procurement of children for purposes of trafficking, forced labour and slavery. 

    5. That the Ministry of Internal Affairs effectively trains law enforcement officers in implementation of the Trafficking in Persons Act, 2009. 

    6. That we strengthen cross-border relationships to identify victims; do joint investigations and collaborations within the East African communities to take care of the children that find themselves in Nairobi.” 

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Faith Nakut. Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by hon. Gilbert Olanya, hon. Aisha Kabanda, hon. Teddy Nambooze, hon. Mapenduzi, hon. Florence of UWOPA, hon. Tom Bright of Terego, hon. Juliet Achayo, hon. Aber and everybody else. Would you like to speak to your motion? 

MS NAKUT: Yes, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Also seconded by hon. Aogon and hon. Muwuma. I have seen you, do not worry. 

MS NAKUT: Thank you, colleagues, for supporting the motion seeking for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to respond to the plight of Karimojong children who are enslaved in street begging and child labour. 

Madam Speaker, the issue of Karimojong street children is not new to you and to all of us. Due to the nature of the activities on the streets, particularly begging around traffic lights and other busy intersections, these children are highly visible, clearly living in extreme poverty and are highly vulnerable. 

The public perception of these children is informed by an understanding of the drivers of poverty in Karamoja, as well as consideration of these children's humanitarian plight. As a consequence, attitudes towards these children range from great sympathy to outright hostility; some people are hostile to these children. 

While there have been efforts to respond to the plight of Ugandan girls in the Middle East and other parts, evidence suggests that little has been done to prioritise the internal trafficking of children from Karamoja, including those forced into begging and child labour. Nearly all victims of this domestic and child trafficking are from Napak. I, therefore, thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to table this motion on behalf of the people who I represent in the house. 

The migration to the streets has not left anybody. There are children of Chairmen LC 1s and councillors who have also found themselves on the street. 

There are a number of drivers; things that have forced these children to the streets but I will stick to two for now. One of them is perpetual scarcity of basic goods and services. You might be aware that the people of Karamoja rely heavily on livestock farming and small crops; they also do small crop farming. 

Every time there is a missed season or when there is an outbreak of Foot and Mouth Disease, you will see the streets full; it becomes economic directly. Hence, you will find children moving to the streets to survive. 

The other factor is insecurity and that is the reason why people have been asking why Napak and not other districts. Insecurity is the easiest way to empty Karamoja. It is on record that the first immigrants from Napak, which was Bokora County then, left in 1978/1979 when there was war that led to the break-in at the Moroto Barracks’ armoury. Our brothers got into the armoury, helped themselves with the guns and decided to unleash it on the Bokora community; that was the first exit.

Fortunately, the people who exited then did not go to beg. They went to look for work in other parts, including in Bunyoro. The unfortunate bit is that they remained in touch with their homes. Therefore, when the concept of going to beg became lucrative, there was an easy link because we already had our people living in other towns such as Kampala. So, it was an easy link and that is why it is Napak and not any other district of this country.

Unfortunately, the insecurity level in Karamoja has risen again. Last night, a number of people did not sleep in their homes; they slept in schools and hospital compounds. Therefore, when people sleep in schools regularly, it frustrates efforts of resettlement. We will see the streets getting full with children and adults.

The state of Karamoja children in Kampala and Nairobi is alarming. Here in Kampala, our children are bundled up in small units, each paying rent fees of Shs 1,000 per night for space for sleeping in a room accommodating more than 30 children. They are bundled up because the landlord wants to make more money.

Therefore, these children are under the obligation to beg in order to find money for renting and to give the “boss” (the person who brought them to the city to beg). Isn’t this slavery in our time and under our watch? I have no idea how these children, who were bundled up in one unit, even survived COVID-19.

Because of the booming business of renting space here in Kampala, the landlords have had to interest themselves in the areas where these children come from. They now coordinate with parents and middlemen to ferry children in the bus because the bigger the number of children you have in your house, the more rent revenue. That is what our children are going through here in Kampala, even today.

Furthermore, for some of the children – especially girls who have found themselves in the streets of Nairobi – there is a report that some of them have lost their body organs. 

There is a girl from Lorikitai Parish in Lokopo Subcounty in Napak District, who found her way to Nairobi. On the fateful day, she was allegedly given a drink and the next time she woke up, she was in a hospital. She was discharged but no one explained what happened. Later, she realised there was a wound on her body. She came back to Napak and got sick, was taken to the hospital and they found out that she had lost one of her kidneys. The girl cannot be traced; she fled the family forever.

Madam Speaker, I acknowledge the efforts so far made by the Government to rescue our children. The 10th Parliament appropriated Shs 3.4 billion and, of that money, about Shs 1 billion was released to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Of the Shs 1 billion, only Shs 38 million was sent to Napak District for surveillance, Shs 200 million went to FUFA. I do not know where the other money went.

There have been attempts to repatriate children back home but they have failed. There have been some efforts by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. We have Koblin Centre, a holding home for children returned from the streets. However, some children are returned, unaccompanied, at the age of five or even less. So, they struggle to explain their ordeals and even struggle to tell their true identify. This makes it difficult to resettle these children.

Koblin Centre holds these children for a maximum of one week and they are in a hurry to release them to the community. These children are released to the same community that sent them away. So, they are rejected and they find themselves back to the street. 

The older girls, who are 14 years and above, are trained at Koblin Centre for four months - there is a success story. After that training, they are released to join the community. Unfortunately, they are released without any start-up kit or package. So, they struggle to find capital to fit in the community or to survive. Those girls have found themselves back on the streets of Nairobi, looking for a living even if we skill them.

Madam Speaker, there is an issue of surveillance. We have Napak Police Station that has made some efforts to intercept traffickers and children being moved from one area to another whenever the bus passes on that highway. From Iriri Police Post, they are doing commendable job. However, there are many other exit routes in Napak; Karamoja is open, they can pass anywhere to access wherever they want to go and those other areas are not attended to.

As a district, Napak receives Shs 4.5 million per year for the entire social protection interventions. This money is received quarterly, meaning it is Shs 1.1 million per quarter and when you divide it into 14 administrative units, it comes to Shs 80,000 per quarter. If this can handle gender-based violence, domestic violence, issues of the elderly, how much would be available for surveillance of the children?

Sometimes, we see traffic police in Kampala standing one metre away from the children, who are being subjected to slavery but they have nothing to do. It has become a new normal and nobody seems to know what to do. Nobody seems to care.

In 2019, the media was awash with news of our children being sold in the markets in Katakwi - children on sale. It made news for some time and it ended in the news. When did we accept this as the new normal? This is broad-day slavery of our children, under our watch.

We are saying that we can rescue the Ugandans who are enslaved in the Arab world and the other countries but we cannot rescue the ones who are enslaved in Uganda, who have to rent space every night and who cannot make decisions for themselves.

Madam Speaker, these children are victims of this level of violence, yet, we are treating them as criminals. When we decide to bundle them up and throw them in trucks, we are treating them as criminals, yet they are victims.

Napak District has attempted to draft a by-law to punish the parents who willingly give away these children or the people abetting this kind of work. Unfortunately, this by-law has taken more than a year in the office of the Solicitor-General. Their willingness to take action on these particular children seems to be slow.

If we do not take any action and we watch it the way we have been watching – it started with Napak but, now, it is a Karamoja thing. A study report that I will lay on the Table indicates that there are children from five other districts in Karamoja, and if we continue treating it as a Karamoja thing, it will one time extend to your districts as well. There is nothing special about children from Karamoja that the children in the rest of the country do not go through. 

Therefore, if we care about children, we will respond to this domestic trafficking, first by having these criminals apprehended. Fortunately, they are known. Even the landlords are known. The people connecting – the transporters of these children are also known. Even the parents who give away the children are known.

Madam Speaker, I kindly request you to support this motion so that we can come up with an everlasting solution to the plight of our children, who, involuntarily have found themselves enslaved. This will help us put a stop to the business where our children sold out as goods; an end to the business of enslaving our children.

I request you allow me to lay a report from Moroto Catholic Diocese. This report informed the motion. The report is titled, “Insights on the Karimojong Children Crisis, Napak District.” Thank you and I beg to move.

5.37
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Faith Nakut, Woman MP, Napak District for moving this motion. 

Busia District, being a gateway to Kenya, has witnessed a lot of acts of child trafficking. Many times, internal affairs officers and teams come to receive Karimojong children previously trafficked to Nairobi through Busia and Malaba. 

I stand to second this motion because truly, Napak has suffered a lot. When you do research, Uganda is the first country in Africa with the highest number of cases on child trafficking and it is the second in the whole world next to India, Karamoja Sub-Region being the hardest hit place in the whole of Uganda. 

When you visit Nairobi, you will realise that almost 80 per cent of the children in Westlands and Garisa, who are sold there, come from Napak District. 

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In his maiden session presiding over the House, the Rt Hon. Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah guided the House – and you, Madam Speaker have been eloquent on this matter,- that every time we make reference to statistics that are supposed to help us plan, we should give the relevant citation. 

My honourable colleague, I am passionate and I fully support the motion. However, as a scholar and somebody that tries to be guided by the leaders of this House to make the relevant citations, I do not know whether it is procedurally right for us to sit here, getting statistics that have not been cited in terms of source. 

What is the source of these statistics? Are we procedurally right to have these statistics part of our record of Parliament without the relevant citations? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Katusabe. The mover of the motion had already given the statistics on the plight of the children from Napak; she had given her figures. He is only giving a qualitative analysis of what he sees. He may not have to repeat what she said. 

The fact is 871 children leave Napak District, of which 561 are girls and 310 boys. Where they end up is the question. That is why the border person is saying that they see so many children cross over. 

He may not have the capacity to count how many have crossed or come back because it is an illegal activity. If it was a legal activity, one would go to the reports and see that these are the numbers that have crossed. But because it is an illegal activity, let us know – remember in the 10th Parliament, we rescued some children who were being taken to Nairobi. And those children were from Karamoja. That is what the mover of the motion is saying. This time round, she is only being specific to her district, Napak. 

We need to take this seriously. When you move from here to Clock Tower, you may find over 100 of them; it is a serious matter. 

Meanwhile, welcome back to the House. I am happy you stood up to make us know that you are around. (Laughter)

MR KATUSABE: Thank you. My only problem is the source. We are here for a specific time and there are people who will come after us. I am interested in the source of the information and that is normal. Is it from the Ministry of Gender or UBOS or UDHS? I am interested specifically. Is it from the national council for population? What is the source of the information? That is very important.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was laid on the Table. The source is available here. It was from the diocese, a very reputable organisation and so much respected in the region; the source is there. It can be referred to in future when we are out of this House. 

MR MACHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I was still in Primary one at Busia Integrated Primary School, we had a volunteer teacher called Rampelhestelskin. He made me fail P.2 because he used to speak English that I could not understand at all. (Laughter) I, therefore, do not know what my colleague has just said. (Laughter) 

Anyway, going back to the motion; almost 7,000 to 12,000 girl children sold in Kenya are from Karamoja Sub-Region. We believe this exploitation is modern slavery. 

I would like to agree with the mover of the motion that we need bilateral collaboration to solve this problem. As I speak, children are sold, not only in Westlands, not only in Gikomba Markets of Kenya and not only in Garisa, but even in Somalia. The children who are sold in Garisa, the fatty girls are sold majorly for their organs. The slim ones are sold to work as suicide bombers and this has been proved. 

I appreciate Minister Peace Mutuuzo who has been an advocate. That is why I think the issue of child trafficking should be solved politically. Hon. Peace Mutuuzo has always been a mouthpiece for the children of Karamoja and Uganda at large.

Secondly, since I am saying we should solve this problem politically, I request the Head of State, my beloved President, that the Minister of Karamoja Affairs should be appointed from people of Karamoja because while we are discussing this very important subject, there is no minister. I am not being regional or tribal but – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Macho, the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development (Children Affairs) is here. I do not know; maybe because she is not a kid that is why you have not been able to see her. 

Secondly, you cannot say that the Minister of Karamoja Affairs should be a Karimojong; Uganda is for all of us. Actually, the next Minister of Karamoja Affairs is going to be you. (Laughter)

MR MACHO: Thank you for your guidance, Madam Speaker. I want to assure the ministers here that their jobs are secure. I was just talking about the Karamojong politics.

As I summarise, I believe these children are always trafficked because of the issue of livelihood in Karamoja. Government should have a special strategic plan to solve this problem. Government should also involve the parents of these children. That is why we need a special programme for parenting of the Karamojong people so that they have a mindset to know their values and responsibilities as parents. 

As the mover of the motion said, truly the Napak District Child Protection Ordinance that has sat at the Solicitor-General’s office should be worked upon as quickly as possible. We believe this law will help our people to solve the problem of human trafficking because it is a cartel. Why we say it is a cartel is because every day and every month, children from Karamoja are being brought back to Busia and Malaba to be taken back to Napak but it has never stopped. It means trafficking is still going on.

Lastly, I request the Government to interest itself in this so that these people who are carrying out child trafficking are named and shamed. We have organisations like Willow International Uganda that have done a lot of research and even found out these people carrying out human trafficking. 

I therefore support this motion strongly by saying that if we protect a child of Uganda, we are protecting our next generation. Uganda will be a stronger country and again, regain the name as the “Pearl of Africa”. I therefore move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Macho. 

5.49
MR JOHN BOSCO NGOYA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to second this motion. The issue of street children has been there for a while and I am glad that hon. Atkins Katusabe has asked for reference. Mary Sundal in 2007 produced a book and she has been staying with this community of street children here in Katwe. “Nowhere to Go: Karimojong Displacement and Forced Resettlement” is the title of the book. 

The United States State Department has also been able to do a lot of research on trafficking in persons. You can also look at that research. Gackle Wesley Joel et al (2007) also did research on the same. So, you can still be able to help our brother, hon. Macho, if you want to get the statistics and references. 

The street children phenomenon has been there for the last 15 years or more. We are talking about a bomb blast in the last two weeks. This bomb blast in Karamoja has been there for 15 years and many children have died in the process. Some have been returned and they got lost in the process. We are talking about that. We are giving a face to that.

Many a time as you are coming to Parliament, you see those people out there begging; they are looking at us. That is the future of Karamoja and Uganda. 

What we have done is to trivialise this problem to make it look like a Karamoja issue. In fact, we have worsened it by calling it a Napak issue. These children are Ugandans; they are not Karamojong alone and they are not Napak children. They are Ugandans. (Applause)

That is why I appeal to you to look at them while they gesture at you asking for an answer and a future. It is a future of a whole lot of 15-year children who have actually been born on the street. This is a whole generation. 

We have about three sub-counties that have been affected in Napak: Lopei, Lokopo and Matany. They are getting emptied into the street. Just imagine for 15 years or 20 years, you have actually gotten people getting out - I am not worried about voters but I am worried about them. That is why I want us to look at this particular issue with more concern and care because Karamoja is in Uganda. Napak is in Uganda. 

There are many push factors and I think hon. Faith Nakut has already alluded to them. This particular problem started around 2001 when there was disarmament and many children were actually running away –(Member timed out.)

Madam Speaker, this is a very touching issue for me. I do not know if you could allow me just one more minute. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is touching for everybody. 

MR NGOYA: We are basically saying there are a lot of push factors and insecurity is one of them. Insecurity has actually assumed worst situations. Many people do not stay in their villages and they have started moving to the urban centres. If you are talking about people coming to the streets, they come from the urban centres because they cannot afford staying in a very insecure environment in the villages. 

As I have already said, lots of credible information is out there but it is for us to be able to hold this particular problem with both hands. Not only the Karamoja issue, not only Napak issue but for all of us. 

It is my prayer, therefore, that we actually educate these children. There should be a deliberate attempt to educate these children for them to be able to get some kind of future. 

The second appeal and prayer is that we start thinking about how to reintegrate but also resettle them in a manner that we are not dropping them like rubbish. We should think about how to deliberately deal with them when they return home. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. John Bosco Ngoya. That takes us to the issue of the by-law, which you need to make a follow-up on, honourable minister. In the by-law, we should be able to apprehend the irresponsible parents. It takes us back to parenting. The other day, we were talking about parenting of the girl-child. You find somebody, as she said, selling a child for Shs 5,000 with the knowledge of parents.

When we talk about these children who are enslaved on the streets of Kampala and elsewhere, they are not only Karamoja children. They are from all over. Just because you can notice some of them speaking Karamojong does not mean they are all from Karamoja. You will find some of them are from your constituencies too. 

So, it is upon you and I to make sure that these children get out of the streets. You are proud of Uganda, the “Pearl of Africa” but the first impression visitors get in Uganda are these kids in the street. Remember the first impression is lasting. You see the children begging a tourist; are the begging children the tourism they have come for? 

I remind this House that in the last Parliament, one of the Bills that lapsed was moved by hon. Herbert Ariko and seconded by hon. Kunihira. I possibly urge Government or a private Member to bring this Bill on anti-slavery. This Bill would help us to have an enabling law –(Applause) – that would help us on what to do in case there is slavery, how do we apprehend these people and would help the House and the country, not only Napak, as we talk about this motion.

5.56
MS ASINANSI NYAKATO (FDC, Woman Representative, Hoima City): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion for the Woman MP for Napak. As Parliament, we need to interest ourselves in knowing who these child traffickers are.

Madam Speaker, it is painful as a mother, most times when we are driving around Kampala, on the streets of Wandegeya, Kamwokya, Katwe and even right now at Jinja road, seeing young girls and children of five or four years old begging. Little do you know – You even see babies seated begging– babies of not more than a year begging for what to eat and money.

Most of these young girls have been impregnated on the streets. They have been able to produce fatherless children and some of them have been infected with HIV/AIDS. When some of these children are told to go back to their homes, they will automatically refuse because they will be rejected by the communities where they came from.

Madam Speaker, as I stand to support this motion, I pray that security, together with local leaders in the different localities where these children come from, start on a community search for every family. If at all we know that such and such a family has ten children, where are the rest – where have they gone? 

If we find that these parents are some of those people who have been selling out children, let them be convicted and charged because this is real selling of human lives? How does a parent or guardian sell off a child’s life, then again take a pregnancy of producing more children? For nine months, you bear the pregnancy, only to sell them to traffickers.

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I support the motion but also call upon the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to come out strongly and convict the culprits. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a very important motion that touches everybody. You find people giving their children to be carried by these people to start begging - a small child begging. I really think we must know who these people who go and collect these children are. (Applause)

We must know the motive and identify the parents who are culprits in selling the children. This motion is supported by everybody in this House. 

My suggestion is for us to end this and have children out of the streets, we send this motion to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, which will study it and be able to identify for us the people who are selling the children. 

There is a motion.

5.59
MR MOHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Following your wise guidance and deliberations of honourable members, I follow suit and move a motion that this House refers this matter to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for exhaustive investigation and report back to the House. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? [HON. MEMBERS: Yes.]

6.00
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I second this motion. I interfaced with the parents, as a Minister of State for Health then, in Napak when they had the Hepatitis E outbreak. 

When we were in the field, that was one of the issues that we brought to the attention of the people and the LCs. Do you know what they told us, together with the Woman MP? They told us, “You people are living very well in Kampala, enjoying yourselves there. When we send our children there, they send us money and therefore, we cannot stop this.”

So, Madam Speaker, I support this motion that we send this matter to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, so that they get to the bottom of this. When we talked about the motion on the girl-child, remember this trafficking was one of the issues that was brought up by the Member of Parliament who seconded my motion. 

There must be a timeframe. This is the amendment that I wanted to make. I support that motion that we give the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. I think 30 days would be ideal, so that they can report back with their report. Otherwise, if it is –(Interjection) – No, no, no. Thirty days is adequate; let us be reasonable. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, we will give the committee two weeks. If they have not finished, they will come back and seek an extension. (Applause) This is a very crucial matter. These children are even an insecurity threat to us because when they come and beg from you and you do not give them, they hit your car because they are frustrated.

I put the question that we send this to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development with an amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS AISHA KABANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I pray that you allow me to propose an amendment to the mother motion –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have already approved the motion. Hon. Aisha Kabanda, there is a procedure of raising that again. What you can do is to take your issue to the committee and it will be adopted and reported to the House.

MS AISHA KABANDA: Madam Speaker, my amendment was on the prayers that had been proposed by the honourable member in the original motion – (Interruption) 

MS ALUM: Madam Speaker, hon. Aisha Kabanda is my friend and member, but I feel constrained when the motion has already been passed for her to keep on insisting.

I am rising on a procedural issue on whether it is procedurally right for the honourable member to keep on arguing and yet she has been given leeway to go to the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kabanda, what you are raising is very important. You will take it to the committee and it will be considered at that level.

There is a motion merely seeking leave.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Muwuma, do you have something to say?

MR MUWUMA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was rising on an issue of procedure, whereby the – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your MP is asking me if I can allow you to go. Please, thank you for coming - come again. Greet the people of Napak. Thank you.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, the procedural matter I was raising was in lieu of the minister in charge of children and youth affairs because she laboured to come and say something about the motion - I think it would be courteous of this House to give her a chance. Remember that one of the Members was even alluding to the fact that there was no minister from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. So, I would -

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable member, with due respect, the minister will go to the committee and present her issues. I also defended the minister that she was here. She did not labour, really, to do that. She came to do her legislative duty of being in the House. 

Honourable minister, you will go to the committee and present it but thank you for being there for children. Hon. Peace, you have been praised by a “smuggler”. (Laughter) Thank you. 

6.06
Ms sarah opendi (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member's Bill entitled, “The Surrogacy and Assisted Reproductive Technology, Act 2021”.

“Whereas Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda;

And whereas Rule 121 of the Rules of Procedure grants every Member the right to move a Private Member’s Bill;

Further whereas Article 33 of the constitutional imperative of Government is to ensure that the welfare of women and men is enhanced to enable them realise their full potential;

Aware that as per the Ministry of Health, one in every four couples in the country is affected by infertility, while 10 to 15 per cent of couples in the country cannot have children as a result of infertility caused by various issues such as the sexually-transmitted infections, overconsumption of alcohol, poor nutrition, environmental factors and diabetes;

Appreciating that the biotechnological advancements of surrogacy and fertility treatment in the practice of medicine have made it possible that notwithstanding absence of malformation of the womb, recurrent pregnancy loss or repealed IVF (In Vitro Fertilisation), implantation failures, any woman who desires to enjoy her age-old maternal and God-given heritage of childbearing can do so;

Concerned that there are many IVF clinics operating in the country currently and providing fertility care and surrogacy services but with no regulation or Government supervision to guarantee the quality of service and promote ethical medical conduct;

NOTING that the practice of surrogacy and fertility treatment has attendant legal, ethical and social issues that include attribution of maternity between a biological and uterine mother in case of mistaken implantation, execution and implementation of gestational agreements and myriad of many other complications, including death resulting from gestational surrogacy; 

FURTHER NOTING that the practice of surrogacy and fertility treatment is now on the rise in Uganda, yet surrogacy remains unregulated notwithstanding the importance to set up laws that will regulate the practice for the better protection of the parties involved and for the orderly development of this medical field and to offer legal and state-sanctioned reprieve to couples that are battling with infertility problems; 

CONSIDERING that the lacuna in this practice of the medical field calls for the enactment of a regulatory framework to guide the orderly advancement of the medical field and Uganda as a society;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that; 
This House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill, for an Act entitled, “The Surrogacy and Assisted Reproductive Technology Bill, 2021,” a draft of which is hereto attached and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for the first reading.”

I beg to move.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you, hon. Sarah. Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Dr Bukenya, hon. Atkins, hon. Dorcus Acen, hon. Mary, hon. Santa, hon. Aol and Dr Asiimwe. Would you love to speak to your motion? Two minutes.

Ms opendi: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The freedom to procreate or not is a fundamental right of every adult above 18 years. Therefore, those facing challenges need to be assisted. 

We all know that in Uganda, it was Prof. Edward Tamale Ssali who started the fertility clinic for over 15 years now. Since then, there are many clinics offering fertility services in the country. 

Secondly, there are busy mothers and women with challenges with their wombs that have gone into surrogacy. Surrogacy is when you hire another person or somebody to carry your baby for you. This service is being offered currently. There are also donors who donate their sperms and eggs to the various fertility clinics. 

We are also aware that the Government constructed a specialised Women’s Hospital at Mulago. It is supposed to be offering – it is actually the first public fertility clinic in Sub-Saharan Africa. Most of these clinics are private. The Government constructed this hospital that is supposed to be offering this service. 

Also, while the World Health Organisation (WHO) recognises infertility as a disease – it is a public health issue that requires support – there is completely no law in place to regulate the services that are being offered here. This is the reason - because of time, I have stopped there. It is for that, that we need to have a law in place to regulate not only the donors but also these fertility doctors or physicians who are engaged in this. We do not want to hear that somebody has gone to a fertility clinic to seek services and tomorrow, we find somebody resembling hon. Musasizi on the streets and when they do a DNA, it is his son, yet the sperm was used without his permission. (Laughter)

Therefore, there is need for regulation so that the donors and even the children born out of this are protected. I beg to submit.

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Member, when that hospital was operationalised, were you not a state minister for health?

Ms opendi: Madam Speaker, it is the reason I am here. I did champion the legislation. When I left, for the last three years, nothing has come out and this is why I am moving a Private Member’s Bill. 

The Deputy Speaker: No, I just wanted to know whether it is operating without any regulation or enabling law.

Ms opendi: Madam Speaker, they have trained experts. Allow me to say that certain times, there are movers in a ministry. There are people who are passionate about things and they move things. Allow me to say that this fertility clinic, specifically, is not functioning as it should be. Despite the Government training the experts in India and other countries, they are actually not being fully utilised. 

6.14
DR MICHAEL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion as has been presented by the hon. Sarah Opendi. She has talked about the extent of the problem; that 15 per cent of Ugandan couples are suffering from infertility. Contrary to what people think, 50 per cent are men – (Interruption)

MR ODUR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and thank you my brother, Dr Bukenya. The procedural matter I would like to raise is whether it would not be proper for Dr Bukenya to first declare his interest before seconding this matter. I am aware that he is one of the doctors with clinics that are already performing the subject matter we are discussing here.  

So, wouldn’t it be fair that the honourable member first declares his interests for us to benefit from his experience of running such? Thank you.  

DR BUKENYA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my brother – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Allow me to make a ruling on that, hon. Dr Bukenya. One of the ways of marketing yourself is speaking about what you do. If he owns a clinic, he is basically marketing what he does. Maybe he is the right person to give us information on what happens. 

DR BUKENYA: Thank you for the wise ruling, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can still tell us if you own a clinic. 

DR BUKENYA: I am a trained gynaecologist/obstetrician with special training in fertility treatment. Before I came here, I used to do fertility treatment. Even a few of my colleagues consult me here so I am still practicing. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you also treat him? 

DR BUKENYA: I am not allowed to disclose whether he is one of my patients but what I was saying is that contrary to what is known, 50 per cent of the problem is contributed to by men. However, there is a need for treatment; we all agree on that. 

Like my sister has said, there are more than 10 private fertility treatment centres in the country. Government is yet to operationalise its unit. We have provided money this financial year but there is no regulation, despite the fact that this is a profession that involves third parties, like she has mentioned; a sperm donor, an egg donor and a surrogate mother. It needs to be regulated to avoid problems since it involves third parties. 

Finally, I would like to ask Members to support the private member who has offered to assist the Government to come up with a law to regulate this practise. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, as a traditionalist, I am seeking clarification. I think it is important to understand. I have tried to understand the motion and I know where we are coming from because there are people who face challenges; they are married but cannot have a child and so, they should definitely be facilitated. 

However, when I reflect on the Bible, I realise that the Book of Genesis Chapter 1:26 says, “…then God said, let us make man in our image…” When you borrow an egg or a sperm to produce a child, I hope at the end of the day we will not end up with difficulties where some people will fail to know whose child they are carrying.

I know that Abraham tried using the house help to give him a child called Ishmael but he caused problems to Sarah, your namesake. I just want to be clarified and comforted that when such a thing comes, you will not bring us a storm that we will not be able to handle. There will be religious and traditional crises. For example, if you come and tell me you are going to hire a womb, I will say if you marry a woman and she has not given birth in one or two years, traditionally you should marry another to produce a child. That is my tradition. 

I come from Lango and that is what we do. If the woman you have married has failed to give you a child, you marry another so that, that child produced through a second wife is named as if they are your children and you have to take care of them. 

I am hoping that this new technology you are bringing will not clash with my traditional interests. That is the clarification I am seeking. I am just ignorant because of my background. I come from a different age group and I also have to protect the interests of my group. Can I get that clarification so that I do not wreck my understanding of what production is all about? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know these laws are not cast in stone. The motion before us is merely to grant the honourable member leave. We are not going to debate the substance of the motion. What the Imat is raising is very crucial, especially with her age; the culture, the religion and age. 

Anyhow, that will come when we are debating the motion. For now, what the Member is asking for is leave. 

I now put the question that the Member be granted leave to introduce a private members’ Bill entitled, “The Surrogacy and Assisted Technology Bill.”

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sarah Opendi, go and prepare your Bill and bring it to the House. I adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 6.22 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 10 November 2021 at 2.00 p.m.)

