Wednesday, 7 November 2012

Parliament met at 3.03 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.
 
PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are welcome to this sitting. We have substantial work to finish. If you look at the Order Paper, there is laying of papers and item No.4 is on the petition report which we received yesterday. I am going to defer the debate on that to tomorrow; Members will have internalised the report in order to be able to competently and efficiently carryout that debate. 

So, for today, we will deal with the laying of papers if the persons responsible for them are here and then thereafter, we should go to item No.5

Honourable members and Members of the front bench, there was this issue that kept coming up; the issue of the OIC elections that are due on the 30th of this month and we are supposed, as a country, to have paid our subscription so that our candidate can benefit from this. This issue has been raised many times by Members in this House and the dates are drawing close. The information we have is that it has not yet been paid. Could that be rectified so that our candidate can also take a shot at that office which has fallen vacant and we are aspiring to fill it? We have our own hon. Isaac Isanga Musumba as a candidate for that office. So, Finance needs to act quickly so that this matter can be dealt with.

LAYING OF PAPERS

I. GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES (JUNE – DECEMBER 2011)

3.07
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES (Mr Odonga Otto): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the Government Assurances from June to December 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

II. GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES (FEBRUARY – MAY 2012)

3.08
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES (Mr Odonga Otto): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the assurances made by ministers entitled, “The Government Assurances, February to May 2012.” I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

III. LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011

3.08
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Jack Sabiiti): Mr Speaker, allow me to lay the Local Government Accounts papers as per rule 30 as follows: 

Moyo Town Council Accounts for the year ended 30th June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: Koboko Town Council Accounts for the Financial Year ended 30th June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: Nebbi Town Council Accounts for the Year ended 30th June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: I beg to lay Paidha Town Council Accounts For The Year Ended 30th June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: Semuto Town Council Accounts for the Year ended 30th June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: Nakaseke Town Council Accounts for the Year ended 30th June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: Kampala City Council, Rubaga Division Accounts for the Year ended 30th June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: Bulegeni Town Council Accounts for the Year ended 30th June 2011. I beg to lay.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: Bugongi Town Council Accounts for the Year ended 30th June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that Bugongo?

MR SABIITI: No, this is Bugongi. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that what is on the Order Paper?

MR SABIITI: I am reading – Bugongi Town Council. This is what it is.  Unless there is another town council which I do not know. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: Patongo Town Council Accounts for the Year ended 30th June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: Kanungu Town Council Accounts for the Year ended 30th June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: Bukwo Town Council Accounts for the Year ended 30th June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: Kiryandongo Town Council Accounts for the Year ended 30th June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: Katwe Kabatoro Town Council Accounts for the Year ended 30th June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: Mpigi District Local Government Accounts for the Year ended 30th June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: Gomba District Local Government Accounts for the Year ended 30th June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: Kamwenge District Local Government Accounts for the Year ended 30th June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: Bundibugyo District Local Government Accounts for the Year ended 30th June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: Rubirizi District Local Government Accounts for the Year ended 30th June 2011. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: Kween District Local Government Accounts for the Year Ended 30th June 2011. I beg to lay.
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.


MR SABIITI: Buhweju District Local Government Accounts for the Year ended 30th June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: Bushenyi District Local Government Accounts for the Year ended 30th June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: Mbale District Local Government Accounts for the Year ended 30th June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: Oyam District Local Government Accounts for the Year ended 30th June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: Kabale District Local Government Accounts for the Year ended 30th June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: Isingiro District Local Government Accounts for the Year ended 30th June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you, honourable chairperson, for that work.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

MR CHAMASWET: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is now a year since I moved a motion for Contempt of Parliament, and I am moving under a rule of procedure - rule 163(1)(a) where the Chairman of the Committee of Rules and Privileges is supposed to have reported back to the House on the deliberations of the same ruling that was supposed to be given to us on Contempt of Parliament. 

Right now, the Prime Minister has been in existence for over one year and yet we are going to discuss the oil Bills today, matters that had brought contention before. I thought it would be prudent for us to have heard from the Chairman of the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges on the issues pertaining to Contempt of Parliament before we proceed. In fact, it would not be good if the chairman of the same committee sits on the same report for a duration of one year without reporting to the House, and in fact, we have been waiting for it for all this period of time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, that the motion for contempt was debated last year and concluded and referred to the Committee of Rules, Discipline and Privileges of this House. The Bill that is in issue was introduced this year in February; it has gone to a committee necessary to handle it, which is the Committee on Natural Resources. There have been discussions on this Bill and none of those issues that arose on the issue of contempt ever came, whether in the meetings, in the House here, in the preliminary debates on the principles of the Bill or even in the interactions in the harmonisation meetings that were conducted.

Therefore, the two issues have no conflict in them. It does not prohibit us from handling the Bill. Those issues will make directions to the chairperson to make this matter available to Parliament as soon as we are ready to receive it. I have not seen a copy of the report yet because normally when a report is ready, we only get to know when it is submitted to the Clerk and to the Speaker’s Office. That is when Parliament gets to know that a particular report is ready. As I speak now, we have not received copies, so, I am not so sure whether that report is ready. So, we can proceed with this.

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. Sometime back, we instituted a committee to probe the energy sector. Before we get the report, Umeme fronted shares under the arrangement of IPO and many Ugandans are now buying shares in Umeme, yet we know that under the PPP arrangement, Government is also responsible partially in as far as Umeme is concerned. We have never received any statement from the line minister to own up what is going on in Umeme. Remember what happened to shares in National Insurance Corporation, National Housing and others.

The procedural matter is, is it in order for the minister not to come up with a statement owning up the process of Umeme that the government is under this arrangement and in any case if anything goes wrong, the government is squarely to blame and Ugandans should really put the blame on Government. So, I would request that the honourable minister owns up what is going on in Umeme. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which minister, honourable member?

MR SSEBAGGALA: Natural Resources Committee. They are probing the energy sector -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which minister?

MR SSEBAGALA: Minister of Energy, because the ad hoc committee -Umeme is under investigation, and the report is yet to be presented. But now shares have been floated, and Ugandans are buying shares, and at a certain time, they will tell them that we did not know what was going on. Why shouldn’t Umeme wait until our probe committee presents all the mess on Umeme?

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, I have an abridged prospectus from Umeme right here over the same matter and reading it, inevitably, you can see that we have only part of the information. You cannot ably tell who actually owns Umeme.

I do not know if the Minister of Finance is here to reassure the country and the House that indeed, Umeme met the conditions as outlined in indebtedness of over Shs 120 billion. Are they collecting money for payment of debts and loans? Does Umeme have assets in this country? Is it viable? Has Umeme paid taxes to URA? (Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, honourable member for giving way. The information I want to give you honourable colleagues is that actually, Umeme in issuing this IPO, is issuing it on the basis of a concession it obtained from Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Limited, a company owned by Government and we would like to know whether actually Government through UEDCL had sanctioned the trading on the stock market of its own assets through a third party called Umeme.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Just two pieces of information. One, I met Gen. Salim Saleh and he was challenging Parliament. I met him at an international airport and he was saying, “Why is Parliament not acting on the Saleh report” because the Salim Saleh report on energy called for the cancellation of the contract of Umeme in Uganda, and here is a company going ahead to collect money from unsuspecting members of the society.

Secondly, I am privy to information, Mr Speaker. The committee probing the sector led by hon. Oboth has made all effort to table the committee report to Parliament, but they have been frustrated by the Clerk. Yes, I am speaking with authority.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which Clerk?

MR ODONGA OTTO: The clerk to the committee. Actually, the chairman is here. He can speak for himself to the extent that yesterday he was even moving with a flash disk if we could do anything to help him table his report before Parliament.

So, the information I am putting is to the effect that even the Umeme staff have infiltrated Parliament through the Clerk to frustrate this report coming before Parliament.

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, the information is very relevant. May I add that I am aware, as well as other Members that Umeme has been reporting losses over the years, when did it become a profitable venture to qualify for listing? It has operational losses of over 30 percent, way above the regional average of 15 percent. We have very serious questions for which we are demanding answers from -(Members rose on information_)- I will take the information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, can I rule on the procedure? You are beginning to debate this matter even before I have ruled on the procedural point raised. I do not think you are handling the procedure properly, please wind up. (Members rose on guidance_) You cannot seek guidance and then get information. Let us respect the rules please.

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, the issue of Umeme’s indebtedness is very serious. In their prospectus they are indicating that they have loans, they are not saying when the loans are going to be paid off and I cannot tell that after receiving money from the public to pay their loans, they will disappear like most other companies have fleeced this country.

I think Parliament has the mandate to expressly demand from the Ministry of Finance for an explanation. Otherwise, we shall treat these purchases as just an invitation to treat and, therefore, demand that public funds are returned unless clear explanation is given. Thank you. (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was a procedural point raised, let me rule on it. First of all, I received a copy of the report of the Committee on Energy, the one chaired by the honourable member for West Budama South, Hon. Jacob Oboth. I received it in my office yesterday.

Secondly, the procedural point raised by the honourable member for Kawempe would not be properly addressed to the Minister of Energy. The reason is this; the criteria for listing and all those things whether the company is allowed to go public is contained in an Act passed by this House called the Capital Markets Authority Act.

That is where the key requirements are provided for; what should be done for a company to qualify to be listed. The Capital Markets Authority is actually under the Ministry of Finance not the Ministry of Energy. So, the question could be directed to the Ministry of Finance as supervising the Capital Markets Authority because they would be the ones who would have looked at these people’s papers, verified that they have conformed with the law - the law which they supervise - that is the CMA law and, therefore, qualify for issuing an IPO which they did, and I am informed it is ending today.

So, that question should be dealt with by the Ministry of Finance. Honourable minister this is an issue of the IPO issued by Umeme by the Capital Markets Authority. Do you have any information on whether they qualify to deal with these issues or not? If you are in a position to, you could guide the House on what procedures have been taken this far.

MS NABILA: The issue is a matter of national importance. Members of the public are getting urgent messages; all customers of Umeme, including we here, are being harassed. It is actually a point of harassment. They are telling us that it is urgent today, and it is the last day for us to have an opportunity. We are, therefore, concerned that something will hurriedly be done. Ugandans taxpayers’ money taken out of their pockets willingly, but in a manner we do not understand. People are asking us, “Honourable member, do you know anything about this? Can we invest?”  Yet, we do not have information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is a law, the Capital Markets Authority Act, and there is an institution called the Capital Markets Authority, which is mandated to carry out these investigations, and when they are satisfied that they have conformed with the law, that is when they issue the IPOs and things like that.

So, the presumption ordinarily would be that those procedures were followed, and that is why I am saying if the minister has any information, he could give it to us. If he does not have, I would ask you to get this information and come when you have this information and inform this House about what transpired in this issue of Umeme going public and taking money from members of the public, and that will have to be tomorrow. That does not go to the Ministry of Finance. So, can you guide us on how you are going to handle this so that we know what is going on.

3.31
THE STATE MINISTER FOR FINANCE (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. The IPO has been given out and it is a public document. As of now, our understanding is that the offer will be ending today, but we undertake to give formal information to the House next week.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, make it tomorrow at 2 o’clock.  Consult, come and inform the House about what is happening. So, please, honourable minister, tomorrow come with the information that this House requires, because you need just to consult with the CMA.

MR NGANDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Odonga Otto has raised very grave issues that a clerk of Parliament is frustrating the tabling of a report from a committee that was given that assignment by this Parliament, and that money has been received. That is the first point of procedure that I wanted to raise.

The second point is about Parliament investigating a sector or a department where Government is a party, but before or when the report of Parliament is ready and I assume making very serious recommendations, the company under investigations runs very quickly to float shares.

Mr Speaker, the point of procedure I am raising is; one,  whether we may not need to institute investigations into a clerk of Parliament frustrating tabling of a report, and whether Government can go ahead to allow a private company that it signed with a concession to float shares as Parliament is investigating very serious matters in that company. Because even before you invite the Minister of Finance or Energy to explain, would that be procedurally right - that as you investigate a company, Government allows it to float shares? Umeme simply runs a concession and actually, the business they are doing is on the public assets leased to them by Government. Can they behave as if nothing has happened when the legislature is investigating? Assuming we recommend for termination in the report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, Umeme Limited is a company; whether it has a concession with Government or with any agencies, that is another matter, but it is a company. As a company it can make its application for going public.

Therefore, it is up to the institution that is required to do this due diligence to confirm that they are okay, they will not be a risk to the public, and then they go ahead to authorise them to issue the IPO. That is the procedure. So, whether it has issues or not - that is why I am saying that it would be more structured if we allowed the minister to come back and inform us what the position of CMA is on this subject, because they are the institution that is mandated by an Act of Parliament to deal with this. 

So, the minister, I have given you a directive to go to pick this information and come back with it tomorrow so that we have information on what actually transpired. Can we leave it at this please! That is the only way we can deal with it. 

But on the issue of the clerk – the clerk to the committee, not the clerk to Parliament – frustrating the committee that will be dealt with at an appropriate time. But the person who made these statements should be ready to volunteer this information further when the matter is raised.

But we also have in the House the chairman of the committee. I received a report yesterday and we are scheduling it for debate next week, so that we can finish this issue in a systematic way.

Mr Chairman, are you ready? These issues being raised, are they true?

3.36
Mr Jacob Oboth (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you Mr Speaker, I can understand and appreciate the sentiments in the House about the delay to bring the report. I would not want to speculate on what are the causes. There are some genuine causes, we shall list them down, but we are ready with the report that even if we are given the opportunity now, we would be ready to lay it before the House.

But we would be grateful, as you guided, if we are given next week. The report seemingly is hot; there have been claims that we are sitting on it and we are saying the report is too hot to be sat on. We want to lay it and we would be glad if you gave us that opportunity to do so.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That report will be handled next week at the beginning of business. 

In the VIP gallery we have lecturers of Kyambogo University led by Prof. Isaiah Ndiege, the Vice-Chancellor of Kyambogo University. They are here to listen to the debate on the report of Kyambogo University. This debate will take place tomorrow. Please join me in welcoming them.

In the public gallery this afternoon, we also have pupils and teachers of Kampala Kings Nursery and Primary School which is represented by hon. Moses Kasibante and the honourable Nabila Nagayi Ssempala. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House; please join me in welcoming them. 

We also have pupils and teachers of Mengo Primary School represented by hon. Kasibante and hon. Nabila Ssempala. They have also come to observe the proceedings of the House; please join me in welcoming them.

3.39
BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION BILL), 2012

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker I would like to seek your guidance on a matter of great concern. It is on record that I am one of the presenters of the minority report.  It is also on record that sometime back, the proposers of various amendments converged in Munyonyo and attempted to agree on a common line. I would have expected that before we proceed with the process of identifying commonalities, a general report on how far we had gone should have been given by the committee chairperson so that it is clear on how to proceed. 

On top of that, it is on record that I was the presenter of the amendments related to the Constitution about the same two Bills. I got the opportunity to recite them here generally, but in Munyonyo, I was given the opportunity to state exactly what I had wanted to be impacted constitutionally.

I got the impression that nearly all my constitutional amendments were brought on board. People cheered and gave me the support. 

So, I am seeking your guidance on how we can proceed so that the fears of John Ken-Lukyamuzi, “the man”, can be contained.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We are at committee stage and those clauses are going to be handled one by one, and that is when the issue of whether there is agreement or not will come. If it should be that whatever you had proposed will be suggested by the chairperson, that it is the one, then we will proceed with that.

I think we are at a stage where we will take out clause by clause, where we look at all clauses which you would like to amend.  That would be the best way to proceed because the way the chairman should have reported would have been when Parliament was sitting and that would have required debate when we are already at committee stage. Members would have had discussions on the report and approved the report. All those are now technicalities.

The purpose was, go and agree, so that when you come to committee stage, you point out where there is agreement and then we proceed with the Bill as it is. So, can we proceed that way? And we had finished with clause 1. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, much obliged about that advice. While I take that advice, the point I am talking about is seemingly different from the framework set before us. I raised constitutional concerns about the two Bills; how do they come in? At what stage shall we handle them?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But those constitutional issues were discussed at the level of the principles of the Bill. You raised those issues on the principles of the Bill. The House agreed that the principles of the Bill were agreeable; they took a vote and we are now at committee stage.

MR WERIKHE: I wish to report that when we adjourned three weeks ago, with your guidance, as a committee and indeed, with all other colleagues from the House, we had discussions in Munyonyo where my colleague hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi made again same presentations like he had done here, regarding constitutional amendments. 

I remember all members observed and agreed that these were valid observations and proposed amendments. However, that was a wrong forum for us to consider constitutional amendments. He was unanimously advised to refer this constitutional amendment to an appropriate committee of Parliament. That was the position even when we were in Munyonyo. However, some of his proposals, actually in conjunction with hon. Theodore Ssekikubo’s, have been taken on. For example, on the definition of petroleum, he insisted that we lift it as enshrined in the Constitution, into the Bill. To us, that was pertinent and so we accepted.

But like I said, constitutional amendments are beyond the mandate of the Committee on Natural Resources and that was the advice that was endorsed by all Members who were in Munyonyo.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, I was one of the members who attended the Munyonyo meeting; we had about two days. I recall that hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi raised this issue. As said, he said that the Constitution and the proposed Bill were not very clear on the definition of the term “petroleum.” We also realised that the Constitution had also fallen short of recognising certain minerals or liquid-related components. But we agreed that it would be taken care of within the definition of the term “petroleum” in the Bill.

Secondly, he also brought out the question of Article 22 on the right to life. He argued that the right to life extends to the right to liveliness or livelihood. He argued that whatever affects livelihood in the context of environmental concerns - for example, if you are drilling oil and there is a spillover into the water or destroys the ecological systems - must be taken care of in the Constitution. He gave examples from Norway. But like it has been said, that was not the right forum. So, we agreed that we cater for those amendments in other Acts of Parliament such as the NEMA Act, Water Act and so on, to take care of any environmental threats. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Can we now proceed? We had done with clause 1.

Clause 2

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, under Clause 2, we had reached paragraph (g) regarding parliamentary participation in the oil and gas sector. This is an issue we discussed, and we came to the conclusion that if parliamentary participation is provided for in specific clauses within the Bill, there was no need to have a general provision talking about parliamentary participation because this would entail Parliament getting involved in everything right from exploration to development and production.

So, we agreed and harmonised on this and, therefore, we accepted the minister’s stand over this matter; that we expunge parliamentary participation from the report.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 2 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR WERIKHE: On clause 3, I would like to report that the committee moved to substitute for the definition of the term “block” with the following: “’Block’ means acreage which maybe stratically delineated as provided for in Schedule III of this Act and includes part of a block as constituted.”

The justification is to widen the definition to accommodate situations of licensing by stratagraphic delineation. 

We have also proposed the insertion of the following new definitions: 

“(i) ‘delivery point’ means the point at which petroleum passes through the inset valves of the pipeline, vessel, vehicle, craft, terminal or refinery in Uganda,” to appear immediately after the definition of ‘currency points’. 

Justification: to provide for the most appropriate definition of the term, which also caters for refinery situations. 

(ii) Immediately after the definition of the word “discovery” to read as follows: “‘Discovery areas’ mean the block or blocks in an exploration area comprising the geological features as outlined by the relevant geological or geo-physical data in which a discovery is located.” 

Justification:  To define vital aspects of the petroleum value chain as applied in the Bill.”

I do not know - but we have some other proposed amendments from other colleagues and I think this is the time they should come in. I do not know if I should go through and then they come in. This would be the appropriate time for some of the colleagues who wanted to define petroleum. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, but can I first put a question to the amendment on the definition of ‘block’ if that is agreeable? 

I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put a question to the second amendment as proposed by the chairperson of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, yes we still have amendments on this Clause 3, but I now need your guidance.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, allow me move an amendment on Clause 3 in respect of the definition of the term “petroleum” to read as it is defined in the Constitution thus: “Petroleum means: a) any naturally occurring hydrocarbon, whether in gaseous, liquid or solid state; b) Any naturally occurring mixture of hydrocarbons, whether in gaseous, liquid or solid state or; c) any naturally occurring mixture of one or more hydrocarbons, whether in a gaseous, liquid or solid state and any other substances and includes any petroleum as defined by paragraphs (a), (b) or this paragraph, that has been returned to a natural reservoir, but does not include coal, shale or any substance that may be extracted from coal or shale.”

The justification for that amendment is to have a consistent definition with what is provided for in our Constitution of the Republic of Uganda as amended.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that agreed to, Mr Chairman?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, Mr Chairman, we harmonised that and the committee concurs.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question to the amendment to insert the definition of the term “petroleum” in this clause. 

I put the question that this amendment be upheld on the definition of petroleum.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.)

MR KAFABUSA: Mr Chairman, the definition is lifted from the Constitution.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We have already voted on that.

MR WERIKHE: Okay, may I now request that we proceed to substitute the proposal (iii) on the definition of ‘petroleum activity’ to mean the following: “‘petroleum activity’ means planning, preparation, installation or execution of activities related to petroleum including reconnaissance, exploration, development, production, transportation, storage, cessation of activities or decommissioning of facilities. 

Justification: To give a clearer delineation between midstream petroleum operations and upstream activities. 

(c) In the definition of ‘reconnaissance’, delete the word ‘and’ appearing immediately after the word ‘geo-physical’ and insert the word ‘and drilling of shallow boreholes for calibration’ immediately after the word ‘survey.’ 

Justification: To include drilling of shallow boreholes in the definition of reconnaissance to allow seismic surveys to be carried out optimally. 

(d) Immediately after the definition of ‘reservoir - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, let me first deal with petroleum activities. 

I put the question to the amended definition of ‘petroleum activities’ proposed by the chairman.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification because the definition concurs with my earlier definition. But I have one problem; knowing that under Article 2 of the Constitution - the Constitution is supreme - and any law which is inconsistent with it is null and void. How do we deal with this situation where you have a definition of petroleum in the appropriate law, which is different from the definition of the same product in the Constitution? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is what they have harmonised. They have lifted what is in the Constitution and brought it here. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Then that means that my concerns have been catered for and I am very happy. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Congratulations. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Have we finished with petroleum activity? 

MR WERIKHE: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Now, we are going to reconnaissance? 

MR NIWAGABA: Yes, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There was an amendment proposed, would you like to speak on that or I deal with this first - on reconnaissance.

MR NIWAGABA: I thought that we had gone through it.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I take a vote on it? I put the question to the definition of ‘reconnaissance’ proposed by the Chair. 

(Question put, and agreed to.)

MR NIWAGABA: An amendment before the definition of the word to define the term ‘waste’ immediately before oil. It should be defined thus, "waste" includes any matter prescribed to be waste and any matter whether liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive which is discharged, emitted or released to the environment in such a volume, composition or a manner as to cause an alteration of the environment.”

The justification for this is that we are dealing with a sector that will generate a lot of waste and we would want the definition of ‘waste’ to be in line with what is in the National Environment Act for purposes of consistency and certainty.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that the position, Mr Chairman? Can I put a question to the definition of ‘waste’? 
 
MR WERIKHE: Yes, Mr Chairman. That was harmonised. However, it should have come chronologically. 
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, it does not matter. They will do the insertions later. 

MR WERIKHE: It is okay because it is a definition lifted from the NEMA Act.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the definition of ‘waste’ as proposed to be inserted in the Bill. 

(Question put, and agreed to.)

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, immediately after the definition of ‘reservoir’, insert the following new definition: “‘Transportation’ means the movement of petroleum from the well-head to the delivery point.” 

Justification: To differentiate the transportation under the Upstream Bill, which involves transportation by pipeline up to the delivery point, from the transportation under the Midstream Bill, which is referred to as transmission. 
  
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is there any issue on transportation? 

I put the question to this amendment that ‘transportation’ be defined in the Bill under clause 3.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

PROF. KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, I would like to move an amendment to define the word ‘operator’ on page 13. In the Bill it is defined as: “”any entity executing on behalf of a licensee.” But I would like it to read as follows: ‘Operator means a licensee or any person who is executing the day–to-day management of petroleum activities.’

The justification is that the original text leaves out the licensee, who can actually be an operator in his or her own right. And my amendment includes the licensee or any person on behalf of the licensee. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think it is because a licensee is defined separately. There is a definition of a licensee at the top. Have you seen it?  

PROF. KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, my amendment defines the ‘operator’ to include a licensee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: A licensee is not an operator according to this definition. 

PROF. KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, when you go to page 14 and look at petroleum activities even as it is when amended, the activities which have been defined are the activities for a licensee. Then why wouldn’t an operator include a licensee or any other person executing these activities? 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, we have not really looked at the amendment by hon. Kasirivu. I pray that we be given a chance to look at that proposal and then we get back here.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No; I think there is just a slight difference which we can harmonise because a licensee is defined at the top to mean: “a person to whom a licence is granted under this Act.” And a licensee can nominate an operator. So, they want to make a distinction between a licensee and an operator by definition of the law. So, a licensee is not an operator. But the person acting on behalf of a licensee is the operator, according to the definition. 

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Chairman, I tend to agree with hon. Kasirivu. It is only that his amendment falls short of recognising the person working on behalf of the licensee. It is not possible to say that the operator is the person executing on behalf of the licensee, who is the agent, and then you leave out the principle. So, his amendment was bringing in the principle, but you need to go further and say, ‘... means a licensee or any person acting on behalf of the licensee.’ I totally agree with him, but we need to change it. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I agree with you because a licensee is specifically defined. The worry of hon. Kasirivu is that a licensee can be an operator in his or her own right; granted. But if that happens, then that licensee applies for a license to be an operator and will still fall within the definition of operator because that will mean that, that licensee becomes an entity executing on behalf of the licensee.

So, you do not need to broaden the definition of ‘operator’ the way it is. That is my understanding; because ‘licensee’ is specifically defined and if a licensee wants, somehow, in one way or another, to do some operation as hon. Kasirivu is proposing, then that licensee, in my view, can apply for a license to be an operator in a different capacity.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Attorney-General, I would want you to clarify to me how a licensee, who applies for an operator’s license, now becomes an operator on behalf of himself. Maybe if we could look at it and say, “‘operator’ means and includes…” so that we capture what hon. Kasirivu wants. 

A licensee may be running and managing day-to-day petroleum activities on his own because the definition of ‘operator’ here precludes the licensee of managing petroleum activities on a day-to-day basis. But we could say, ‘includes’ as long as this licensee is managing his own petroleum activities on a day-to-day basis.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What I see from this is like defining a father and a son. The licensee is like the father; the operator is like the son. The operator is taking the authority from the licensee. So, there are two distinct animals here being given two different names. You can only be an operator if you are authorised by a licensee to carry on petroleum activities on that licensee’s behalf. Is it clear now?

MS NYAKIKONGORO: I remember when we were discussing this, we said that the operator works under the licensee and it is the whole responsibility of the licensee to ensure that that operator works within the mandate of whatever he is supposed to do rather than having different operators and being managed at different entities by different people.

So, it would be the licensee to take care of whatever the operator is doing so that he works within the law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, that is how I have understood it also.

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, while an operator can be a licensee or a nominee, not all licensees can be operators. So, I think we have to be very careful. While an operator can be  a licensee or a nominee, not all licensees are operators. So, when you say an operator means a licensee, you are indicating that all licensees must be operators.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I concur with my colleague hon. Nyakikongoro that while we were in the committee and looking at this clause, the difficulty we had was, in case of any damage, who is held accountable? Because in circumstances where it is not clear who takes responsibility of any environmental damage, in terms of who the licensee is and the operator is, operating separately, and yet not clearly defined to be independent or not, then it would be difficult to determine who is to be held responsible for damaging the environment in the process of carrying out these activities.

Therefore –(Interruption)

MR PETER LOKERIS: Mr Chairman, the activities in the oil industry are delineated - they are separate. At the time of exploration, a company can get a license and become a licensee immediately. The obligations that company undertakes at that stage including payment of damages, in case they default or in case there is environmental damage, are also specified at that stage.

As you proceed, after exploration and making discoveries, this licensee can say, “I want to become an operator of these fields” in preparation for production. When you want to become an operator, you also apply for an operator’s license that enables you to become another entity.

Anything to do with obligations of the environment and everything else is also described at that stage. So, at every stage, you must give obligations and responsibilities. That is how these activities are handled. So, you cannot say that if somebody is an operator and messes up then the licensee comes to rectify. It should be the operator because what you are supposed to do at that stage is already defined.

Further, a licensee may not become an operator. Somebody else who has the necessary capital can come and become an operator because the investment is larger.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think the honourable minister has taken us away from what we were looking at. The issue is here: “‘Operator’ means an entity executing the day-to-day management of petroleum activities on behalf of the licensee.” This is the distinction for these two purposes.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. If you go to clause 57, it clearly stipulates the conditions under which a licensee has to operate. This operator is just a small sub-entity under a licensee; like a sub-contractor. So, I do not see why we should give prominence to this operator. We have already looked at the operator and the conditions for a licensee include that any damage that is caused by the operator falls under the licensee.

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, can I make a proposal in the definition of an operator to take care of his concerns so that the context of a licensee is brought into perspective. If we define it as, “‘operator’ means any entity executing, on behalf of a licensee, the day-to-day management of petroleum activities and may be the licensee” this takes care of his concerns rather than starting with, “An operator means a licensee” because there are some licensees who are not operators.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We need to address ourselves to clause 83 of the Bill, more particularly clause 83(4); and if the minister reads that part, she may have a different opinion from what she is proposing. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, I put the question?

MS BEATRICE ANYWAR ATIM: Mr Chairman, we have been swayed a bit, away from what hon. Kasirivu was trying to propose and it was interesting that the minister is amending her own Bill, and yet as we had agreed together with the committee chairperson, to cater for the operator to be under the licensee so that he can be accountable for any fault that might occur in the process of operations. 

So, to amend the Bill and derail us from what hon. Kasirivu is trying to propose might bring us to look at this issue from two different angles. I propose that hon. Kasirivu’s proposal should be harmonised with what we had earlier, as a committee agreed upon, that the operator should fall under the licensee for accountability purposes. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, would you like to look at clause 83(1); it says, “There shall be appointed for each petroleum exploration license or petroleum production license an operator nominated by the licensee and approved by the minister.” You need to harmonise these issues.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I beg that we interface and harmonise this. We can stand over it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, clause 3 is stood over.  

Clause 4

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, for clause 4, the committee proposes to substitute in sub-clause (1) for the words ‘take into account and give effect’ the words ‘complied with’ so that it reads as follows: “A licensee and also a person who exercises or performs functions, duties, powers or activities under this Act in relation to petroleum activities shall comply with the environmental principles prescribed by the National Environment Act and other applicable laws.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Should I now put the question to the amendment proposed by the Chair?

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, before you put the question, there is something we want to add – not only to add a word after ‘environmental principles’ - ‘and safeguards’. The phrase ‘principles and safeguards.’ The justification is that compliance should not only be in the principles, but also the safeguards under the necessary environmental laws.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You mean safeguards are not part of principles? So, how do we proceed here? The amendment here is to replace the phrase ‘take into account and give effect’ with the words ‘complied with’. Well, since we have not yet voted on the clause, you can still bring it. 

MR NIWAGABA: I just wanted to insert the word ‘safeguards’ after ‘principles’ – “environmental principles and safeguards”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you have an issue with the word “safeguards”, honourable minister?

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, we haven’t looked at it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The words “environmental principles and safeguards”? 

MRS MULONI: No, the word “principles”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: “Principles” is in your Bill; he is only seeking to add the phrase “principles and safeguards”.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I think it does no harm. We can proceed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question to the proposed amendment in clause 4(1).

(Question put and agreed to.)

PROF. KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, I want to move an amendment immediately after sub-clause (1), to insert another sub-clause to read, “The licensee shall ensure that the management of production, transportation, storage, treatment and disposal of waste arising out of petroleum activities is carried out in accordance with environmental principles prescribed under the NEMA Act and other applicable laws.”  I beg to move.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, the committee concedes on that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you want to include the word ‘safeguards’ so that we do not have to come back to it again?

MR WERIKHE: But here we are saying “and other applicable laws”. Where do you put it?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is the “principles” in your amendment not the one you intend to put there? This is the “principal of a school”; so we need to change it. 

Okay, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I beg to propose that in clause 4(2), we substitute in sub-clause (2) for words “...by different entities and in any case different from those described in sub-clause (1)” with “...by the licensee in accordance with the environmental principles and safeguards prescribed under the National Environment Act and other applicable laws.” This is because under sub-clause (2) you can see “by different entities” which means that in that case we delete it from sub-clause (2). But if we allowed the amendment by hon. Kasirivu to stand and we also leave this without deleting it, it means we shall be restoring it under sub-clause (2). So, we have to move by deleting this and retaining it as I have recast it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: By deleting what particular phrase?

MR SSEKIKUBO: By deleting the words, “…by different entities and in any case different from those described in sub-section (1).” (Interjections)

Mr Chairman, if I may, for clarification purposes, if we go by what hon. Kasirivu has proposed, it is in the same spirit; but if we leave sub-clause 2 as it is now, because it reads, “…the management of production, transportation, storage and treatment of waste arising out of petroleum activities shall be carried out by different entities in any case different from those described in sub-section (1).” And that is exactly what hon. Kasirivu’s amendment has moved to cure.

So, I would move that we do not leave it contained in our sub-clause (2). We delete it and my amendment conforms to what hon. Kasirivu has proposed and it is in tandem; to read, “…by the licensee in accordance with the environmental principles and safeguards prescribed under the National Environment Act.” It could appear a repetition, but if we do not cure it under sub-clause (2) then we shall be reinstating it.

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, I do not agree with what the honourable member is proposing. The meaning behind No.2, where a different entity carries out the work, is to ensure that the licensee or the operator who has generated this waste, a different entity carries out this work to ensure that it is thoroughly done. Otherwise, if we leave the licensee or the operator to deal with the waste, they may not be able to manage the waste in an effective manner. So, I do not agree.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I wanted to - because we had agreed anyway and that is why I never laboured to go for the principle behind this amendment.

In our justification we are saying waste management and disposal is one of the core activities in petroleum exploration, development and production, certainty of which must be ensured before embarking on petroleum activities. And two, the primary duty to manage waste is with the licensee, and this is consistent with the principle of polluter pay in the National Environment Act. 

In any case, waste management and disposal is one of the most expensive core processes in the entire chain of the petroleum exploration, development and production in the form of calcium cake sulphur mass waste. It is only the licensed companies with the necessary financial muscle, wealth of experience, the requisite technology to properly manage waste and the name or corporate profile to protect. Should you leave it to any company around, they shall not be able to manage this very expensive activity; because they have the name, they have the necessary technology and they even have the manpower. Let them be the one to cater for this activity.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. My problem with the amendment of my colleague is that there is no fundamental difference between the amendment we have adopted from hon. Kasirivu with this particular amendment. So, it will be a total repetition because when you look at what we have already approved with hon. Kasirivu, it also gives the responsibility to the licensee and mandatory, which says, “The licensee shall ensure that the management of production, transportation, storage, treatment and disposal of waste arising out of petroleum activities is carried out in accordance with environmental principles and safeguards.” 

It is being repeated here if we leave it the way he is suggesting. It will read the same that, “The management of production, transportation, storage and treatment of waste arising out of petroleum activities shall be carried out by the licensee in accordance with environment principles and safeguards prescribed under the National Environment Act.” So, I would rather that the two of you harmonise and we have one clause on this particular issue; but to make two of them will be being very clumsy in the way we are doing the drafting. 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. According to clause 2, which was moved by the minister it means that this company can delegate to transport or it can contract certain entities to handle this waste. Take an example in the Ministry of Health; if there is medicine which has expired, it does not necessarily mean it is the duty of the Ministry of Health, but it can contract some other company to transport that waste to be disposed of. So, by a company which is managing -(Interjections)– yes, it can decide that it contracts people to transport this waste under the regulations of a licensee. So, I would like to support the proposal that if the waste arising out of petroleum activities shall be carried out by different entities, the company can have a leeway in contracting other companies to transport this waste.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think in principle, my colleagues seem to agree, but we need to adopt a legislative language that is clear. Because, what are we legislating upon here? We are placing a duty, but we cannot place a duty in ambiguity. The principle of polluter pays should be our guiding principle. Let us place the obligation on a specific person called the licensee. You do not have to legislate as to whether someone can delegate, but for us, as far as the law is concerned, the obligation lies with the licensee. I will give an example. 

Under the Workers’ Compensation Act, if you sub-contract somebody and that person employs a person who is subsequently injured, the person defined as the employer is the one to pay compensation. But when you say other entities, which are not even defined then you have left the obligation hanging.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Learned Attorney-General, if you look at the adopted amendment from the honourable member from Bugangaizi, would there be any necessity to retain the existing two? 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I think there are two fundamental issues we need to think about and maybe, even stand over this –(Interjections)- first listen to me before you -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Proceed.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, the proposal by hon. Ssekikubo is to really put the duty as explained by hon. Sseggona in the sense that the duty should be on the licensee; but the minister responsible for energy seems to think otherwise; that the duty should be actually be on NEMA.

I know there has been a lot of debate –(Interruptions)- Yes, let us get it correct so that we either agree with it or not? That NEMA coordinates these other entities which are supposed to be in charge of the management, production, transportation, storage and treatment of waste arising out of petroleum activities under sub-clause 2 of clause 4. 

So, before we agree to the deletion, let us first agree to the principle that this duty is on the licensee or should be on NEMA –(Interjections)– and NEMA coordinates – I am speaking in good faith, and I am speaking in respect of what I am reading and in respect of what the Minister of Energy has just said, unless she agrees to abandon that other position. That is my position. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have adopted sub- clauses 1 and 2. Now the existing sub clause 2 would essentially become sub clause 3. The word, “management”, where it appears in sub clause 2 gives a different meaning because you have already used “management” in the amended sub clause 2. So, if you want to think of NEEMA; would “supervision” replacing management solve that problem? “The supervision of the production, transportation, storage and treatment of waste arising out of petroleum activities shall be carried out by different entities”; so that the responsibility is no longer with the licensee but somebody else who will see to it that the licensee is doing the right thing. If that was the intention as the learned Attorney-General has suggested.

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, the whole essence is that the licensee is held liable for the waste that is produced. But when it comes to managing the waste, to avoid conflict of interest and to ensure that a thorough job is done, the licensee then engages another party; a different entity licensed by NEMA to carryout waste management. 

If the same licensee who is producing the waste is left with managing the waste, there will be a conflict of interest; they will not do a thorough job. We would rather have them pay for waste management and a different entity licensed by NEMA carries out that function. That is the whole essence of this article.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us first clear this. Using the word “management” in both clauses would introduce confusion because you are also giving the responsibility to manage the production, transportation, storage, treatment and disposal to the licensee under the amended sub clause 2.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, we agreed with the sponsors of this amendment to remove the word “production” – that is why we took it under clause 1. Here we are now going to consider the transportation, storage and treatment of waste arising out of petroleum activities carried out by different entities. The issue here was to have the licensee still held liable for whatever happens, much as the waste will be transported and treated by different entities. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the waste will also be produced.

MR WERIKHE: Hon. Kasirivu, you are the sponsor of this proposal; could you please articulate what we agreed on so that we can resolve this issue?

MR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, I want to make a very clear recollection. We agreed that the responsibility of waste lies on the shoulders of the licensee. The minister was saying, “other entities”. But whatever entity you want to think of is doing delegated functions. And when you are delegated, the person who has delegated retains full responsibility. That is why we must bring in the licensee clearly here. 

We actually agreed that sub clause 2 in the Bill would be deleted –(Interjections)– because I will be moving another amendment in sub clause 4 to make the person contracted by the licensee to also be licenced and given some duties. 

MR KAKOOZA: According to what hon. Kasirivu is saying, I perceive that once you are involved in the production of oil, you have to manage the waste. But how do you manage the waste? Is the licensee going to get involved in transporting the waste? Suppose you do shoddy work, who is going to check you? This private work should be contracted in order to do a thorough job, rather than doing it yourself. 

Sub clause 2 states that you have to manage the waste. And how is waste management done; suppose the company does not do it; will production stop? And how will this waste be managed? It is better to have this waste management contracted to another company so that you can follow-up on what they are doing. That is what we mean when we say that there is conflict of interest. If I give you a license and you have to do that job, then you are going to become a judge in your own court. 

MS ODONG: Thank you, Mr Chairman. As far as I know, probably people do not know what takes place in oil activities. With the little experience I have and the few times I have visited the oil fields; digging the trenches and laying those pipes is contracted by the licensee. 

We cannot give one responsibility to two entities. That would be confusing ourselves and the oil companies. As far as I know, sub clause 2 already gives the responsibility of management, production, storage and transportation and treatment of waste to the licensee. It is upon the licensee to contract; we do not have to enshrine it within the law. They will definitely get contractors to carry out the transportation, disposal and all that. 

Concerning supervision, we already have NEMA doing the monitoring or supervisory role on waste and environmental issues. Probably what we should know about NEMA is that, in Nwoya District, there is an oil company which has dumped waste in the community and it is already bringing problems in the presence of NEMA. So, if we are to bring in other entities, who will supervise or ensure that those principles are followed?

So, I am in favour of deleting the original sub clause 2 – the one which has been proposed by doctor should replace the other sub clause 2 so that we remain with one entity. We should give responsibilities to only one entity, the licensee, instead of giving it to private persons. It is obvious that even Government functions are being contracted out without us saying that Government will contract ABC. 

MR OTADA: Mr Chairman, I actually share your fear with regard to this clause because saying, “The management of the production……” and then you go on to waste and other things, I think there is a bit of confusion there because as petroleum activities take place by whoever is undertaking that activity, waste is generated or produced. 

So, for you to say, “The management of the production……” and then you go on to transportation and whatever, I would suggest that we delete the word, “of the production” and we say, “The management, transportation, storage and treatment of waste arising out of petroleum activities shall be carried out by different entities and in any case, different from those described in sub-section 1.” I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

The justification is that we are separating the activities by the operator who is generating the waste, from the person who will take care of the waste that has been generated.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I have the Member from Kyankwanzi District.

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: I thank you. With due respect with what hon. Atwooki was proposing, first, why we are saying the management of production is that, while producing oil, we the owners of the oil must know that we have a company that is producing oil and when that company does not manage the production very well, you will have more waste which is not called for. It means that instead of having 10 barrels and, for example, a bit of waste, you will have fewer barrels because much of it will go into waste. So, we are also trying to tie the production so that this licensee does that actually, which is this. 

Then also, in lieu with the proposal by hon. Kasirivu. Honourable colleagues, I want us to also look at sub clauses 2, 3 and 4. While doing this, we were anticipating - because we would like as much as possible to integrate the principles of protecting the environment, but we could not get the National Environment Act and put everything here. But we wanted to make sure that some of the things are imported in here. But what happens? Anybody to do with management and disposal of waste must first of all be licensed by NEMA. [HON. MEMBERS: “By NEMA.”] Good.  

Now, when you consider the proposal of hon. Kasirivu, we have to be very cautious because it affects sub clauses 2 and 3; and this licensee – another thing we are looking at - while producing, they sometimes use chemicals which chemicals NEMA has to control. Even the controllers, who are the ministry and the authority, have to control the chemicals they use during production. Some of them may be hazardous. 

So, we are looking at it in such a way that when there is a shortfall and it has not been observed that some of the chemicals they used were hazardous, and you are using the same licensee to dispose and manage this waste, he may get a shortfall in trying to control his cost and the country will not benefit. 

That is why we are proposing that we must maintain NEMA to license, but the licensee must be responsible; that is why we are bringing in another intermediary; that is the person who will be contracted to dispose and manage waste, but must have a license from NEMA.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The Shadow Attorney-General.

MR KATUNTU: I thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think we should start with a head note, “Compliance with environmental principle.” I think that is s principle. Who should comply with the environmental principle? Let us agree on all the principles and then maybe our draftsmen can eventually coach it in the terms we have agreed upon. If we all agreed that the licensee should principally be held responsible for the compliance with the environmental principles, then we should be coached in Clause 4(1). 

And then, because we have already agreed that the licensee will not carry out this other activity of transportation, for example, storage and treatment, and he may sub-contract or contract –(Interjections)- okay he contracts to other entities [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] then the responsibility of compliance with the environmental principles applies to both the licensee and the people he has sub-contracted. [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”]

The beauty of NEMA is to make sure that both the licensee principally and the other entities comply with the environmental principles. If that is –(Interjections)- I think we have a problem here because NEMA’s mandate is not only created by this law. It is actually created by the principal Act that sets it up, and on anything to do with the environment, NEMA is responsible for its monitoring, supervision and control already.

So, if we agree to that, then we can have our technocrats to try and draft it in those terms. Otherwise, should we try to – we may find a problem of getting some –[MR NIWAGABA: “Can I give you some information?”]

MR NIWAGABA: The principle required by the minister is that “activities of transportation, storage and treatment of waste may be carried out by other entities.” [HON. MEMBER; “Not ‘may’.”] Now, when you look at clause 4(3), those entities must obtain a licence from NEMA. So, what we now require is to delete sub clause (2) in the Bill because of hon. Kasirivu’s amendment, but under sub clause (3), we re-word it in such a way that these other entities intended to do these activities are captured – that the licensee will do business but with the entity licensed by NEMA. [MR RUHUNDA: “Mr Chairman, there is-”] [MR SSEBAGALA: “Further clarification.”] 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Fort Portal and then Kawempe.

MR RUHUNDA: If you look at 4(8), the licensee for the relevant petroleum activity shall be responsible for the payment of costs to the entities referred to in sub-section (3) for the management of the production, transportation, storage and treatment of waste arising out of petroleum activities. So, this clearly binds the licensee. 

When you look at No.8, it enforces No.2. So, the argument here - I am interpreting it from a business point of view. The argument is that the monopoly of managing this petroleum resource should not just be left to only one company because these licensees’ capacity – of course no one can compete here in Uganda, and now we are trying to see that we tie everything to only one company. Then what will happen? We also have to bear in mind that within our country, we can have other local service providers who can be contracted by the licensee. But when this is not provided for within the law, it is going to be very difficult for us to benefit from our resource. 

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am a little bit confused. As we struggle to ensure that there is proper waste management, we must also remember that there are so many factories and industries that are operational; and indeed we know that in those companies, the responsibility of managing their waste is squarely on those companies. Now, when it comes to oil, we agree that it is a new product, but with waste products. If we try to separate – if we hand over – if our agreement as Government is with the licensee and then we go into other areas and say waste management should go to someone else, we are missing the point. 

Our agreement must be with the licensee and indeed we should spell out that they should do a, b, c, d, under the supervision of NEMA. Otherwise, if we are making another contract, then it means we are going to have another contract with another company, which is separate from the one we have licenced. So, let’s ensure that the one we have given a licence is the one put under pressure to ensure that waste management is a priority. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman and honourable members. What informed this amendment is that we are not re-inventing the wheel. We need to take cognisance of the experiences elsewhere. I can cite one. 

When there was an oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico - the Macondo incident - it was Shell that took responsibility. BP took that responsibility because it was the licensed firm. But when it happened in Nigeria - you colleagues know this - four firms have gone to The Hague because of such a law. In the US, the licensee takes responsibility and indeed that is why all the billions were spent to clean up. But here in Nigeria, as we deliberate here now, four farmers are in The Hague, on their own, taking Shell to the International Court of Justice. 

What am I saying honourable members? The moment you separate waste from oil - because these are the firms with a name to protect; with a financial muscle to handle waste and spillage; and even with technology. Even then colleagues, in some instances, when they measure and see that there are no underground water bodies, they can pump this waste two kilometres down; and they can even use it to push up oil. 

Now, for you to get companies that were registered yesterday to manage such a critical project; I know there are many businesses that want to handle this activity, but at the end of the day we are making a mistake. Let it remain the sole responsibility of the licensee because after the good oil is drilled, there is what they call residual oil; and then weaker companies will come in.

Colleagues, we are going to make a mistake. We should tie waste management to the licensee who will  be responsible on how to handle the waste. 

MR NAKABALE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to share some information with colleagues on four pertinent issues. First, beyond what we are discussing now, we have the element of local participation that we would wish to realise in the oil resource. 

Secondly, we should be mindful that whatever will come back to us in terms of oil revenue is going to be a factor that they will consider as costs involved in the management of the oil resource. 

Now, here we are trying to detain ourselves from allowing other entities and restricting it to only the licensee. [Mr Sebunya: “Procedure.”]

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please finish and then we will take the procedure.

MR NAKABALE: Thank you. I would agree with the minister’s view. However, I would like to concur with the Attorney-General that if we could stay this clause –(Interruption)

MR SEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We are in committee stage, but Members are continuing to debate and yet the main issue is the drafting. We have agreed with the principle. The problem is with drafting. Can we stay this point for some five minutes so that our technical people draft the idea that we want to put across. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I don’t think we have agreed on the principle. There are two issues. The one presented by the minister is different from the one being presented by the amendment. The difference is this: The minister wants the financial responsibility of managing waste and dealing with all those things, to rest with the licensee, but does not want the licensee to do the actual operation of the management of those wastes – listen, I am just stating for you the difference so that we can move forward. 

In other words, the minister is saying, if you allow the licensee to be the one to dispose of the waste, they will look for the most convenient way to do it. It might be hazardous. Let them pay for the disposal, but let somebody else handle the disposal, but the money for paying that person handling the disposal will come from the licensee. 

I am trying to zero down the issues. The question that we should resolve now is, does it make any sense for the licensee, under the cover of darkness, to be granted the authority to produce, transport, store and treat waste because we are giving the licensee full authority to do it? Or, should we let the – of course the licensee will produce the waste, but the issue of transportation, storage and treatment of the waste should be done by somebody else, paid by that person and that person is appointed by NEMA. That is under clause 3, licence: “in consultation with the authority by NEMA.” Are we together? Let us first zero on the issue so that we can move forward. 

Honourable members, there is a licensee whose responsibility – the Speaker is speaking. What I am saying is, there is a licensee whose responsibility or whose business it is to extract, produce and sell to make money. The license is given to the licensee for that purpose. So, should we now say that it should be that same licensee to be responsible for treating and managing the waste from that product? What the minister is saying is that – okay, maybe I used the wrong word “responsible” but okay - should it be the one to carry out the actual transportation, storage and treatment?

If the licensee should not be responsible for the actual transportation, storage and treatment, then who should be? Okay, somebody else, but who pays this somebody else?

HON. MEMBERS: The licensee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, are we together.

MR SEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I think we seem to all agree, but have different strategies of how to get there. First, we need to know that we are dealing with a licensee upon whom we are placing an obligation. The alternative or cumulative view is that, that licensee may sub contract somebody –(Interjections)– no, I am using the word “may” consciously and very cautiously. We are not taking away the discretion of a licensee to sub-contract another person to do that work, provided two conditions are respected: First, that person has to be approved by NEMA and two, where that person does a shoddy job, the licensee shall still be liable. I am saying this because we are talking about liability and duty.

So, the moment we take away the liability from the licensee, there will be no incentive that will propel and compel that licensee to have a proper waste management strategy, because they won’t have responsibility over what is shoddy.

So, may I now implore my colleagues to bridge the gap between the two sides? First, that we maintain the duty, responsibility and liability of the licensee. Two, we allow the licensee to sub contract because even without stating it, somebody can sub contract anyway, but remain responsible provided the person sub contracted is licensed. This means that we are introducing two layers of supervision – the supervision by NEMA that is licensing this person; and two, the supervision by the licensee who is the principal. This is intended to have a principal and an agent; it is a contractual relationship. While NEMA will be doing a statutory obligation, the licensee will do a contractual obligation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If that is the spirit, then what is the proper formulation for it? We have adopted sub clause 2 as proposed. 

Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, do you still think the different entities’ deletions would apply in the existing sub clause 2 if that explanation holds? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: I don’t know whether we can define those different entities, because the moment we do that it means we will have recognised them. I would like to say that when a licensee takes this responsibility but that licensee contracts other entities – once the ultimate responsibility lies with the licensee, I have no objection to that because even with Shell BP, that is what they normally do, except that they look for companies that can ably manage this.  

What we have in place, where they are digging and putting polythene is very disastrous. But as long as they can comply with NEMA principles and safeguards; as long as they have the requisite technology, manpower and the muscle, let that responsibility lie with the licensee to ensure and guarantee waste disposal and management.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think we need to move forward. The issue is that the principles have been agreed upon as shared. But can we stand over this matter to allow time for a clear drafting of what we have discussed?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, matters on clause 4 stood over to allow a clear drafting of what we have agreed on before we pronounce ourselves on it.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, we still have a matter to bring up in clause 4 (3). I would like to move that we shift the word “may” in the second line of that sub clause. It reads, “The National Environment Management Authority may, in consultation with the Authority, grant a licence…” If leave the word “may” before “in consultation with”, it will mean that it may or may not. To properly capture the spirit, I propose that the word “may” be moved to appear after the word “Authority” so that it reads, “The National Environment Management Authority in consultation with the Authority may grant a licence for the management…” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There are still many other amendments in respect to this clause. Should we stand over some of them? Are there any further amendments to this clause?

MR RUHUNDA: Mr Chairman, the assumption here is that it is a must that a licence has to be granted. So, you cannot just use the word “may”, because it must be granted. It reads, “The National Environment Management Authority may, in consultation with the Authority, grant a licence…” Now, if you say, “The National Environment Management Authority in consultation with the Authority may grant...” it is very different. 

There is another party which must be granted a licence. So, it is not about the Authority. What is important is that NEMA has to grant a licence, so this changes the meaning. That is why we may have to say that a licence “shall” be granted by National Environment Management Authority for a, b, c, d. If we just adjust “may” and take it to the other side, it means there are instances where the licence may not be given. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I rise to support the amendment raised by hon. Ssekikubo for one reason. From the way he has put, there must be consultation between NEMA and the Authority and actually after consultation, they may or may not grant permission based on the advice given. That is the import of this. So, it is at their discretion. 

The reason as to why he has brought “may” after is because there should be consultation. We have run into problems before, for example in the Parliamentary Elections Act, or in UNEB where they say that the National Council of Higher Education shall consult UNEB. The problem we have had is that the National Council of Higher Education just grants certificates without consulting UNEB. That is why we have to cure that problem in this law. Thank you. 

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I also stand in support of the proposal by hon. Ssekikubo for one reason; in case we choose to put “may” as it is proposed in the Bill, then in a way we are legislating in a redundant manner because it is as good as not being there. If you say, “they may consult”, they could actually choose not to consult, so why put it there in the first place. The intention must be clear that the consultation must take place. That is why we need that amendment. Thank you, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. If you are now to go into the real issue of using commas and so forth, that would be cured by a comma after “Authority”. Let me listen to hon. Oboth and then the Attorney-General. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In this proposal, what are we trying to make compulsory? Is it both the consultation and the granting of the licence, or is consultation mandatory and the granting of the licence is discretionary? The moment we agree on that, it will be as easy as a, b, c. 

The consultation in the current form is discretionary but the granting of the licence is mandatory. In my reading of this, when you put “may” just before “in consultation”, you are making consultation discretionary and the granting is actually made antecedent to the consultation. So, if we can agree, it would not be as difficult. I am just seeking your guidance, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, that is okay. I do not think there is any serious matter with it. In other words NEMA, in consultation with the Authority, may grant permission; isn’t that so, Attorney-General? 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I agree with that. Suffice it to add that Parliament used to conduct some lessons in legislative drafting for Members of Parliament. Maybe we need some of those refresher courses in that. 

Essentially, both hon. Mwiru and hon. Karuhanga are quite right. It depends on what you would like to achieve. You could, for instance, achieve even what you are proposing by inserting another comma after the word “Authority” in the second line and you will be there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, that is what the Chair had proposed. That would be very smart drafting. (Laughter) Because the “may” would now run with the “grant” though the consultation would remain mandatory with NEMA. Just one comma would solve that problem. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Chairman, you are good, only that I do not know how the users of this law will take it. However, I essentially agree with you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are we through with sub clause (3)? Can I now put the question? Sub clause (3) is remaining as it is except for putting a comma after “Authority”.

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Chairman, my proposed amendment also affects sub clause (3). I would like to propose that under (3), (4), (5) and others where we have clauses to do with production, transportation, storage and treatment of waste, the whole chain of waste management be completed by including “disposal”. So, my proposal is that right from the top, in order to complete the chain of waste management, where we have production, transportation, storage and treatment we include “disposal of waste”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: He is saying there should be a specific provision relating to disposal. The word “disposal” should be wherever those lines of words appear. 

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, the word “treatment” takes care of disposal. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Does it do any harm to say “treatment and disposal”?

MR WERIKHE: I think it is okay. We can add “disposal”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, we agree to add “disposal” to all the clauses? Agreed? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, we will take the question on that as we move forward. 

MR KATUNTU: Sorry, Mr Chairman. I must take you back. I agree that the sub clause we passed a few minutes ago where you advised, and quite correctly, that a comma comes after “Authority”, changes the meaning. However, we never passed it as an amendment and the record should actually capture it. The reason why I am saying that is that the record may not capture it and in the final text it will appear as it is. Once we put this comma, it will have really changed, so it should be captured on the records as an amendment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. The amendment on the existing sub clause (3) is by insertion of a comma after the word “Authority”. 

MR OTADA: Mr Chairman, that is exactly the clause that I would like to be clear. There are two authorities and I do not know where exactly the comma should be applied. There is the lengthy authority with NEMA in brackets and then “Authority” with –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is the Authority. There is another authority in the Bill apart from this one. 

MR OTADA: Mr Chairman, my request is: can the drafting be read for us before we can say “aye” or “nay”? How does it read, Mr Chairman?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. “The National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) may, in consultation with the Authority, grant a licence for the management, production, transportation, storage or treatment and disposal of waste arising out of petroleum activities to different entities in subsection (2), on terms and conditions prescribed in the licence.”

MR OTADA: Mr Chairman, I think that is exactly where my problem is because I think the House is saying that consultations should be mandatory and that the granting can then be discretional. So, if we use the word “may” where there are going to be consultations, it is going to make the consultations actually optional.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, when you put the comma in the position it is, the “may” runs with the “grant” not with the “consultations”. In other words, you can read the text without even reading that part. You can say, “The National Environment Management Authority may grant a licence in consultation…” That is the import of the comma.

MR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, an assessor like me would wish to have something that may not be confusing, therefore I would request to go with hon. Ssekikubo’s amendment. We have already agreed that the consultation must be made, that it should not be optional; it is granting of the licence. So, this “may” should be between “Authority” and “grant” and as an assessor, I would then be comfortable.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, can we take it the other way? It is basically the same. “The National Environment Management Authority, in consultation with the Authority, may grant a licence.” It is exactly the same.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, before you put the question, we did stand over sub clause (2) and this sub clause (3) makes reference to sub clause (2), which we stood over for purposes of proper drafting. Don’t you think it would be prudent that this one is also stood over so that it is captured by the draftsperson, in order not to bring some kind of confusion when sub clause (2) is worded differently?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The cross references have to be adjusted to accommodate this. Is that okay? Are there any more suggestions on clause 4? Is someone helping us to draft this?

MR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, I want to move an amendment on sub clause (4). The sub clause says, “A person shall not carry out any of the activities...” I would like to move an amendment so that it reads: “A person contracted by the licensee shall not carry out activities referred to...” The justification is that I want to bring out the responsibility of the licensee in this sub clause. I beg to move.

Mr Chairman, in the Bill it says “a person shall not carry out”. I want to amend and say “a person contracted by the licensee”, so that this person is defined.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, I think clause 4(4) reflects what sub clause (2) was reflecting originally. Before I give you a licence for waste management, you must have been qualified by NEMA. This is what it means. Regarding all activities concerning waste, before I give you a licence, you must have that pre-qualified certificate from NEMA. This is what he is saying. A person shall not carry out any activities referred to in subsection (2) - that is waste management and includes activities of storage, treatment, transportation. You must be qualified by NEMA. This is what it means.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Chairman, I would still think that this clause would be subject to drafting basing on what we had agreed. We wanted to differentiate the fact that if the person is subcontracted by a licensee, the licensee should legally have the primary responsibility of disposal in case there is spillage or pollution. 

This amendment on a person contracted by a licensee will be in tandem with the compromised amendment that you have asked us to stand over. So, debating it at this moment without the new draft would make it a little bit difficult to conclusively handle. So, my proposal would be that we wait to see what the new draft would look like then we would know whether to go with this amendment or the original one under (4) in the current Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we now stand over clause 4 because they are going to re-draft. We are going to debate again and then start from scratch. Let us come with the re-draft and then we can handle it comprehensively.

Clause 5

MR OTADA: Mr Chairman, under clause 5, I have been trying to find out whether the Republic of Uganda is defined in the Constitution. The tail end of clause 5 states, “… is vested in the Government on behalf of the Republic of Uganda.” What is the definition of “the Republic of Uganda”? I thought “on behalf of the people of Uganda” would be more entrenched. I am just seeking clarification, maybe I could be wrong, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t you just propose an amendment?

MR OTADA: I wanted some clarification, Mr Chairman, before I can propose because it could potentially be a redundant amendment.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, we had proposed an amendment to cure my colleague’s dilemma. It is an amendment by way of inserting a new sub clause (2) to read as follows: “For the avoidance of doubt, the Government of Uganda shall hold petroleum rights on behalf and for the benefit of the people of Uganda.”

The justification is that there is ambiguity in this provision, as “Government” and “republic” mean the same thing if you look at Article 257(1) (e). It defines Government as the Government of Uganda and Uganda to mean the Republic of Uganda.

Mr Chairman, in the Constitution, particularly paragraph 13 of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, it provides that the state shall protect important natural resources on behalf of the people of Uganda. So, in this particular sub clause, we try to consolidate the fact that whatever is undertaken by the Government is for the benefit of the people of Uganda. I believe that will cure hon. Otada’s concern. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, would it require a new clause or we just replace “Republic” with “people”? Would it require a whole new sub clause? 

MR NIWAGABA: The problem, Mr Chairman, is that this particular sub clause (1) is a transplant from the Constitution. What we are trying to do is to remove that kind of ambiguity.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I do not know whether it is constitutionally permissible to amend a constitutional provision because this is lifted from Article 244 of the Constitution as it is. This clause is specifically a constitutional one and I do not know whether can actually do anything to change it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This is not the Constitution; we are dealing with the Bill.

MR WERIKHE: Okay, but it was lifted from the Constitution; so, I seek your guidance whether we can amend it in this Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If we pass this provision, are you suggesting that it would imply that we have amended the Constitution? No, it will not.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I think the committee chairperson is trying to bring to our attention that Article 244 is specific. It says, “Subject to Article 26 of this Constitution, the entire property in, and the control of, all minerals and petroleum in, on or under, any land or waters in Uganda are vested in the Government on behalf of the Republic of Uganda.” That is what is being reproduced in clause 5. If we are reproducing it, let us actually reproduce it without any qualification. The moment you begin qualifying it, it presupposes an indirect way of amending it. 

Let me actually expound on it further. Don’t you think there is a difference between Article 244 and Article 237(1)? What could have been the purpose? Article 237(1) specifically says, “Land in Uganda belongs to the citizens of Uganda and shall vest in them in accordance with the land tenure systems provided for in this Constitution.” If it was the intention of the Constituent Assembly to do the same as they did in Article 237, they would still have done so in Article 244. So we cannot indirectly amend the Constitution in this Bill.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Is the Attorney-General trying to say that clause 5 as it is amends Article 244 as well? Article 244 refers to Article 26 but we have transplanted Article 244 and made it clause 5 of the Bill and yet we have omitted Article 26; is that the same? 

I thought that when we read clause 5 and say “in accordance with Article 244”, in Article 244 we read Article 26. That is how I understand it. It means that clause 5 as it is, even if we said “in accordance to Article 244”, we read Article 26 in clause 5. The way we have stated it under clause 5, if we say that by adding sub clause (2) it would mean we are indirectly amending the Constitution, similarly since we are saying we have transplanted without mentioning Article 26 under this clause, it would also mean amending the Constitution.

MR RUHINDI: What we are doing here is simply re-enacting Article 244. This is in terms of being clear within the Bill because this is the subject Bill on petroleum rights. We are talking about vesting of petroleum rights. We are actually reproducing that clause just for the avoidance of doubt, for purposes of avoiding referential legislation for those people who will be reading this Bill. 

Certainly, subject to Article 26, hon. Mwiru, whether you put it there or not; it is a clear provision within the Constitution. You can even reproduce it exactly as it is. In fact, I would be happier with that, but once you begin - (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have been trying to study the position by the learned Attorney-General and I think there is a way of bringing him closer to hon. Otada. As stated by hon. Mwiru, Article 244 is not self-contained, and that is the starting point. It is actually subordinate to Article 26. 

Secondly, in relation to clause 5, I support hon. Otada because of two reasons namely, all these resources are vested in the Government of Uganda, but it does not stop there, it goes on to say on behalf of the Republic of Uganda. Now, what is the difference between the Government of Uganda and the Republic of Uganda? If I want to read behind the curtain on this clause, I find that the “Republic of Uganda” stands for and represents the citizens of Uganda. 

In the wisdom of the draftsman, as well as the sponsoring ministry, they did not want to leave it at the word “Government” and stop there. There is some principal person behind government, and that is why they instead used “republic”. I want to imagine that the “republic” refers to us, the Ugandans. I would therefore wish to support hon. Otada to replace the words “Republic of Uganda” with “people of Uganda” because they are the same. 

It would not make any sense, whether legal or otherwise, to use both. It would not make sense to say that the Government of Uganda acts for and on behalf of the Republic of Uganda, if the Republic of Uganda stood for and meant Government of Uganda. I think the intention is the people of Uganda.

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, thank you. I think I would support the proposal of the honourable member in glasses. (Laughter) He was proposing to state, “for avoidance of doubt”. Why? I agree with the Attorney-General that what is imported from the Constitution cannot be distorted. So, we leave 5(1) the way it is because it is from the Constitution and we do not want to tamper with it. 

However, the sub clause (2), which he wants to introduce, stating “for avoidance of doubt” is to try and clarify the question of Government in respect to the Republic of Uganda and who they act for. If you read Article 26 of the Constitution, it talks about not depriving individuals of their property and so forth. He quoted the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy; No. XIII is on protection of natural resources and it says, “The State shall protect important natural resources, including land, water, wetlands, minerals, oil, fauna and flora on behalf of the people of Uganda.” 

So, to bring in the essence of the people of Uganda would clarify and ensure that anybody reading this provision in Article 244 also realises that here the republic or the Government is acting on behalf of the people as per the guiding principles in the Constitution. So, I would support this amendment. 

MR NIWAGABA: Let me give you some further information. Mr Chairman, when you look at clause 2 of the Bill, part (d) says, “The purpose of this Act... 
(d) providing for the optimal social and economic benefits of petroleum resources with a long term perspective for Ugandan society as a whole”. 

I believe these resources, yes are held by the Government but for the people of Uganda. Let us be very clear. I do not agree with my learned friend, the Attorney-General, that adding this sub clause will in a way be amending the Constitution. No! we have not touched the Constitution. We are only trying to be pro-people legislators and to make the Bill and Act understandable by the people we represent here but not to amend the Constitution.

MY ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. I have listened to all the submissions, but as a matter of fact if today someone mentioned the word “government”, let us be honest, what comes to our mind? Mr Chairman, under your office sometimes you say, “Please, Government respond by 4.30 p.m.” Which arm of Government are you really instructing? It will automatically be the Executive.

Now, to do away with that fear, we thought it wise that we should introduce 5(2) as moved by my brother, the learned counsel. However, maybe also to demystify the fear of the Attorney-General, we could bring it within the context of, “In accordance with Article 244 of the Constitution, the entire property in, and the control of, petroleum in its natural condition in, on or under any land or waters in Uganda is vested in the Government on behalf of the people...” In fact, it should be “…on behalf of, and for the benefit of, the people of Uganda.” That is what I think should be brought here so that both sides can agree. It should be “for the benefit of the people of Uganda.”

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. It is getting interesting. I believe that the Attorney-General will agree that the proposed amendment does not do much harm or any harm at all. Probably, it is only contributing to more pages of our law. 

Maybe for us to debate further, we would seek guidance. What harm would it do if we left it as proposed by hon. Niwagaba? In any case, the reasoning and the arguments by purely paralegal, hon. Betty Amongi, when she referred to Article 26 as referred to in Article 244 - I do not see anywhere that we would be amending. However, if we really want to have the government there, there could even be further amendments by saying, “in the Government of the Republic of Uganda on behalf of the people of Uganda.” You just sound the same. 

Really, this is for the avoidance of doubt. We have been somewhere else; Mr Chairman, you took some of us to Norway and it is the principle of their law - the major drive - that national resources or oil is held in trust for the people of the Republic of Norway. I do not know if we are getting it from there. However, as I usually would say, maybe I am a bit limited in this knowledge but the Attorney-General could help us before we debate further. What would be the harm in accepting and conceding that proposal and we leave 5(1) as it is but add (2) as proposed by hon. Niwagaba? Attorney-General, just help me get out of this fear.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, learned Attorney-General; what is your opinion on the proposal by hon. Niwagaba?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I trust really that the Attorney-General –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member for Lwemiyaga, I do not know who gave you the authority to speak. (Laughter)  

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I concede to the proposed amendment on sub clause (2).   

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment proposed by the honourable member for Ndorwa East on the insertion of a new sub clause in clause 5 to read in the terms proposed by the honourable member. I put the question. You want to read it again.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, it reads thus: “For the avoidance of doubt, the Government of Uganda shall hold petroleum rights on behalf and for the benefit of the people of Uganda.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR WERIKHE: The head note of clause 6 is, “Prohibition of petroleum activities without authorisation.” We propose to substitute, in sub clause (2) paragraph (a), the word “ten” with the word “one hundred”. The justification is: to provide for a more deterrent penalty.   

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What do you mean by inverted commas? You are proposing to remove ten-

MR WERIKHE: We are removing the word, “ten” in (2) (a) and substituting it with “one hundred”. It will read as follows: 
“A person who contravenes sub section (1) commits an offence and is liable on conviction -
a)	if an individual, to a fine not exceeding ten thousand currency points or imprisonment not exceeding ten years or both.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is the justification. I put the question to that amendment proposed by the chair of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR AMURIAT: I want to propose a simple amendment, which involves a deletion in sub clause (1) of the words, “or subject to Ugandan jurisdiction”.

Mr Chairman, I feel that by including that phrase, we are encouraging redundancy. In my view, the Ugandan jurisdiction is limited to the territory of Uganda characterised by land and water, and it is within the boundaries of the Republic of Uganda. I do not understand why we are subjecting ourselves to this term “Ugandan jurisdiction”, well knowing that we cannot have any jurisdiction over oil outside our territorial boundaries. So I wish to propose a deletion of that phrase, if the House accepts.

Secondly, I propose a redrafting of sub clause (2). My concern is that a body corporate cannot be a person. When you read sub clause (2) – I will be advised on this – it says, “A person who contravenes subsection (1) commits an offence and is liable on conviction...” I would like to call your attention to (b): “if a body corporate...” This implies that a body corporate can be a person. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, it is true.

MR AMURIAT: Then I withdraw my proposal. However, my proposal to delete “or subject to Ugandan jurisdiction” remains because I feel this part is redundant.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General, is there any oil in the United States that belongs to us?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I think taking it that far would not be in the context of that provision. What is in the context of this provision is that the word “subject”, I am sure, is used carefully because an activity could have taken place outside Uganda but is subject to our jurisdiction. It is not a question of being outside per say, but it refers to an activity taking place outside Uganda but subject to our jurisdiction. 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, how I wish the learned Attorney-General would put this in practical terms. How practical is this? I want to challenge the learned Attorney-General to put this in a practical context. Can we have jurisdiction over what is not on or in our land and our water?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Suppose it is a pipeline – like these cables we lay from Nairobi?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I think the member’s concern should be understood in the context of jurisdiction. When you are talking about creation of an offence, it goes with what Austin said, “it is not law without a sanction”. What are you going to do to somebody who commits this offence in Nairobi on a pipeline – supposing it is a pipeline, as you rightly guided? What happens supposing someone commits the offence while outside our jurisdiction? You cannot legislate on an offence made by somebody who does it outside your jurisdiction. However, if you wish to conduct a consequential amendment, as it has ever been done in the Penal Code, you can go ahead at the beginning and also define what in this context you mean by jurisdiction. 

Jurisdiction has two elements. The first and most basic is territorial. I think the Member’s concern is about the territorial jurisdiction when you are creating an offence. You then include the word, “within waters in Uganda or subject to Ugandan jurisdiction”. This context must be defined for you to understand the word “jurisdiction” in a proper perspective.

MS BINTU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In the context of jurisdiction, we may want to know that the geo-positioning of some of the oil wells in the lake means that some wells cross borders. If the neighbouring country wants to drill that oil, it must seek the authority from their neighbour because if they drill, the oil might tilt and start flowing to the other side.  So I thought this clause actually puts that in perspective and tries to create harmony between the neighbouring countries. 

MR NAKABAALE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. When we talk about oil, there is a commercial element that comes in. Are our oil companies going to do business in other countries? The jurisdiction talked about tries to cater for those other interests that may go beyond Uganda. 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I thank you. For the benefit of our colleagues to follow the argument, we agree with the spirit that they are expressing. What is presented by my colleague, the commissioner, is a very good moral argument. However, legally, you cannot bind somebody outside your territorial or other jurisdiction. I do not know how oil would tilt – if you wish, you would say, pours the other side - but if somebody commits an offence in relation to that oil, practically you cannot enforce this provision. 

Let us legislate and bind our own people - people who are subject to the jurisdiction of this sovereign state. The other states are sovereign and when someone does anything - I do not know what my colleague called harmony; you cannot harmonise by creating offences against persons in other jurisdictions. There is no practical sense and application that you can derive from this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The subject matter of this particular prohibition is actually land or waters. Those are the operating words. Yes, honourable minister. 

MR LOKERIS: Mr Chairman,  oil is in something like a tank or a drum. You may find that the reservoir is at the boundary - I am just explaining literally – and one part of this tank is another territory and the other part is in this territory. When you punch here, you have chances of withdrawing what is on the other territory. 

What they usually do is what they call unitisation, so that you can agree with countries and either draw it this way or you measure how much has been drawn from the other side. So, here is the Congo and Uganda is here and this drum is occupying the middle; when you punch here, it has an effect on this side. So, what they do usually is to make agreements on how you can have these things. That is why we are giving this to cross border transactions in dealing with the oil industry. Even in terms of gas, it is like that. There is what we call unitisation; there are cross border boundaries and that is why we managed to capture all these things in case we are carrying out activities here. 

We know what we call a state. You must be bound by boundaries, by the people inside there and then you qualify to be a state according to international law. But with this one, we are dealing with oil and gas.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, I think the question is: which land or waters are subject to the Ugandan jurisdiction? You have already said “land and waters of Uganda” or “land or waters subject to Ugandan jurisdiction”.   

MR NIWAGABA: I think let us look at what the clause intends to prohibit. It prohibits petroleum activities without authorisation. When we go to the definition of petroleum activity, it includes operations, planning and preparation. So, some of those activities such as planning and preparations may not necessarily be carried out within this country. You know these other agreements between states giving extradition and the like. So, I believe that if my colleagues could consider that definition of petroleum activity, they would appreciate the intention of this clause, abandon the amendment and we move on.  

MR ANYWARACH: I thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The title of clause 6 is “Prohibition of petroleum activities without authorisation.” It is not going to the gist of questioning the ownership of land, whether by Uganda or not. It is going to whatever Uganda has identified, land or whatever water that is ours, and therefore oil activities like exploration and so on that may take place on such land or close to such water and so on. This clause, therefore, tried to prohibit any illegal activity on such land and water. 

I know of Lake Albert and River Nile. Whether part of River Nile or part of Lake Albert is for Uganda or for Congo I think here is immaterial. Here the intention is to focus on no illegal activities to be carried out in relation to petroleum or whatsoever on any property of Uganda in terms of land, water and so on. 

I think that the way that this is framed is very clear, except if there is any fear in the context of - like my brother has put it - a pipeline that extends say from Pakwach Graben up to Nairobi. I think for that one, we would now be crossing from municipal law to international law. The principle, like my learned friend brought out, will now be very clear - the principle of jurisdiction. Which states will claim criminal or civil jurisdiction over a commission of a crime or over a person who has committed a crime on say property that is moving from us to Kenya? Here the principle of territorial jurisdiction comes in. 

Where it becomes very hard, you can even go to the principle of universality where it is not the question of the area or the citizenship of the person but whose interest has been hurt. If Uganda says that our interest has been hurt, then you proceed under international law and you settle the matter but for me here, let us not question which one is our land. I thank you very much.

MR OBOTH: I thank you, Mr Chairman. I wonder whether I still have anything useful to add but I think that I agree with hon. Niwagaba and the Attorney–General and hon. Joshua Anywarach.

I think it is safe to put it the way it is and to just leave it as it is. I do not know why we are stretching our minds beyond what is obviously stated - “Petroleum activities in, on or under any land or waters in Uganda or subject to Ugandan jurisdiction…” When you mention waters here, this is the only time probably - You can only get waters when you are talking about laws and not the water that they give to you when you drink. Here you cannot rule out subjecting your activities to Ugandan jurisdiction – (Interjections) - I would love that we harmonise this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you through? Can I have - 

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, I need some protection because – (Laughter). The subjecting of the transaction or activities here is only safer if we subject it to Ugandan jurisdiction. You are talking about oil and petroleum activities, so you cannot rule out the aspect of international law. But in your municipal law you have to indicate that clearly, that what you want to regulate is all things that can be confined within your jurisdiction. I believe that hon. Sseggona is not disagreeing with that. I propose that you guide us to the conclusion of harmonisation of this.    

MR KATUNTU: Clause 6 is about criminalising an activity which is not authorised. Criminal law has its own principle. Can you legislate for any criminal activity outside your own jurisdiction? You see, the only petroleum activities that fall squarely within the jurisdiction of this law we are putting into place are those on Uganda’s lands and waters and not any other. Under what circumstances will you have any other petroleum activity, which is subject to Ugandan jurisdiction? I would like to be educated, and if we can have that then we can move ahead.

MS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to share with the honourable members the situation where we can have such an activity. In the Albertine Graben, in Lake Albert, there are instances where you have wells which are crossing borders. You have a well under the water on the Ugandan side and the DRC side. In such a circumstance, you have to agree on drilling. There could be a situation where DRC agrees with Uganda to drill that well after knowing the boundaries for each side and drill it from a common point. So, that is why this provision was put there to specifically cater for those situations. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the situation presented by the honourable minister is this - there will be a standing agreement between Uganda and the DRC for a particular oil activity to take place in the middle of the boundary. The person who will be conducting it, if it is for Uganda they must conduct it with the authority of Uganda; in other words, they must have a licence to do it. This particular activity is not necessarily on Ugandan waters or Ugandan land but Uganda has jurisdiction over it by agreement between the two countries. That is the explanation the minister has given.  

MR KATUNTU: Does that then create a criminal offence across the border by this law? You are creating a criminal offence to say, if there is a Congolese who disturbs that drilling on the Congolese territory he or she is criminally liable under our law.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I have an extreme sense of sympathy to and for the sponsors of this Bill. I can really understand where they are coming from. But from a technical point of view, I think there is need for redrafting. 

If you are creating an offence, first of all jurisdiction is a matter of law; it is not a matter of agreement. What you will be creating by that agreement, or discussion by whatever name, is something entirely different. It will not confer jurisdiction to Uganda. Maybe you could talk about control etc.

Secondly, how do you enforce it? It is a contractual obligation that exists between the two states, so how do you enforce it? Remember this is going to be an essential ingredient in this criminal offence, that where I committed this illegal activity was a place subject to Ugandan jurisdiction. In international law, no single country has ever had jurisdiction in the territory of another except for embassies, and I want to emphasise that. I think what we would do is to see how to help the sponsors of this Bill by redrafting it to bring out the context they want. Otherwise, we would be embarrassed. It cannot be a criminal offence. 

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, I fully appreciate my colleague’s opinion on the treatment of this matter. Let us stand over it so that it is redrafted to bring out the essence of what is intended, if the way it is drafted here is not clear. But we anticipate those situations. So we can stand over it.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Chairman, as the point is being stood over, you earlier raised that beyond the trans-boundary resources which do exist, in the Albertine for example, there are also other protocols, other regional efforts which compel us to have an energy master plan, share pipelines within a region, etc. I would like that when we are redrafting, whoever is doing the drafting work helps us take care of those very important issues aware that we are moving in the direction of the East African Community and some of these will be joint venture projects. 

How do we, under international law, make somebody liable under such an arrangement? How then would Interpol work if you have a problem with somebody across a territorial boundary? For trans-boundary resources, the practice always is that the solution is a joint venture effort. So, we need to be helped by the legal gurus in terms of drafting. 

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. As we propose that clause 6 be stood over, I still have an issue with the prohibition of petroleum activities without authorisation. I see some gaps where we are saying that petroleum activities in, on or under any land or waters in Uganda or subject to Ugandan jurisdiction, shall not be conducted without an authorisation, licence, permit or approval issued in accordance with this Act. My question is: authorisation by whom, licence by whom, permit by whom and whose approval? It is my proposal, Mr Chairman, that we insert, “Government of Uganda.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The respective authorities are in the Act. That is why they are saying, “in accordance with this Act” because there are different people who do those things in the law. 

MS JOY ATIM: So, there is no need to put “authorisation or the approval of Government of Uganda”? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Some are by the oil authority and  others are by the minister. So, whatever applies will be done as is provided for in the law. Can we stand over this clause?  
MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. As we stand over this, I just wanted to bring to the attention of the chairman that an amendment has been made on (2)(a) but when you look at (2)(a) and (2)(b), you find that on framing this there was an intention to create a differential penalty between an individual and a body corporate. However, we have amended (a) to have a penalty of one hundred thousand currency points and imprisonment and we have left the penalty in (b) remain the same as in (a), although without the other provision of the possibility of imprisonment. I think there is need to make the penalty stronger in (b) such that we can lift up from one hundred thousand currency points to maybe five hundred thousand currency points such that we try to create a difference in the penalties. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, propose it so that when we come back it is already –

MR LUBOGO: My proposal, Mr Chairman, is to amend (b) to read as follows: “if a body corporate, to a fine not exceeding five hundred thousand currency points. 

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, if I may be allowed to continue. I would love to propose that this punishment should be hiked because in drilling these wells, at times one can be so swift that if the punishment is very light, he or she would rather pay the punishment fee and go away with the big profit. So, I am proposing that we probably raise it to 10 million currency points. 

The justification is that we are talking about these big oil corporations. Also, when you look at what you are trying to prohibit, - prohibition of petroleum activities without authorisation – it refers to these multi-national corporations that come here and at times can be smart. They will look at the punishment vis-à-vis what they can take home and they will decide to go for the punishment. By the time you catch them, they will have taken oil worth Shs 10 million or more. So, the punishment should be so scaring for anybody or corporation to participate in any unauthorised activity.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I agree that we can raise this figure but I also would like to inform my colleagues that as we legislate, we should not do it in absurdity. Yes, I am not a lawyer, but we need to agree to proposals that are going to be punitive but also enforceable. Otherwise, we might end up legislating in absurdity.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, chair, for giving way. The information I would like to give you, and which I am very certain you are also very much aware of, is how rich these corporations are and what they are capable of doing in a very short time especially when they know what they are doing very well. Read in details about what is happening in Nigeria. These people will come here and in less than a month they will have scooped so much oil that by the time authorities come for them, they will not mind paying the penalties and just walk away. So, we must do everything possible. If it were about individuals, it would be okay but this is about a corporation; it is about business.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, from your proposal, the penalty will be Shs 200 billion.

MR KARUHANGA: Yes, that is okay.

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, while I appreciate the Members’ concerns, I would like to say that we should not put a figure that will be so prohibitive. In any case, this is giving us the minimum, which means we have the leverage to fine even more.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, this is the maximum.

MS MULONI: Okay. I agree with the proposal that the chairman of the committee made, which is 500,000 currency points. That is reasonable.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, can those responsible for drafting go and look at these proposals and then we deal with them when the draft comes. We cannot spend time on it now and then we spend time on it again. Clause 6 is hereby stood over.

Clause 7
MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to insert a new sub clause (2) to provide for the extent to which clauses on confidentiality, stabilisation of law and arbitration can be negotiated in a production sharing agreement or any other agreement made under section 7. It will read as follows: 

“(2) An agreement entered into under subsection (1) of this section may comprise clauses in regard to confidentiality, stabilisation of law and arbitration provided that -
(a) the confidentiality clause shall only seek to restrict publication of information to third parties regarding the person’s commercial or other information that is protected under the Access to Information Act, 2005, laws governing intellectual property rights and any other relevant laws.

(b)the stabilisation clause shall not prevent Government from exercising its legislative mandate to enact future legislation which may affect the agreement.

(c) the arbitration shall be done in accordance with the laws of Uganda.”

The committee also proposes to insert new sub clauses (3) and (4) to provide for the Cabinet and parliamentary approval of model production sharing agreements or any other model agreements, as the case may be. They will read as follows: 
“(3) The Authority shall develop or cause to be developed a model production agreement or any other model agreement as may be entered into by Government under this section which shall be submitted to Cabinet for approval. 

(4) The minister shall lay before Parliament the model production agreement or any other model agreement approved by Cabinet under subsection (3). 

(5) A model agreement approved by Cabinet shall guide negotiations of any future agreements under this section and any future agreements shall comply with the provisions of the model agreement except that modifications which are not contrary to this Act or any other relevant law and are justifiably necessary to address unique aspects of individual agreements may be made.”

The justification is: to guide contract negotiations to avoid bad deals for the country without scaring away investment in petroleum exploration and development.

We also propose the insertion of a new sub clause (6) to create specific offences in regard to failure to comply with section 7 and corrupt tendencies in negotiating contracts. It will read as follows: 
“(6) A person who, being a Minister, a public officer or any other person mandated or authorised to perform a duty or a function under this section, shall perform that duty or function in a manner that ensures compliance with the provisions of this Act and any other relevant law. 

(7) A person mentioned in subsection (6) who performs a duty or a function under this section contrary to the provisions of this section commits an offence and shall on conviction be liable to a fine not exceeding two hundred thousand currency points or imprisonment not exceeding four years or both. 

(8) A person who offers, gives, receives or solicits anything of value to influence an action of a politician or a public officer in the process of negotiating an agreement under this section commits an offence and shall on conviction be liable to a fine not exceeding two hundred thousand currency points or imprisonment not exceeding 20 years or both.”

The justification for all these is to provide for prohibitive sanctions to ensure compliance with the law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is the proposed amendment. Can we hear from the responsible minister in regard to her position?

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, I do not agree to the proposed amendment. It is a long amendment and so I would like to request that you give me some time to take the members through what I have on the proposed amendments.

One is on stabilisation and arbitration. I would like to say that these two are issues – (Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Sorry, Minister. I had a substantive amendment actually to delete clause 7. I do not know whether we would have started with mine before we go to this one, which sort of modifies clause 7. I seek your guidance.
    
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, yours will be first. Proceed.
  
MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. To appreciate my amendment, you will need to look at both clauses 7 and 9. Clause 7 is premised on the grounds that the functions of the minister will be, among other things, to grant and revoke licences, negotiate and endorse petroleum agreements, and to approve field development plans etcetera. I will be moving for the House to have them deleted or transferred from Part III to the part of the Authority.  

Why am I saying that we need to delete clause 7? Mr Chairman, Government is defined by the Constitution as the Government of the Republic of Uganda. So, if we are going to have functions of granting and revoking licences, negotiating agreements, approving data management systems and so on as functions of the minister, then they are functions of Government and they are not functions of the Authority, where I would like to move that they should be transferred to.
 
Ministers are politicians; they are policy makers. The reason, in principle, why Government as a policy enacted the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets law was to make sure that in matters of public procurement, politicians should keep off. That is a principle in matters of public procurement. When you are negotiating oil agreements, when you are granting licences and so on - (Interruption)

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I appreciate the submission of the shadow Attorney-General. We are dealing with clause 7 and I do not know whether we are now going to look at clauses 9, 10, 11 and 7 concurrently. What he is submitting on is about the functions of the minister vis-à-vis the function of the Authority in line with clause 7. So, I do not know how we are going to handle this? I need you guidance, Mr Chairman.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The honourable member proposed an amendment to delete clause 7 and in trying to justify his reasons for the deletion, he is looking at other provisions, which are related to it. However, in his manner of speaking, he is trying to take longer than we could have been accommodated within the framework. Honourable member, state it clearly so that we are able to understand what you are up to.
 
MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. If we do pass clause 7, then there is no way I would move any amendment under clause 9. It is not possible. So, there is no way I will argue this without bringing in clauses 9 and 7. That is why I am saying that to appreciate my argument, you need to look at both of them. Once we pass clause 7, then it follows that there is no way you can make an amendment on clause 9 because the issues of granting and revoking licences would have already been covered under clause 7.

So, the point I was trying to make is that we need to get our policymakers, the ministers, out of boardrooms to negotiate business deals. It is very risky to get a politician to start negotiating with business people in this industry. I appreciate that actually, the oil industry is both economic and political. The role of the minister, however, should be at approval level. The nitty-gritty of negotiating details and so on cannot by statute be imposed on a minister. Where does he get the competence? The only qualifications we have for being a minister are actually a senior 6 certificate or its equivalent and we are dealing with very delicate business, very complicated business. So, my own view is that we transfer the functions of negotiating and endorsing petroleum agreements to the Authority. 

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much, hon. Katuntu. You are talking of clause 7 being deleted and in order to pursue that argument you are referring to clause 9, functions of the minister. Now, under clause 7, the functions are under Government and not the minister. Government has got both the political and technical sides; why do you want to delete the entire function of Government simply because you are targeting the function of the minister who is a politician? Why don’t you want this House to proceed and approve the entire function of Government - agreeing and negotiation - and then when it comes to 9, you pursue your argument with the minister? Why are you relating these two?
 
MR KATUNTU: You see, I started with the Constitution about what Government is, and I also know that actually when you look at this Bill, the Authority is also defined and is distinct from Government. When you are talking about Government under clause 7, you are actually talking about the minister. Let me tell you why. 

Clause 7 says, “The Government may enter into an agreement relating to petroleum activities and consistent with this Act, with any person with respect to the following matters...” They then talk of the grant of a licence, and then when you go to clause 9 it says, “The Minister shall be responsible for – (a) granting and revoking licences.” It is actually one and the same thing when you are referring to the minister and Government in clause 7 and clause 9, if you read them together. 

If we were to transfer the duties or the functions of granting and revoking licences, negotiating and endorsing agreements, approving field development plans to the Authority, then that does not necessarily mean it is with Cabinet. As it is now, this is purely a Cabinet function. I could proceed if I have made myself clear.
   
MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I am constrained to seek clarification from my brother and friend. I have learnt one important thing during my legislative career, both as a practitioner and as a professional, that a good law should be blind. The moment we make the law looking at people, individuals or departments, we shall end up making a bad law. 

The moment we think in terms of institutions, including ministers, tomorrow you may be minister of energy and any day, hon. Gerald Karuhanga may be minister of finance. What we should be looking at is to create ministers that are very effective, institutions that are very effective and that would be able to discharge their obligations, whatever they may be.

Let me conclude by way of seeking clarification. When we were young, and I am sure all of us passed through that stage, during our classes of civics we used to learn about what constitutes a government. They would tell you that the three arms of government are the Legislature, Judiciary and the Executive. The Executive is an infrastructure. When you talk of those authorities and parastatals, they form part of an infrastructure called government. 

Mr Chairman, with all due respect, the submission of hon. Magyezi should not go unnoticed. Why don’t we first complete this because the submission is very clear? We are talking about Government but when we come to 9, we can then entertain those observations from hon. Katuntu. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it looks like the whole three weeks of adjournment did not help much. It is coming to 7.00p.m. and we have not moved that much. Can I go through the Bill and identify which clauses have amendments and which ones were agreed to so that we have an idea of how long we can take on some of these clauses? Otherwise, there is no guide. Each time a clause is called, there are five or more amendments. We might not be able to proceed. So, can I have an idea of what amendments we are expecting? It can give us a good idea on how we are going to proceed. Is there any amendment on clause 8?

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I am seeking guidance. After we have gone through, will we then begin with my amendment?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, I think I will come down to that. I need to know how much time we need to deal with these things. Is there any amendment on clause 8? 

MR WERIKHE: We did not have any on clause 8.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 9?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, we had.

MR KATUNTU: I have an amendment on clause 9.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 10? No amendment on clause 10. Is there any amendment on clause 11?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, we have.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 12?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, we have.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 13?

MR WERIKHE: We do not have.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 14?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, we have one simple amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 15, any amendments?

MR WERIKHE: No amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 16?

MR WERIKHE: No amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 17?

Mr WERIKHE: No amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 18?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, we have.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let me do this; it will give us an idea on where we need to focus more energy and where we might need to just go and pass those provisions. Where there are no amendments - You see, there is only one Speaker in this House right now. Is there any amendment on Clause 19?

MR WERIKHE: No amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You see, why I am doing this is because we had three weeks of harmonisation, so all the clauses that have amendments should be known by now. So, can we take stock of which clauses have amendments? That is what I am trying to do to guide us. We shall then come back and start going clause by clause the way it is. I want to have an idea of what to expect. Is there an amendment on clause 20?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, we have.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 21?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, we have.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 22?

MR WERIKHE: No amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 23?

MR WERIKHE: No amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 24?

MR WERIKHE: No amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 25?

MR WERIKHE: No amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 26?

MR WERIKHE: No amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We had three weeks of harmonisation meetings, which were chaired by the chairperson, so we should have an idea about where we expect amendments. That is all I am trying to do. As Speaker, I need to do an audit. Okay? Are there amendments on clause 27?

MR WERIKHE: No amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 28?

MR WERIKHE: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 29?

MR WERIKHE: No amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIR: Clause 30?

MR WERIKHE: No amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 31?

MR WERIKHE: No amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 32?

MR WERIKHE: No amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 33?

MR WERIKHE: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 34?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, there are amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 35?

MR WERIKHE: No amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 36? Honourable members, I wish you could just respect what I am doing. For now there is no amendment. If you are showing up with an amendment later then we will be able to treat it like that. Are there amendments on clause 36?

MR WERIKHE: No amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are there amendments on clause 37? Okay. Are there amendments on clause 38?

MR WERIKHE: No amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 39?

MR WERIKHE: No amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 40?

MR WERIKHE: No amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 41?

MR WERIKHE: No amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 42?

MR WERIKHE: There is an amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 43, there are amendments. Clause 44, there are amendments. Are there amendments on clause 45?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, there are amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 46?

MR WERIKHE: Not in our report.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. From 43 we have a draft of amendments that will have to displace some of the clauses. Within our amendments we shall cover 46. We shall proceed with the way the Bill is but we have a series of amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, let us just look at what is here. We are now on 46; do you have an amendment on clause 46? 

(Members indicate clauses for proposed amendment)

The following clauses were indicated for amendment: 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 61, 62, 63, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 93, 95, 97, 101, 102, 110, 113, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 125, 126, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 142, 144, 148, 150, 151, 152, 154, 155, 156, 162, 163, 167, 168, 169, 173, 174, 180, 183, 184 and 189.

The following clauses did not have proposed amendments: 52, 60, 64, 77, 78, 79, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 94, 96, 98, 99,  103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 100, 111, 112, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 124, 127, 128, 129, 140, 141, 143, 145, 146, 147, 149, 153, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 164, 165, 166, 170, 171, 172, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 181, 182, 185, 186, 187 and 188.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you can see the volume of work that we have. It is almost like a new Bill that we are going to redraft. Be that as it may, can we have the text of these particular amendments ready so that when we come to propose amendments, we have a text to propose. Is that okay? We will have very limited – (Interjections) - No, at this stage now we do not have time to adjourn to the committee again to deal with it but I think we will be able to deal with them from here. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I would like to emphasise what you are saying, that we do get copies of the proposed amendments. It is straight knowledge. We all know our rules of procedure. Rule 123(4) is very clear; it says, “The Committee of the Whole House shall consider proposed amendments by the committee to which the Bill was referred and may consider proposed amendments, on notice, where the amendments were presented but rejected by the relevant committee or where, for reasonable cause, the amendments were not presented before the relevant committee.” That of course lies with your discretion - the last leg of it. 

This would quicken the process because either side would come prepared. But when any side is ambushed on the Floor of the House, you find it very difficult to move. Even when you talk about law, my professor who introduced me to the law said that a good lawyer is not the one who knows the law in his or her head but one who knows where to find it. Sometimes you are expected to give an off-cuff kind of legal opinion on the Floor of the House. So I think let us have these amendments and we prepare accordingly.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it is only proper, so that we proceed in an organised way, that those who have amendments share their amendments. I am going to grant amnesty to those who defaulted before, so that we share the texts so that when we come to those issues, it is easier to discuss. When we just propose immediately as we go along, it gets these discussions very complicated. Is that okay? 

You see, an amendment that is arising from an amendment on the Floor is different. I am referring to when you have to originate an amendment. Of course, when it is already on the Floor and the amendment is proposed you can improve on it, but I am talking about substantial amendments on a clause that you have already contemplated and which is not a matter of surprise to you or anybody else. At least we should have the text of it, okay? Can we move to the next level and clear with -

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I thought you would give us some guidelines that maybe by this time those who have written amendments - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I will be communicating that one when I am Speaker. (Laughter) So, you will also now prepare properly for your amendments on clauses 7 and 9 so that we can handle them properly. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.11
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (Ms Irene Muloni): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the motion for the House to resume.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.12
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (Ms Irene Muloni): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill, 2012” and considered clauses 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 and passed them with amendments. However, clause 4 was stood over as well as clause 6. I beg to report, Mr Speaker.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.12
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (Ms Irene Muloni): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we come to the end of our proceedings today. My instructions to those who have amendments: please, I would like to have received a copy of those amendments by 12.00 O’clock tomorrow and also circulate to the chairperson an advance copy. If you bring it to the Speaker’s Office, we will find ways of immediately sending them to the relevant people so that you do not have to do it yourself everywhere. Just centrally bring them to the Office of the Speaker and we will devise mechanisms of sending these particular proposals to the minister and chairpersons so that by the time we come here, the concerned people will already have text, so that we see how to move quickly. Do this by midday tomorrow.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In relation to what you have said, let this be a lesson on the way this Parliament handles its Bills. You have seen that it would be much better for any amendments to Bills to first be given to the committees and after the committee’s work – you have seen the problem which is arising. The committee did not do any work! 

The practice of this Parliament has been that anybody who has amendments takes these amendments to the committee and the committee discusses them and brings a harmonised report that can be debated here. Remember, this Parliament will be judged on the performance of the Bills we pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, that is certainly not misplaced but it is a good observation. I said earlier that this is the final call and I will be very brutal when we show up with an amendment that has not been shared with anybody and you are amending a clause which has not been looked at at all. We are all supposed to be here and be part of this discussion. I will not entertain amendments being brought directly on the Floor on a matter that has not been earlier discussed. That is the only way we can be able to proceed. You can see that we are almost re-writing the Bill by the number of amendments proposed.

This House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 7.16 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 8 November 2012 at 2.00 p.m.) 
