Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Wednesday, 6 November 2019

Parliament met at 3.25 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I apologise for the late start. I had to attend a meeting with the President on a number of issues and it took a bit of time. The bulk of it was to do with outstanding issues in this House. One of them was the Tororo report. I can confirm what the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development said, that the President will be meeting the two sides in that dispute before Christmas in order to conclude that matter. Therefore, for the time being, we shall not be raising it on the Floor because he has given me that assurance.

We also discussed the construction of a number of urgent roads. He has agreed to make some concrete moves on them. I will not mention the roads but I think that next week, we shall be able to get feedback from the Government on those issues. 

Secondly, honourable members, I have received a report that there were some incidents that occurred today in the Committee on Education and Sports, where we sent our petition on the issue of Makerere University. I shall require the chairperson to file a report to me today about what transpired and then we shall be able to deal with it tomorrow. Nevertheless, you might see something from the media about it. 

Honourable members, our Committee on Public Accounts (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises) constituted a subcommittee on 9 July 2019 to investigate the disposal of property belonging to the Departed Asians Property Custodian Board. This was as a result of the Auditor-General’s report and comprised of whistle-blowers. 

As you will appreciate, the issue of the custodian board has never been handled in this House and this is the first time, so I approved that. However, I have been told that there are attempts to wind up the subcommittee before it has reported to this House. Therefore, I would like to inform the House and the members of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) that the powers of the House cannot be usurped by any particular Member. The work of the subcommittee should be done and concluded and they should report to this House because the power comes from this House. It is not necessary to disrupt their work. Let it complete its work so that we can have an effective closure to that inquiry. 

I, therefore, ask the subcommittee to use the next 45 sitting days to complete work on the custodian board and report to this House. 

The final matter, honourable members, is that this week is not a very good one because we have lost a number of people. I would like to report the death of hon. Max Omeda, a former Member of Parliament, former minister and former Member of the Constituent Assembly. I believe that colleagues in this House will give us details on the burial arrangements. Let me invite you to stand up for one minute of silence in his honour. 

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on Tuesday, I communicated that all matters of national importance will be handled tomorrow, Thursday, in the first two hours of the sitting. Therefore, those for today and those that are outstanding will all be handled tomorrow. We shall take the first two hours to handle that business. 

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION FROM THE MANUFACTURERS AND CONSUMERS OF BOTTLED BEVERAGES IN UGANDA

3.32
MR GIDEON ONYANGO (Independent, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This petition is moved under rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of this House. I will go directly to the issues and then the prayers. 

The petitioners are consumers and manufacturers of beverages in Uganda. The petitioners aver that their members jointly appeal against the Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) implementation and installation of digital stamp systems at the factories of the petitioners.

The petitioners are concerned that the service provider, SICPA-SA was selected to carry out the exercise without due process of procurement according to the procurement laws of Uganda.

That in total disregard and abuse of the existing procurement laws, Ugandans were locked out of the whole process that denied the country revenue and capital flight. That these are the same machines owned by Uganda Printing & Publishing Corporation (UPPC) and Uganda Security Printing Company Limited, and that they have local capacity to implement the digital tax system. 

The petitioners further aver that the issuance of digital tax stamps at varying costs, for example Shs l5 for a bottle of water, Shs 20 for a bottle soda, Shs 55 for a bottle of beer, Shs 80 for a packet of tobacco, and Shs 185 for a bottle of spirit and wines is discriminatory, yet the digital tax stamp is the same and its purpose is only to track and trace the product.

The petitioners further contend that the digital tax stamps will increase cost of production and will put legitimate manufacturers out of business, yet little has been done to bring the informal sectors into the formal sector. This presents a further risk of ordinary Ugandans resorting to illegal –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are not supposed to be reading the body.

MR ONYANGO: Madam Speaker, I am not reading the body but just picking the highlights. 

The petitioners argue that the entire process carried out – 

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers? 

MR ONYANGO: Madam Speaker, my prayers are:

    1. That Parliament places a halt on the digital tax stamps until the committee investigates the procurement procedures and all matters put in the petition as presented to this House.
    2. That the committee investigates the cost of the stamps, selective method of implementation and mechanisms to bring the informal sector to taxable capacity prior to implementation of the tax measures. 

I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that during the budget process, this House rejected the request for funding for that project. I do not know where hon. Lugoloobi is, but this House had said no to it. Let us ask the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to examine that petition and come back to us with a report. Thank you. 

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION ON TEA SEEDLINGS SUPPLIERS AND NURSERY OPERATORS IN BUSHENYI DISTRICT ON NON-PAYMENT BY GOVERNMENT FOR SEEDLINGS SUPPLIED AND DISTRIBUTED TO FARMERS UNDER NAADS PROGRAMME

3.37
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I present this petition moved under rule 30 of our Rules of Procedure. 

The petitioners are tea seedlings suppliers, nursery operators, farmers and distributors of tea seedlings from greater Bushenyi. They are frustrated and aggrieved. They were contracted by Government to supply tea seedlings to farmers in 2017 and they were supposed to be paid three months after supplying the seedlings. These are about 500 people who supplied about 10 million seedlings worth Shs 3.5 billion. 

Three years down the road, the activity has been verified by the Chief Administrative Officer, Bushenyi, and they made their presentation to the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) but there is no response to the farmers. The petitioners are getting more disappointed and frustrated, and they are facing a lot of difficulties in their operations. Some of them got loans from the banks to enable them do this, and inputs like fertilizers were quite expensive. 

Their prayers are as follows:
1. Your humble petitioners pray that Parliament urges Government to expedite the payment due to the tea seedlings suppliers and nursery operators in Bushenyi District. 

2. That Parliament urges Government to treat tea seedlings suppliers fairly and with empathy in all future transactions by paying all suppliers quickly and always on time.
3. That Parliament urges Government to pay close attention to issues of tea farmers, especially the tea inputs and supplies, tea policy, tea pricing, extension services, improved tea loans and other activities of the tea value chain.

Your humble petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray and hereto appended are your humble petitioners’ signatures as attached.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Magyezi. The petition is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to handle expeditiously and report back to this House.  

RESPONSE TO A QUESTION ON THE RAMPANT POWER OUTAGES IN NORTHERN UGANDA

3.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, in a letter dated 4 November 2019 from hon. Reagan Okumu, a member of the Committee on Natural Resources, my ministry was required to respond to extreme power fluctuations in Gulu and Kitgum areas. Specifically, hon. Reagan Okumu was seeking for -
a) Restoration of power supply in the sub-region for domestic and industrial needs – (Interruption) 

Mr JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, there was a debate here and you guided and requested the minister to come and provide a statement regarding the entire Northern Uganda. The minister is here responding to a letter by hon. Reagan Okumu. I would like to beg for your guidance on whether we should proceed with this statement, which is farfetched and seemingly not grounded on the Rules of Procedure of this House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, first, it was not hon. Okumu but hon. Lyandro Komakech who raised the issue about power outages in Gulu. Furthermore, hon. Akena complained about the power outages in Lira and hon. Atiku reminded us about the issue of West Nile, which has been on the Floor of this House. That is the genesis. 

MR PETER LOKERIS: Madam Speaker, I note the request by hon. Komakech and it is also in line with this one. This statement answers all requests about northern Uganda, especially the Acholi region. It is in that respect that I am responding and telling the people of that region what is happening. 

THE SPEAKER: Let the minister respond and then we shall find out whether he has said enough or not. Let him proceed.

MR PETER LOKERIS: Thank you for your wise ruling, Madam Speaker. I was saying that this letter asked for – 

a) 	Restoration of power supply in the sub-region for domestic and industrial needs, and that is in the Acholi area. 
b) 	An explanation of how Government will ensure power supply reliability in the region. 
c) 	Provide different rural electrification schemes in the sub-regions.

2. 	Government recognises power demand growth in Acholi region due to various economic activities taking place in this sub-region. The issue of power cuts has been raised before by Parliament to which explanation was given on how Government is addressing the issue. 

3. 	The first intervention that has been implemented is to install a second transformer at Lira substation to double the capacity of the substation from 20MW to 40MW. This intervention has increased power reliability in the region as implementation of short-term and medium-term interventions are at different levels. I will elaborate on short-term and medium-term interventions later. 

4. 	Therefore, the prolonged power outage that was witnessed on Friday, 1 November 2019 up to Sunday, 4 November 2019 was not a matter of sabotage but rather due to unplanned technical faults on the transmission network. 

5. 	My ministry, therefore, responds to the specific issues raised as follows:

Restoration of power supply in the sub-region for domestic and industrial needs

    a) Gulu and Kitgum are connected on the national grid through the 132kV Tororo-Opuyo-Lira transmission line on wooden poles, which experience breakdown especially in swampy areas.
    b) There was a technical fault on the 132kV transmission line between Soroti and Lira substations at Kirikiti swamp where a wooden pole in this swamp collapsed on Friday, 1 November 2019, leaving all areas served by Lira substation out of supply for about two days. Gulu and Kitgum are some of the areas that did not have power for about two days because of this technical fault.
    c) The power supply has since been restored, bringing Gulu, Kitgum and the environs back on power.
    d) It took long to restore power supply as the swamp was waterlogged due to heavy rains, hindering quick erection of a new pole.

Explanation on how Government will ensure power supply reliability in the sub-region

Short Term

a) 	Construction of Aswa hydropower dam is complete and the line evacuating power from Aswa dam will be ready by the end of November 2019. Gulu, Kitgum and the environs will, therefore, be getting locally-generated power from Aswa dam with effect from December 2019. Aswa dam will provide an alternative power supply and, therefore, enhance power supply reliability in the sub-region.

b) 	Government is constructing Tororo-Opuyo-Lira transmission line on metallic structures to replace the old wooden lines. Once complete, the new line will provide stable power to Acholi. This project is expected to be completed during the financial year 2019/2020. The line would have been completed but it is being hampered by court injunctions, mainly in Tororo and Lira districts. 

c) 	Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Limited has commenced rehabilitation of the 33kV Lira-Gulu and Lira-Kitgum lines in order to enhance their reliability. 

Medium and Long Term

a) 	The 132kV transmission line connecting Karuma Hydropower Dam to Lira substation is under construction and is about 85 per cent complete. This power line, once complete, provides an opportunity for the sub-region to directly get power supply from Karuma Hydropower Dam.

b) 	Procurement is ongoing for the contractor to undertake construction works for the 132kV Lira-Gulu-Nebbi-Arua transmission line. Procurement of the contractor is expected to be completed by the end of this year. This provides an opportunity for the region to get power supply through Olwiyo, Kole and Lira substations, hence significantly boosting power supply reliability in the region.

The areas to be connected are all in the appendixes. Every district in that region is included here. I would like to know whether I have to read all these appendices.

THE SPEAKER: The issue of power is very critical but they are many. Are they uploaded on the iPads? Just read the schemes and districts.

MR LOKERIS: Okay.
1. Amuru District 

Under Implementation
(Areas packaged under the sub-county electrification programme under China EXIM Bank funding)

    a) Tudakakuba Trading Centre in Amuru Sub-county
    b) Areas in Guruguru Sub-county include Abye, Coke, Guruguru and Pailyec
    c) Kal Trading Centre in Pabbo Sub-county
    d) Elegu in Elegu Town Council 	
    e) Pacilo East in Atiak Subcounty
    f) Pawel Pukumu in Opara Subcounty.

Planned Schemes 
(Works packaged under the World Bank funded intensification programme)

    a) Transformer installations for Restore Leadership Academy, Kiridima Health Centre III, Olwacaro Primary School and Labongogali
    b) Amuru Hot Springs
    c) Atiak and Lwani Technical College
    d) Lacem Primary School and environs.

Completed Schemes in Amuru District
(Works implemented using Norway Government funding)

    a) Gulu-Adjumani-Moyo line T-off to Amuru Project, supplying the following areas in Amuru District: Keyo, Awer, Parabongo, Pabbo, Pawel, Atiak, Bibia, Pagak, Olwal, Labongali, Amuru Town, Amuru Subcounty headquarters and Amuru District headquarters
    b) Bibia-Elegu TC
    c) Oyam Sugar Factory in Atiak.

2. Pader District

Under Implementation 
(Works proposed under Islamic Development Bank (IDB) funding – IDB II)

    a) Transformer installations for Pader Water Pump, CCF Pader Girls’ SS and Pader Central High School.

(Areas packaged under the sub-county electrification programme under China EXIM Bank funding)

    a) Lawodapwoyo in Acholi-Bur Sub-county
    b) Angagura Sub-county headquarters
    c) Laguti Sub-county headquarters
    d) Latanya Sub-county headquarters
    e) Lapul Sub-county headquarters
    f) Ogom Sub-county headquarters
    g) Puranga Sub-county headquarters
    h) Pajule Sub-county headquarters.

Planned Schemes 
(Works packaged under the KfW funded intensification programme)

    a) LV pole extensions for Ligilili and Pader trading centres.

Completed Schemes in Pader District (Works completed using Government of Uganda funding)

    a) Bishop Flynn Secondary School.

(Works implemented using World Bank funding)

    a) Gulu-Acholi Bur and Paicho-Patiko-Palaro Project serving the following areas: Acholi Bur, Laguti, Aswa Ranch, Atanga, Lacekocot, Angagura and Akuyam.

(Works implemented using Norway Government funding)

    a) Rachkoko-Awere-Lalogi Project, serving the following areas: Lagile Trading Centre and Lagile Health Centre, Awere trading centre, secondary school and health centre.

(Works implemented using Swedish Development funding – SIDA II)

    b) Corner Kilak-Patongo-Adilang-Abim with T-offs to supply Pader Township and Acholi Pii areas.

3. Kitgum District

Under Implementation
(Works planned under Islamic Development Bank – IDB II)

    a) Corner Alango-Putuke Project serving the following areas: Labongo Amida, Opete, Opira Angoma, Oryanga PS and Putuke PS.

(Works planned under Islamic Development Bank – IDB II)

    a) Tumangu TC and health centres.

(Areas packaged under the subcounty electrification programme under China EXIM Bank funding)

    a) Labongo-Akwang Subcounty headquarters in Ateng
    b) Kitgum Matidi Subcounty headquarters in Lanyam
    c) Kitgum Matidi Town Council headquarters in Pagwa Layamo
    d) Labongo-Amida West Subcounty headquarters in Omunibul plus other areas to benefit shall include First Jeng, Auch, Layik and Okidi Central.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if you look at the Order Paper, we wanted you to explain power outages in Gulu, Lira and West Nile. What you are answering is a different matter. I know it is important but it is not what –

MR PETER LOKERIS: The line going to Arua is on but we are still getting areas where the lines will be passing. The extension is going from the dam – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are answering a different question. I know that information is important but it is not what is on the Order Paper. The item on the Order Paper is asking you to explain why Gulu and Lira municipalities are continuously having no power and why West Nile for many years has not received power.  

MR PETER LOKERIS: Madam Speaker, when I was making the statement, I said that there had been technical breakdowns due to the heavy rains, which at times break the poles, and we take time to work on them due to waterlogging in the swamps. While for Arua, the new plan is to take power from the dam to Arua. Arua used to be served by a generator. Madam Speaker, there are plans for Arua.

MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH: Madam Speaker, yesterday the issues we raised were very clear. We said that while Government continues to put in place all that he has read, the transmission lines that were put in the 1960’s are not operational. 

The minister should have said that while we wait for what they are supposed to complete, we could have sustainability for the current lines to be operational. Otherwise, we receive power for only 24 hours in a week. So, how do we get power for a whole week as we wait for all the megawatts that are going to come in the long-run? These are the issues we are raising. Honourable minister, can you assure the House whether this can be sorted out? Otherwise, during the dry season, we are told the poles are burnt and during rainy season, the rains have dropped the poles. What is the logic of all this explanation?

MR BENARD	ATIKU: First of all, it is the wrong minister presenting. Hon. Lokeris is the minister in charge of minerals. It should have been hon. D’Ujanga to respond. I do not know whether it is a tactical move that hon. D’Ujanga has taken leave and sent hon. Lokeris, who is in charge of minerals.

Nonetheless, we must pick interest. This report that has been presented here is very important. I sit on the Committee on National Economy and we approved several loan requests that have come here and been approved. However, we are hearing rumours, and many times those rumours which move around in the corridors of Parliament are facts. The rumour is that the money we approved for taking power to subcounties has been mismanaged. The contract was awarded to a Chinese company and the company has shared the money with some subcontractors and now money is changing hands, left, right and centre. We, actually, may not see power going to the subcounties.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us be focused. You asked questions yesterday, which need answers. That matter of the subcounties should come separately. 

MR ATIKU: Madam Speaker, I was just trying to keep the House alert because they bring this information to confuse us.

THE SPEAKER: We shall not allow them. 

MR ATIKU: That aside, Madam Speaker, on the issue of West Nile, I mentioned here yesterday clearly that we passed a loan request and we engaged the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development here in the South Committee Room. They actually gave us assurance and a roadmap of the progress they had made.

According to the roadmap, by May this year the contractor should have been on site. We even had a stakeholders meeting in Nebbi, organised by hon. D’Ujanga, who is not here. I do not know why he is not here, yet he should be giving us updates.

Madam Speaker, there is something sinister, which should interest us. For West Nile, we are not going to lie down if the issue of connecting the region to the national grid is not addressed yet Parliament provided money.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery, we have students and teachers of Factory Primary School. Please stand up. They are from Jinja District, represented by hon. Lufafa and hon. Loy Katali. You are welcome.

Honourable members, do you want him to answer question No.4 or do you want to wait for the issue of the subcounties?  

MS LILLY ADONG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The power outage in northern Uganda must be interpreted differently. It is no longer inefficiency of the Government. You cannot operate a mill or even a salon. One time, I took time and went to the Umeme Manager of Gulu – we all have homes in Gulu – but he told me that the capacity of the transformer they have is low. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to tell the minister that it is not rain or even fire burning the power lines; it is something else. It is economic sabotage. During the dry season, three times in a week, Umeme is always doing “management”. They used to send us messages, which they have since stopped. I kept marking my calendar because I took particular interest. Each month, we receive power for less than 15 days, which means that in a year, Gulu District or northern Uganda receives power for less than half of the year. We cannot manufacture. In fact, all the investors who had their factories in Gulu have moved to Lira. We cannot process products.

Madam Speaker, in this country, once you start hearing things in the corridors, they can materialise. They are saying in the corridors that we have failed to manage our land and to develop. Sincerely, how can we develop when we cannot process agricultural produce or even operate salons? In fact, you cannot invest in our area.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do you want the minister to answer or not? Honourable minister, do you have the answer to question No.4? 

MR PETER LOKERIS: Madam Speaker, what I am seeing is that everyone wants to raise a question. I think what I have here could be inadequate; so, let me go back and bring another paper. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR PETER LOKERIS: I request that all the questions be raised concerning the northern part of Uganda so that I am able to bring a comprehensive report.

THE SPEAKER: Can you bring it next week?

MR PETER LOKERIS: Yes, it can be brought next week on Thursday because it is a big document.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I will instruct the Clerk to pick up all the questions, which have been raised relating to the subcounties and all these areas in the north, and send them to the minister so that he makes a proper response. We are going to item No.5. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have read through the statement, which the honourable minister presented. When you asked him to read the list of districts, he tried to avoid it because we only heard Nwoya, Kitgum, Amuru, Pader and he stopped there. This is despite the fact that he said he has a list of all the districts in northern Uganda. Even the way the statement was addressing the questions was not in context. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your mandate that he makes sure that he puts the responses in the context of the questions. His report should be comprehensive to the extent that he should listen to the views, which the Members have already pointed out.

There are many views, not only on northern Uganda but other parts of the country as well. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the honourable minister to take questions and address the sector within the entire country rather than handling it in piecemeal?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a question by hon. Guma on the whole country for which we expect an answer. It is on all the subcounties in the country. You can pick up the other questions from what the Members have been saying and prepare answers for all of them.

MR PETER LOKERIS: Much obliged.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ADMINISTRATION OF PARLIAMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

4.09
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be read for the second time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, it has been seconded. You can move for the second reading and then the chairman will come up. Do you have the justification?

MR BARYAYANGA: Madam Speaker, I now invite the chairperson to come and take the lead. I think it is better that way.

THE SPEAKER: Ideally, you should have stated your objectives but if you have handed over the work to the chairman, it is okay. You should give the justification for the second reading and then the chairman will answer with the report.

MR BARYAYANGA: Madam Speaker, the object of the Bill is to amend the Administration of Parliament Act to provide for the manner of choosing the backbench members of the Parliamentary Commission, the Leader of the Opposition, the Chief Opposition Whip and party whips, and to establish the Office of the Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Chief Opposition Whip. It is also to establish the tenure of whips and the Office of the Dean of Independents in Parliament. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.12
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Speaker, the committee considered this Bill. As in our report on 29 January 2019, hon. Andrew Aja Baryayanga, the MP, Kabale Municipality, moved under rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure to introduce the Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Bill, 2019. The Bill was accordingly referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, pursuant to rule 128 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 
	
This Bill seeks to amend the Administration of Parliament Act to provide for the manner of choosing the back bench members of the Commission, the Leader of the Opposition, the Chief Opposition Whip and party whips, among others.
	
It also seeks to establish the Office of the Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Deputy Chief Opposition Whip, to provide for the tenure of party whips and to establish the Office of the Dean of Independent Members of Parliament and related matters.

The Bill also identifies one of the defects in the current legislation as - in designating the backbench members of the Commission, the Administration of Parliament Act allocated only one position to be filled by the Opposition and yet the party in Government was allocated three positions.

Madam Speaker, in considering the Bill, the committee was guided by rule 128(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. We met and received memoranda from notable stakeholders such as the Leader of the Opposition, the Chief Opposition Whip, the Government Chief Whip and other Members of Parliament.

The copy I am referring to here is an abridged version, for purposes of presentation. Allow me to point to the views of two notable stakeholders that the committee met:

1. The Chief Opposition Whip pointed out that the argument that all shades of opinion represented in Parliament are not represented on the Commission is untrue and baseless in light of the functions of the Commission. 

He also alluded to the fact that the mover of the Bill seems to look at the Commission as a body that is supposed to be representative of every opinion in Parliament, which is untrue. 

This was the opinion of one of the stakeholders and we highlighted the one from the Chief Opposition Whip. Therefore, whatever I will be saying here is that, until I say otherwise.

The Commission makes decisions that benefit all Members of Parliament irrespective of their political affiliation and the mover cannot point at any decision that was taken by the Commission that was not fair to any of the other shades of opinion not represented on the Commission. The role of the Parliamentary Commission, mainly being the provision of Member's welfare, should not be looked at from political party lenses because Members of Parliament, whether in the Opposition or ruling party, are all equally entitled to be provided for by the Commission.

Another person or another stakeholder is the Leader of the Opposition. On the other hand, the Leader of the Opposition argued that this Bill would be a thorn to the multiparty dispensation, which the Opposition advocated for, for more than two decades. 

Since 2004, parties have been struggling to overcome the 18 years suffered in abeyance, being incriminated, operating from limited space and curtailed freedom of association. The Leader of the Opposition added that to date, parties are still struggling to harmonise loyalty and keep disciplined membership with common interests. Thus, parties in the Opposition are so sceptical and reluctant to support this Bill. 

Madam Speaker, it is worth noting that during the interaction with the other stakeholders, concerns were raised against the movers of the Bill for not consulting the major stakeholders on the matters they raised, for instance, the Opposition and the party in Government.

Secondly, the committee notes that whereas the Rules of Procedure do not state whether a private Member of Parliament intending to bring a Bill before Parliament must consult, it is a democratic principle that the views of the people, especially those who are to be affected by the proposed amendment, be sought.

In addition the committee, therefore, proposes that guidance should be issued by the Rt Hon. Speaker in exercise of the powers granted to the Speaker under rules 7 and 8 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, on the manner and mechanism for consultations that must precede the introduction of private Members’ Bills.

In conclusion, the committee scrutinised the Bill and made recommendations. It is, therefore, the prayer of the committee that this House allows the Bill to be read the second time based on its recommendations on pages 10 and 14 of the report shared with Members on their iPads. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you have heard the mover giving his objectives and you have also heard from the chairperson of the committee. This report has been signed by the necessary minimum of one-third of the members. Therefore, you are free to express your views. 

4.19
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the chairperson and the mover of the Bill who had, I suppose, other interests other than the interest of having multiparty democracy in this country.

If you look at the object of the Bill, it is referring only to the Opposition, yet in this House we have both the Opposition and the ruling party. If you are talking about the methods of choosing the Chief Opposition Whip, then you should also mention how they should choose the Leader of Government Business and the Government Chief Whip. If you are not doing that, then it will be wrong for you to come and prescribe a method which is aiming at curtailing the operations of multiparty democracy and oppressing one side.

Madam Speaker, if you look at this Bill, we do not need to go even to the committee stage. This Bill should be withdrawn by the mover of the Bill –(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, I was excited about this Bill and I forgot to lay on the Table a copy of the report and the minutes of the proceedings of the meeting we held on this Bill. I beg that I seek your indulgence and allow me to lay them on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: The report and the minutes of the committee are hereby laid on the Table.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Again, I would request the mover of this Bill that it is high time he withdrew it. There is a proposal to have a dean of the Independents. If you come in Parliament as an Independent Member, you are independent of each other. The only thing we know about deans is that they are for students in universities and not for Independents in Parliament.

Madam Speaker, even if you say that we should consult, it is a must that- You see, I am saying this because when you are making the law, it must be blind. Here, you say that we should consult all the parties in the Opposition. I would like to cite an example from this House. Hon. Betty Amongi is a member of Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) but she sits on the other side; the President of UPC, who is her husband, sits on this side. Now, whom do you consult when there are two UPC members on both sides? You also know the Democratic Party (DP) scenario. Therefore, it does not necessarily mean that when you sit this side, you are in the Opposition; no. There are many examples here. 

Therefore, if a party is leading in the Opposition, it may consult. It can even consult with the other side of the ruling party and say, “we want to do X or Y”. However, if you say, the party “must”, as I am seeing the committee saying - If you consult the UPC on each side, what sort of consultation is that?

For us to allow multiparty democracy to grow, we should allow parties to do what they should do and to do it well. The only thing is that they should apply democracy in their parties. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee. In this report, under point No. 4.2, I heard him referring to the Chief Opposition Whip and the Leader of the Opposition. Has he changed this statement, because the second paragraph says, “The Government Chief Whip objected to the Bill” and it goes on to mention the arguments presented by the Government Chief Whip? However, while you were reading, you referred to the Chief Opposition Whip. Is there a difference or you actually meant this one? I need to understand so that I can make my second comment.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, as I was reading the abridged version, which means it is a summarised version, I said of all the stakeholders, I picked out two. I should then have picked three, including the Government Chief Whip who was also not in support of this Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The reason why I raised that is because you picked two, and I was concern about the sample space. When you are looking at a sample, if it is people, you choose men and women. You do not only choose men and forget the women. Therefore, the sample space you chose here is wrong; you mentioned the Leader of the Opposition and the Chief Opposition Whip. You made a mistake. You should have chosen from the other side also.

Madam Speaker, I see that both sides are saying this Bill has a bad motive. I believe that the mover of the Bill is an Independent Member of Parliament who had wanted his interest to be taken care of. He wanted to create a dean of Independents so that maybe he would use this as vehicle to go to the Parliamentary Commission. However, I can tell you that any party can decide to designate any of the Independents as a member of the Commission. It is up to them to make a decision and say this one is an Independent but Opposition leaning or this is an Independent but Movement leaning. 

Therefore, I would advise my brother to either become Independent-Movement or Independent-Opposition and you will have an easy way to reach the board, if you are very interested in the Parliamentary Commission. I do not think using this method is the right way. I would plead with my colleagues who are independent that it is high time you made a choice on which side of the coin you want to go in January. You can be either UPC or DP and we move. Thank you.

4.26
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would request that you give me more time so that I realign this debate.

Madam Speaker, when you look at the way the report was prepared, it was done with a selfish motive. Much as the mover did not consult us, the Independents, he does not wish away the fact that Independents are recognised in the Constitution. Article 2 of the Constitution says that the Constitution shall be the supreme law; therefore, if it is the supreme law, it has to prevail on anything contrary to it.

Madam Speaker, if hon. Nandala-Mafabi could read Article 72 (4) of the Constitution, it is very clear. It says, “Any person is free to stand for an election as a candidate, independent of a political organisation…” We begin from here. The Constitution is well aware that in Parliament there are Independent Members and the Commission caters for the welfare of Members of Parliament. Why is it that the NRM is ring-fencing the three positions and the Opposition ring-fencing one? It means that they want their interests to be covered. Why don’t we also have somebody on the Commission? Don’t you think the Independents also have interests, whether one or 60? 

Madam Speaker, Article 21 of the Constitution is about equality and freedom from discrimination. Article 21(1) says, “All persons are equal before and under the law in all the spheres of political…” - even if I end there. What is important to note here is “political” because we are politicians. However, it goes on to say, “…economic, social, cultural life and in every other respect and shall enjoy equal protection of the law.” The interests of Independent Members, whether one or 60 of them, must be catered for by the Commission. 

Article 21(2) of the Constitution says, “Without prejudice to clause (1) of this Article, a person shall not be discriminated against on the ground of sex, race, colour, ethnic origin, tribe, creed or religion, social or economic standing, political opinion…” It is very clear. Why would this Parliament go against the Constitution, which was framed by this very House - (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have two or three categories of Independents. There are those who participate in the primaries of their political parties and when they lose, then they run as Independents. The second one is where someone who is not even affiliated to any political party decides to go for an election and contest as an Independent. The third are those who have membership of their political parties and they do not participate in primaries but they decide to run as Independents.

The point of clarification I would like to get from the honourable colleague is: What is it that is independent that an Independent Member becomes independent in this House? I ask this particularly, for situations where a Member has participated in the primaries of his or her political party elections and after maybe being rigged out, he or she runs as an Independent but has not handed over the membership card of his or her political party? What does that imply?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Constitution did not say that you lift the veil and find out whether this person is well dressed or not well dressed. Do not import new conditions.

MR WAIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that wise ruling. When we say that the ruling party should have the majority and the Opposition the minority, even when you spread the number of commissioners and the interest of Independents is catered for, the ruling party will remain with the majority and the Opposition will remain with a representative. This shade of opinion, which is clearly recognised by the Constitution, will also have its interests catered for.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we may delete all the other proposals to do with political parties - the whips, the Chief Opposition Whip – but on the issue of Independents, let us not withdraw this Bill. Let us cater for that shade of opinion, which is clearly recognised by the Constitution. I beg to move.

4.33
MR GIDEON ONYANGO (Independent, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start with report of the committee. I would like to thank the committee for the great work. The chairperson of that committee, who also read the report, is an Independent. Actually, in literal terms, I would call him a serial Independent because he has always been an Independent ever since he came to this House.

Madam Speaker, by the time someone contests for NRM primaries and loses or decides to come as an Independent, it means he is dissatisfied with the proceedings of the party primaries. That is the primary reason. In normal terms, you may not even have a right to associate such a person with a party that is full of irregularities -(Interjection). This is very serious, Madam Speaker. When you are cheated by the party that they say you are leaning to, I think that is a misplacement of English words because the party that they are associating you with has actually helped you come to Parliament as an Independent member. The fact that you are able to contest as an Independent and win the elections without the support or help of a party means you have enough mandate of the people. 

Madam Speaker, therefore, I do not think this Bill should be withdrawn, as proposed by one of our colleagues; it should stand. This Bill has –(Interjection)– honourable member, you will give me the information; just hold on for a minute. 

When you look at the summary of the report that the chairperson presented, it is very quiet on the issue of representation of Independents on the Commission. This gives us leeway to support our position – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to wind up. 

MR ONYANGO: Madam Speaker, what I was trying to put across is that this Bill should not be withdrawn. Let us delete all the other issues that are causing chaos in both the Opposition and Government. Of course, I know even the Government Chief Whip did not support it because she knows it will cause her more problems. Let us delete all this and only handle the issue of representation of Independents on the Commission. 

Madam Speaker, when a Commissioner from the NRM or the Opposition makes a decision, it will never be in favour of an Independent that they rigged in the NRM primaries or Opposition –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am a member of that Commission; when we decide issues of welfare, it is for all Members. We do not say that it either favours the Opposition Members or the ruling side; whatever we do is for all Members, please. 

MR ONYANGO: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, let me be quiet on that. The Independents need a focal person that can communicate what transpires in the Commission. Decisions are made but we do not have a link; we need this link. This is what we want the law to take care of. I thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: When we improve on the “rain”, I tell everybody here that, “The ‘rain’ is falling.” 

4.38
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to state categorically clear that there is a very big problem as far as the minority parties in this Parliament and the Independents are concerned. That is why you hear some of these voices coming up. 

I would like to start by giving the example of Members who serve on the Commission. As a member of a minority party, I have no opportunity and chance and neither do the Independents, to serve as a member of the Commission. This is ring-fenced to the Members on the Government and ruling side and the majority members on the Opposition side, Madam Speaker. 

It does not only stop at that but there is a lot of discrimination when it comes to our number; there are no equal chances and opportunities. For example, from the committee report, the issue of appointing the Leader of the Opposition is the preserve of the Opposition party with the greatest number. There is also the issue of the Commission, heading parliamentary committees, nominating representatives in the international fora, assemblies and Parliament. 

As a member of a minority party, I do not think and I do not see myself being a member of any of the international fora and assemblies –(Interruption) 

MS AMONG: Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with my sister, hon. Alum. We should avoid creating second-class members of Parliament, where the ruling party and the Opposition are recognised. The Constitution is very clear that Independents are part of this. We have our own rights, which must be exercised. 

MS ALUM: Thank you very much, hon. Among, for the information. Madam Speaker, I would also like to comment on how the Leader of the Opposition is chosen. That leader is for all of us seated on the Opposition side but we do not have a say on how that leader is chosen and yet we are supposed to listen to and respect him or her. If my party and I, as a Member of Parliament, do not have a single voice on how that Member is chosen - no wonder we are suffering here. We wait for the left-overs and that is what we are given. 

We have offices, as minority party whips but we always have to wait; we are either given water or not. Madam Speaker, I feel this is the highest level of discrimination coming from the Parliament of Uganda. 

We have been mentioned as party whips. Our names are being mentioned – other parties leave office but how are we elected? If the Leader of the Opposition was really our leader, as Members seated on the left hand side of your Chair, Madam Speaker, then, we would also have a say on how that Member is elected. We know that we do not have the majority or the numbers but let us participate. We cannot even chair committees, Madam Speaker. We cannot even go to the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA) here – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Isn’t there somebody from UPC in EALA? That one I know. 

4.42
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking my good friend, hon. Aza, for moving this motion. 

In 2010, when debating the Land (Amendment) Bill, Section 32 (a) and (b), I put it on record that this Parliament should not be seen to pass laws that target a particular group of people. 

At that time, I was referring to Buganda Kingdom because the Land (Amendment) Bill, at that time, was basically about the “Mailo Akenda”. The person who presided over the debate was the current Vice-President, who actually was and is still a Muganda. 

In 2009, when the Queen paid a visit to this House, the then Prime Minister, Prof. Apolo Nsibambi and our Leader of the Opposition, Prof. Ogenga-Latigo, agreed that the House must have free sitting to create an impression that we are a functioning multi-party Parliament. Some of us walked to the Speaker and said that if we wanted to save the image of this House, then, Members should sit according to their party and side. Indeed, it created an impression that we are a multi-party Parliament with a weak Opposition side. 

This Bill is presented in a way that basically targets to weaken the Opposition. I would like to appeal to my very good friend, hon. Baryayanga, to withdraw it. 

Madam Speaker, when you look at the remedies of the proposed Bill, the election of the Leader of the Opposition, if left to members of Parliament, will mean that it is not only the Opposition that will participate in the election of the Leader of the Opposition. The ruling party will also have the right to cast their votes on who should be the Leader of the Opposition. We shall not be surprised to have a Leader of the Opposition who is actually a member of the ruling party.

Of course, it is about numbers and if you subject it to the entire House to vote for the Leader of the Opposition –(Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I find it hard to put my colleague to order. However, as a student of English, I find challenges when a colleague comes to the House and finds it fit to distort the English language here. If somebody is Leader of the Opposition, it means he or she leads the Opposition. Therefore, for him to come here and say that we shall have a Leader of the Opposition elected by the ruling party, in disguise, defeats my understanding. A Leader of the Opposition must lead the Opposition. A person from the Government side cannot lead the Opposition. 

When we listen to such statements and people are watching us, we find it hard to bear as the English language is distorted here. Therefore, is my colleague in order to say that we shall see a situation where a person from the ruling party will be elected as Leader of the Opposition?

THE SPEAKER: Please substantiate that statement. 

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. I would like to explain my position very clearly. If the opportunity for choosing the Leader of the Opposition was given to the entire House, the way it is being proposed in this Bill –(Interjection)– fine, let me put it this way. (Interjection)

Madam Speaker, I beg for your protection.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I would like to draw your attention to the objectives under clause 4(1). It reads, “Election of the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament to be by secret ballot and to be open to all members of the Opposition political parties in Parliament.”

MR OYET: Most obliged. Madam Speaker, let me put it this way; we have the UPC party, which has a member who now serves in the ruling party as a Cabinet member. We have a DP member who serves in the Government as a minister and her husband sits on the Opposition side. If that opportunity was given for the Leader of the Opposition to be chosen by the Opposition members, what would the result be? You will end up with a Member like hon. Betty Amongi as the Leader of the Opposition and yet she is NRM. That is the perspective in which I am putting this case.

As I conclude –(Interruption)

MR AGABA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give to my honourable colleague is that the argument of weakening the Opposition is right because currently, the rules provide for the Leader of the Opposition to be nominated by the party in Opposition with the highest number. The moment you dictate that the party in Opposition should bring four people amongst whom to choose, that means that the Leader of the Opposition will not be necessarily as loyal to the party in Opposition. Rather, he will be loyal to the members in the Opposition that chose him. That is where the leading party in the Opposition loses control over such a Leader of the Opposition. Thank you.

MR OYET: Thank you very much, my good friend, for the information. Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by saying that if we are to sustain this Bill, I would like to beg my colleagues to consider dropping the provisions that touch on the issue of the Leader of the Opposition. 

However, I would like to agree on the position of the commissioners that it should be subjected to general elections by the Members because they are the backbench representatives. They should not be chosen by the party. I beg to submit.

4.50
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In 1962, it was clearly known that the majority of the DP members crossed the Floor and joined the UPC party. You know very well that in the Political Parties and Organisations’ Act, which we amended in 2015, it was clearly stated that one year to the next general elections, members are free to move from the Government side and cross to the Opposition. Members who are in the Opposition are also free to cross to the NRM side.

Madam Speaker, there is a contradiction there. You have heard hon. Nandala-Mafabi and hon. Oyet raise their fears. I would like to put forward this hypothesis: around January or February 2020, we will be left with one year to the general elections. We have hon. Betty Amongi on that side and hon. Akena on this side. We cannot be sure that when it comes to January or February next year, hon. Akena may not actually cross with all his members to the NRM. Similarly, hon. Amongi may also cross with members from the NRM to the Opposition. The situation is not predictable.

The second scenario is, when they cross - I said I am putting a hypothesis that when our members on this side cross with hon. Jimmy Akena to that side and possibly, hon. Akena has been the Leader of the Opposition on this side, what would happen?

In addition, I would like to address the issue of clause 6(b)(3) –(Interruption)         

MR AGABA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. To the best of my understanding, a hypothesis is an assumption or an imagination –(Interjection)– Yes, it is a view but an imagination. It can only be close to happening if it can be empirically proved and then it becomes an idea.

Are we proceeding right for hon. Nzoghu to propose hypotheses that are unimaginable and impracticable? As a House, are we proceeding right to let him propose his imaginations that are theoretical that the whole House is dragged into discussing what goes on in the mind of hon. Nzoghu? Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please stick to the Bill and address the provisions. Do not speculate. 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I propose that consultations for that matter should be more informal than putting –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just like you have been handling this House and managing all of us in a manner that is balanced, in that spirit we can continue and there will be no crisis in this House.

What we need to ask ourselves is: do parties have powers to reject an elected leader of a political party? 

With regard to the proposed clause 6(b)(3), where it says, “In electing the Leader of the Opposition the party to which he or she belongs shall consult other political parties in the Opposition represented in Parliament”, Madam Speaker, these are the things that come out. What is the essence of this clause? Secondly, do other political parties have veto powers? 

Three, can the chairperson indicate where else in the Commonwealth this practice exists? Four, why should you provide a law that gives on one hand and also takes on the other hand? 

When it comes to clause 6(b)(6), I propose that it be deleted because –(Member timed out.)

4.57
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report. One thing I would like to remind Members is Article 78 of the Constitution, which shows you the composition of the House. Article 79(1) says: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda.”

Madam Speaker, I need to be educated by the committee on whether this law is going to bring harmony among our brothers. The way I have understood it is that our brothers seem to feel that they are being left out. They feel that they are not comfortable with the current arrangement. 

However, now both the Chief Opposition Whip and the Government Whip clearly came out to say that, that arrangement is unattainable. At the same time, I remember one of the senior Members, who is an Independent – hon. Majegere – said they were not consulted but they now support it. I do not know the arrangement.

Thirdly, I am worried. As we talk, the leading Opposition party is the one that nominates the Leader of the Opposition and the team. If we pass this law, are we going to be fighting the parties or are we trying to generate ways to help parties to grow? That is the issue I would like to be helped to understand.

Madam Speaker, my opinion is that this law is only good for a certain section of people but it may not be good for the entire House and the proper administration of this House.

Furthermore, I would like my colleagues to know that if we are questioning the role of the Commission, it means we are questioning the power and responsibility of the Speaker. That is why, like somebody said, we do not know what is happening. Even I who sits this side, I do not know what happens but when the decision is taken it is taken for the good of everybody.

5.01
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the matter of the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament will best be determined at a time we agree to have an Ex-Officio Leader of the Opposition, where somebody who has competed in an election and probably lost is allowed to come here and lead the Opposition as an Ex-Officio.

Madam Speaker, I think it is unfair when you discuss only one side without discussing the other. However, my concern is on the issue of the Independents. When you look at the growth pattern of this Parliament from the Eighth to Ninth and now the Tenth Parliament, you have the Independents growing more than the number for political parties.

The Independents are now about 66, the biggest Opposition political party has 36 MPs and the other parties have 10, five and others. If you project what will happen in the next Parliament, you are most likely going to have the number of Independents almost doubling; why? All those who will lose in the primaries are going to contest as Independents. There is a People Power Movement of young people outside there who are saying they are not joining any political party and they are going to have members of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, I think it is high time we handled the issue of Independents in this Parliament with seriousness and according to the patterns of growth of this House. Matters of Independents cannot continuously be swept under the carpet and we just say “they lean here or there”. I think it is high time we handled matters of Independents seriously because that is where we are going. 

All these political parties have problems in managing primaries, including the political party where I belong. They never handle primaries in a professional manner. Therefore, you are most likely – (Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am not trying to support the political parties’ electoral commissions. Even for the Independent Electoral Commission of Uganda, which is chaired by Justice Byamukama, you recently saw ballot papers “walking” in Hoima. Therefore, if the one which is funded by the Government of Uganda is not independent, which one will be independent? 

The information I would like to give is that the other one came with walking ballot papers. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR NSAMBA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, you are aware that the political parties under the Interparty Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD) are mooting a motion to do away with Independents in this Parliament.

If Parliament does not handle the matter of Independents very well, where every one of us is likely to become an Independent tomorrow – I think issues of Independent Members should be accorded priority. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Oshabe, I wish you addressed the particular part of the Bill you want us to handle. Otherwise, you were making a general submission. 

5.05 
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for proper evaluation of this Bill. I would like to also thank the mover for the attempt he made. However, I would like to point out the following:

We should not legislate this matter as if we are deficient of the practical facts that exist in this Parliament. Much as we have the Independents here, very few of them represent independent opinions. We cannot even attempt to think that they are not independent of each other.

Hon. Majegere has intimated to this Parliament - even on this very particular one, their opinions are not similar. They were not even consulted. Therefore, we should not be tempted to think that they will ever represent a common shade of opinion –(Interruption)

MR MUHEIRWE: The information I would like to give you is that whereas they are all Independents, there are some we meet in Kyankwanzi and there those we do not meet there. Therefore, they are all independent of each other.

MR MAJEGERE: Madam Speaker, Article 72(4) of the Constitution does not talk about someone in Kyankwanzi; it talks about an Independent who is in politics in Parliament. Therefore, is the Member in order to try to confuse this House by bringing issues of Kyankwanzi?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us be serious with this subject. The issue of Kyankwanzi is not known on this Floor. It is outside here. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, regarding Kyankwanzi, Najjanankumbi or Kyandondo - a matter in the Ninth Parliament was taken to the Constitutional Court. It was resolved that the right to associate - going to attend political activities of another political party when you are Independent - does not constitute crossing the Floor. That is a right guaranteed under Article 29 of the Constitution. That is why I could go to Kyankwanzi or Najjanankumbi or Makerere.

Madam Speaker, that matter should not be - whether you are Independent or not – in fact, there is nothing like independent leaning in our laws.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to appeal to you to treat this matter very seriously. Otherwise, as the head of this House, I have a problem. 

When the Administration of Parliament Act was enacted, there were no Independents. Now we have 67 Independents in this House. Suppose in the next election we have 120 Independents, what shall we do? Shall we still say you cannot go to the Commission, you cannot chair a committee? Let us deal with this issue seriously. (Applause)

MR DAVID MUTEBI: Madam Speaker, I am still holding the Floor. I would like to agree that Independents have opinions but they can never be common in circumstances where the Commission comes together to deliberate on certain issues.

Madam Speaker, Parliament, in its wisdom, entrusted the Commission with the responsibility to take care of the Independents’ views, which you have competently done before.

Having said that, I would like to comment on the leadership of the Opposition. It would be a grave mistake and dark design to assume that the Leader of the Opposition should be elected. That would be eroding the executive powers of the leadership of the Opposition. Otherwise, the executive opposition is outside Parliament but their views and leadership opinions are represented by their representatives here, who are the leadership that they designated.

Madam Speaker, therefore, I think it is not fair to erode that power. On that basis, I would like to say that it is not fair to uphold this Bill. I would like to request the mover of the Bill to withdraw it and think of the best way of getting the Independents –(Member timed out.)  

THE SPEAKER: Who is an interested party? Honourable members, let me do my work. 

5.12
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to concentrate on the principles of this Bill. I would like to, therefore, appeal to Members that if there is anything contentious, we should deal with them when we go to the Committee Stage to either defeat or uphold them.

Madam Speaker, we are the people’s representatives in this House. We do not represent political parties but we represent the people. We represent the views of the people in the hierarchy; it is national interest that comes first. What comes next is the people’s interest that you represent.

Political party interest comes a distant third. You cannot start legislating on the basis of what the party wants and disregard what your people want. Otherwise, you will be deceiving yourself and you will not be representing the people who sent you to this House.

Madam Speaker, the issue of the Independents - I actually do not understand why parties should claim that having Independents can destroy a political party. In my own NRM party, there is Gen. Otafiire, who is a member of the Central Executive Committee of NRM, which is the top most decision-making organ of the party. He lost an election but he is still a minister. Has he destroyed NRM [HON. MEMBERS: “No”] is it in any way detrimental to the NRM? So, why this argument that when you have Members who are Independents –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I have read the NRM constitution; if you campaign against the official NRM candidate, you are no longer their member. Therefore, Gen. Kahinda Otafiire ceased being a member of the NRM the day he campaigned against the NRM candidate.

Is the Member on the Floor in order to misrepresent NRM and to lie to Parliament that by having someone who campaigned against the NRM sitting at the top organ of that party, it does not destroy that party? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of the NRM or other parties is not before this House; what we are discussing is the Constitution and rights of members of Parliament. Please proceed.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This House must provide an enabling environment for all Members in this House to represent the views of the people who sent them here. It does not matter whether I am an Independent. In any case, it is the same parties that created these Independents; that because somebody dissented from you and you did not disadvantage them - how come these Independents defeated party candidates? 

Instead of coming here to claim that this Bill is intended to destroy political parties, the political parties should put their houses in order. That is the fundamental issue they must address.

The right to belong to a political party is not given; I can decide to belong and I can decide not to belong. However, I appeal to my colleagues that we allow this Bill, scrutinise it and if there is any provision which is contentious, we deal with it at committee stage.

However, to say that the Bill is not good because “it will destroy political parties; so we should not even consider it” is not the work we are supposed to do here. 

Our work is to scrutinise every Bill that comes before us; so, let us not express any cowardice and do our work - accept the Bill. If there is anything we do not agree with, there is committee stage; we shall handle it at that point. I support the Bill. Let it be read for the second time and we deal with it squarely.

5.18
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support this Bill partly because the political dynamics are so interesting that I may become an Independent. It is in order to have such a Bill that takes care of the Independents in Parliament.

I was reflecting on what happened to Dr Kiiza Besigye a few days ago, when I realised that the police force was trying to flash the former Minister of State for Internal Affairs with water. That shows you how dynamic politics is.

Therefore, for the case of the Independents, it is in order for the Independents to have representation, particularly in a policy organ like the Parliamentary Commission, which makes key decisions. 

To me, this Bill is in order so that we are able to take care of the interests of the Independents who were genuinely elected by Ugandans –(Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, as people talk of destroying political parties, marginalising Independents and others, even us who belong to these political parties with our clear Rules of Procedure somewhere somehow find that the Independents are more comfortable than us.

Madam Speaker, if I, a member of a party, apply for a committee – and the rules are clear that my Chief Whip in consultation with me will designate me to a committee – and then the chief whip decides not to give me any of the three options I have indicated and decides - whether from her bed or anywhere – to drop me wherever she feels like, I wonder whether I will be representing the interests of my people when I decided to choose one of the three. The issue of Independents is not a simple thing.

My colleague here told you that you may get surprised to have 200 Independents here in future. I wonder whether we shall come back here again and legislate because that time they may have the majority; so, we need to deal with it squarely here. If we have to give them a slot, we should give it as we prepare for the future. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Acidri, please conclude.

MR ACIDRI: Madam Speaker, to conclude my submission, I have only two other issues; the issue of belonging and associating is where you see a bit of problems in political behaviour. You belong as an Independent but you associate as another political party. 

In fact, the true definition of Independents should be tested with people like us who are able to oppose the ruling party within without any fear of intimidation. We are the true Independents because we have independent minds, independence of representation of our people, the independence of not being cost financially. That is the real definition of “Independents”.

Those who are Independent, we would like to advise you to balance the boat between belonging and associating because that is where it is a little bit tricky.

Finally, on the question of representation on the Commission, I know that we amended the rules; I do not know whether we would like to revisit the rules so that whoever represents us in the Commission should be elected rather than to be dictated upon by a political party. This might resolve some of these unnecessary contradictions that we are facing now. Thank you.

5.23
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to be on record that whatever views I am going to give are mine, as a Member of Parliament for Usuk County. I listened yesterday to this debate on what transpired with Dr Kizza Besigye.

I listened to all of us giving very passionate submissions about the role of political parties. Here today, we are discussing two issues; one is the question of Independents, and I would like to request the Attorney-General to come to this august House and help the country to define what an Independent Member of Parliament is. Why do I say this? 

Madam Speaker, we must listen to one another. You cannot begin comparing yourself with a political party with two members nor can you compare yourself with a political party with nine or 10 members. All of us can be Independent members of Parliament but even when I am an Independent Member, what I would like to request here is –(Interjection)– Can I make my submissions, my sister? Can I submit?

I would like to request that when we talk about parties, we must accept to allow parties to flourish in this country as they will help us to build this country better than what it is today. The issue of the Independents being represented on the Commission is one question, which should be defined. If we all agree that an Independent is independent of the other and should be represented on the Commission then that will be the position of the House.

However, for us to begin to marry ourselves that we are Independents as an organisation, in my opinion is wrong. That is why I am speaking today as a Member of Parliament for –(Interruption)

MS AMONG: Madam Speaker, when you look at the case of Annita Among versus Attorney-General of East African Community, the issue was about an Independent; whether an Independent should be elected or not. I refer my brother, hon. Ogwang to read that case and have the information regarding an Independent.

Therefore, is he in order to ask for clarification and a legal opinion about Independents when there is already a ruling to that effect? I am an authority on Independents. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think we need the Attorney-General here. The Constitution is clear; it defines the Independents. (Applause) 

MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I thank you for your guidance and I thank my sister, hon. Among for her submission as an authority as far as Independents are concerned. However, the question is, is my sister independent?

MS AMONG: Madam Speaker, I request hon. Ogwang to withdraw his statement. I came to this House as a Member of Parliament elected as an Independent. Is he in order to assume that I am not an Independent Member of Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Can hon. Ogwang substantiate that position?

MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, my submission, as far as asking my sister to accept whether she is independent of herself, is one thing that I would like to put on record. It is true that she is independent but also associating with the political party of her interest. She is strong in that party where she is associating and I can confirm that to my brothers here.

Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by saying that –(Interjection)– hon. Nandala-Mafabi, let me conclude. I would like to conclude by commenting on the view that the views and interests of Independent members of Parliament are not represented in the Parliamentary Commission. 

Madam Speaker, all meetings of the Commission are chaired by you and I do not think there is any decision for which they can stand before this august House and say that they have not been fairly represented. There are no political parties in the Commission; it is about issues of this Parliament as an institution. I thank you so much.

5.30
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga East County, Kagadi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to interest myself in two important matters. The Independents have a valid point and it is a very serious call on the Commission specifically to check itself. Is it true that they are unfairly treated so that they now need to have representation?

Secondly, it is also a call on political parties to organise their parties. We are in a multiparty dispensation and we are talking of political parties managing the politics of this country. We would like to have political parties grow but the questions arising indicate that political parties have a lot of inaccuracies, which are causing disharmony.

There is a scenario that a Member of Parliament has raised; suppose in the next Parliament, we get around 200 Independents, what would happen? This is a call on political parties to have more decency in this matter.

Third is about the call to jointly vote for a Leader of the Opposition. This will further weaken those small parties that we are talking about, like the honourable member mentioned. We would like to give powers to the leading Opposition party to be in charge and I do not see any problem with the leading opposition party choosing the Leader of the Opposition. Why would we subject it to a vote?

Otherwise, we would even have the Government Chief Whip being voted and say, we should vote for another Government Chief Whip. I would not support that and I think the status quo should remain. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to invite hon. Kamateeka but before I do so, I would like to inform you that last week, we got some awards. Hon. Kamateeka, hon. Peter Lokeris and hon. Akiror, the Minister for Teso Affairs were awarded doctorates of the Commonwealth University. I also forgot to inform you that on 26 June 2019, I was awarded a doctorate of the University of Nkumba. Thank you.

5.33
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A lot has been said. Let me start with the issue of elections. As has been pointed out, we decided, as a nation, to move away from individual merit to multipartism. 

Therefore, I do not see why we would want the Leader of the Opposition to be elected. Democracy is a game of numbers. You have the majority party in Government and the next party that is in charge of the Opposition. In addition, that party names the head of the Opposition and it should remain so. 

We are talking of Independents; today we have big numbers of Independents but tomorrow all these Independents may come as members who belong to parties. We do not even know what will happen tomorrow. We may not have any Independents.

Therefore, for us to say that the Independents should also take part in electing the Leader of the Opposition, I think it changes the meaning of Independents in the Constitution and the meaning of Independents in English because if you are Independent, you are Independent and it is an individual choice. You have a right to stand and get a vote from the people but once you are here, you are then subjected to the rule that state that the Leader of the Opposition will be the one named by the party which has the majority on the Opposition side –(Interruption)

MS AMONG: Madam Speaker, the new doctor in the House is legislating in anticipation that tomorrow we may not have anybody as an Independent just like we may not have anybody in Opposition tomorrow or anybody anywhere. Is it in order for a doctor to legislate in anticipation?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us really focus on the provisions made. However, I would like to put this matter into perspective and answer the question of hon. Musana when he said that is it true that the Independents are discriminated in the Commission - no they are not. 

However, the reality is that we have come from dealing with three Independents to having more Independents than the official Opposition- they are double the official Opposition, what do you do with that group of some many people? That is what we have to deal with.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Procedure. Madam Speaker, each member of the Independents is independent of each other. They are therefore not more than the Opposition - they are one.

The procedural issue I am raising, Madam Speaker, is whether anyone in this House can aggregate people who are not - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not go into the semantics. We have a number of 67 people who are here and are neither ruling party nor opposition.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, I do not want to be seen to be going against what you have said. However, to say, for example, that Independents have a dean is to make them into a party because as the honourable member has said, every member who is here as an Independent is an independent of each of the other. 

They should be able to operate that way. Just voice the ideology that you stand for, participate, and be seen and then you - Madam Speaker, we know that you are in charge of the Independents and you can identify them and put them in leadership positions.

However, for us to legislate that Independents should be –(Interruption)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, doctor. Madam Speaker, I would like to give information to our new doctor that on the matter of Independents, at the time of nominations, when we filled the nomination forms, were required to choose a symbol that would identify us on the ballot paper.

The symbol that I picked was different from what hon. Majegere picked –(Interjection)– what was your symbol? Therefore, Madam Speaker, on that basis, we are independent of each other here. I am independent of hon. Majegere because others came with saucepans, others with chairs and crops- (Laughter). Therefore, we are independent of each other. 

There should be no reason, and nobody should confuse the House that we are all Independents - we are independent of each other. I came with a clock; Majegere came with a saucepan –(Laughter). Therefore, we are not together. That is the information, hon. Kamateeka. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you honourable for the information. Indeed, to prove this, that is why the member sat down and crafted this Bill and brought it before Parliament even without consulting his colleagues. If they were working together, he would have consulted them first. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I believe that what we have in place now is practicable and to do otherwise would be to weaken the Opposition parties. Thank you.

5.41
MR MICHAEL TUSIIME (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have critically read and comprehended the object of this Bill and the defects with the current legislation that the Bill intends to cure. 

In addition, it states that this state of affairs has led to the subjugation of the views of the Oppositions and other shades of opinion on the Commission considering other members of the Commission.

Madam Speaker, when you internalise this Bill, it is devoid of justice of the same shades the mover is intending to highlight on the very first page. In his conclusion, he considers the Independent Members of Parliament not being represented and he drops other shades of Members of Parliament like the military.

I do not know at what time we shall have another amendment to provide for other different shades and their deans which will make this implementation either problematic or the law itself extremely ambiguous.

Madam Speaker, secondly, the chairperson of the committee was making a report. I listened and I wanted to know particular examples that had been raised by the people who attended the committee, in regard to the decisions that were made by the Commission that did not take care of the interests of Independent Members of Parliament. In addition, decisions that had been made to address only the interests of either Members of Parliament who belong to ruling party or those who belong to the Opposition.

Madam Speaker, with that observation, I find this Bill defective and I call upon my honourable colleague to withdraw it with immediate effect. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, we do not withdraw Bills at the second reading. We vote for or against them. There is no question of withdrawal.

5.43
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to give special thanks to you as the Chairperson of this House for taking good care of us as Independents. I do not know whether it is by default. Otherwise, our situation in this House would have been very precarious.

Madam Speaker, you can hear the level of debate in the House. 

Madam Speaker, there are sentiments going across the board but once we have contentious issues in this House, you will find the same members quoting us to make a joint decision in this House. 

Madam Speaker, you have categorically said that you have a problem with the growing number of Independents in this House and it will still grow. You need to be helped. I would like to implore members to look at the merits of this Bill so that at the end of the day, when we go to committee stage, we can scrutinise for better the management of this House. It will help that chairperson steer the House very well. 

Anybody in this House is a candidate to become an Independent. (Applause) Members need to be very careful. Where we are going, especially, with the new rules - the parties are coming in and a lot of members here are going to be locked out. The only leeway is to be Independent. Be very careful when we are considering this Bill because it could be a way for you to come back to this House. 

It is no doubt that the numbers have been growing; both the Opposition and the NRM have no capacity to organise free and fair internal democracy within their parties. That is why the numbers are growing and they have continued to grow. 

Madam Speaker, if you look at the numbers in this House, we are second to NRM. At the end of the day, our contributions here matter. You need to be helped to be able to steer the House very well. 

If you look at the Constitution of the –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR EITUNGANANE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Even if you look at the committees, I think only two of us are in leadership; hon. Oboth and hon. Nyakecho. These are issues that need to be addressed with this Bill. 

At the end of the day, we also count so this Bill should go to the committee stage and we scrutinise it. If it is the issue of the Leader of the Opposition, we can debate it when we go to the committee stage but let the Bill not be withdrawn. For example, at the end of the day, we can come up with a better law that will help the House. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.47
MR GODFREY WATENGA (Independent, Lutseshe County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Independents in this Parliament are orphans; we are not like orphans but we are orphans.

When I joined this Parliament, I found it tough, more so when I wanted to link up with many things concerning the activities –(Interruption) 

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, the member holding the Floor has just made a statement that the Independent members of Parliament are like orphans in Parliament.

What I know, under our Rules of Procedure, is that the Whip of the Independent Members of Parliament is none other than the Rt Hon. Speaker, who is number three in the protocol of the Government of the Republic of Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, my Whip is a Cabinet minister. The Whip of the Opposition is also equated to a Cabinet minister. Is the member, therefore, in order to say that the Independent members are like orphans in Parliament, yet you are their mother and Whip? 

THE SPEAKER: No, he is out of order. They are not orphans. (Laughter) 

MR WATENGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was coming to make my point but let me first withdraw my statement. The Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda is taking care of us so I withdraw the statement. 
On the Opposition side, we are the majority. However, when it comes to activities, sharing the positions and the cake, we are the minority. That is why it is a concern to the Independents.

When it comes to the designation of members on the committees, we have been moving around and at times, and we have been looking around for the offices to designate us on the committees. Hon. Aja has been standing in for us and now the Bill is here. I take this call to make a law to gazette – (Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, when we were swearing in, we were given clear Rules of Procedure, which describe how a Member of Parliament is assigned to a committee. The Rules of Procedure state that the Speaker will be in charge of the Independents – (Interjection) – I think you do not know the rules so you better look at them. 

The member has come up to say that they face problems finding offices, committees and so on and yet when we came here, there was even an induction course. Every member was given Rules of Procedure and a Constitution. 

Madam Speaker, is the member in order to come and demonstrate his ignorance as far as the Rules of Procedure are concerned? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: The honourable member is expressing his frustrations. That is all. He knows the rules. 

MR WATENGA: Madam Speaker, I am not ignorant about the rules and procedures of this Parliament. However, I was clarifying my point. I said hon. Aja would always step in the position of designating members on the committees. Hence, I was calling and I am calling for the support of the Bill so that we can get a law to gazette that position. When the time comes to designating members to committees, that person would get powers, proper regulation and guidance in terms of handling that office. Thank you. 

5.53
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It appears that this Bill is proposing a prescription for a wrong diagnosis. Political questions cannot be solved by legislation. I am going to use my own political party for people to understand.
 
When elections take place in this country, every political party must aspire to have the required number to run Government. For the case of my party, if we are only seven here, having lost elections or failed to field candidates, we cannot come here and start fighting for slots that belong to parties that are – 

Secondly, if for any reason, you are in this House and you think that there is food and people are eating, you can then  take a decision individually, like members have done here, to cross to that side and you go and eat and enjoy that position –(Laughter)

We have had a member of my party; she crossed and she is enjoying and that is okay. I think that when we go for elections, we are setting a dangerous precedent because the arguments that are being made here – tomorrow, I should wake up and start saying that the NRM is unfair. We should be having ministers from that side trying to take over power from them, which they want legitimately. 

Therefore, for any political party or person that wants to have power, you must be ready to compete for it but not to come here and try to circumvent the process using the law to take power, which you have not obtained from people. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, I would like to mention it clearly here that we have already seen the proposals that are in this Bill; they do not cure the defects and some of the gaps they have cited. For example, when you complain that the party in Government is allocated three slots in the Commission and the rest are only given one. When you go into the law, you keep quiet. You are not telling us to remove the three and redistribute. It means that there is a mismatch between what you have cited for us, as the basis for this law, and exactly what you are bringing to cure. There is a complete mismatch on that point. 

I would like to mention that Article 72 of the Constitution is clear; there is a political party and a political organisation. Should the Independents at any point feel that they have now merged their independence, they should form a political organisation so that they become one shade that this House can – (Interruption)

MR ONYANGO: Madam Speaker, the Constitution is very clear and Independents in Parliament are a product of the Constitution. Is the colleague in order to give options to the Independent colleagues to join political parties, when Independents are a creation of the Constitution of Uganda?

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, he was addressing Article 72(1) of the Constitution, which provides that: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the right to form political parties and any other political organisations is guaranteed.” He was saying that if you want to go further, the Independents should form an organisation so as to qualify. (Laughter)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for capturing that spirit. That is exactly what I wanted to communicate; that for us to equate the Independents as they are here individually and appear as if they are institutionalised, we would be offending that provision of the Constitution. Therefore, they have the option and I think they should take it in good faith. 

Lastly, the point about discrimination has been made clearly in this House. I do not think that when we are making a law, we should make a law that appears to be inclined towards defeating one side of the House. As you can see, they are concentrating in prescribing a procedure for the Opposition and they are not taking care of the Government side. This law would be defective from the start and it would be challenged. If we are aware that we are passing a law which is discriminative, the House should not really proceed in that way. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Jonathan Odur.

5.58
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am speaking as the acting Leader of the Opposition because the Leader of the Opposition together with FDC women are locked up by the police in FDC offices.

We will become the first Parliament in history that creates parties in Opposition. There cannot be parties in Opposition but there is one party in Opposition. It is just good manners that we work with others. Just like there cannot be ruling parties except if you formed a coalition under the law – and that is provided for.

As Parliament, we need to maintain –(Interruption)

MS SANTA ALUM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate that I am giving a point of order to somebody, who is representing the Leader of the Opposition. In this Parliament, we have many parties in the Opposition; we have the Uganda Peoples’ Congress, Democratic Party, JEEMA and FDC parties. Outside this Parliament, we have an organisation called Inter Party Organisation for Dialogue comprising all parties represented in this Parliament. Therefore, is it in order for the honourable member who is representing the Leader of the Opposition to ring-fence the Opposition parties to mean FDC?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what we have is the official Opposition, which is the biggest Opposition party in the House; that is FDC but there are also other Opposition parties within the House. 

MR SSEMUJJU: If my colleague only listened; Opposition parties and a party in Opposition are two different things –(Interruption) 

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, first for the record, this was a very touching matter to the chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs having been in this House for two terms as an Independent. 

The reality that members need to know, and not to point fingers, the practice and the law as the Speaker as guided; I am just supporting that in law, there is only one ruling party and in our report we captured it. There is nothing like “official” but there is only one Opposition. The rest of other parties in Parliament who are not with the largest numeric strength can join. That is why somebody from UPC can join this side and DP can join the other side. That is the basis and you cannot challenge that in any court.

Madam Speaker, you have rightly guided but for emphasis, members need to know that. It is painful but it is a fact. (Laughter)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, we are an outcome of elections. I want to sit on the other side and be the Prime Minister. However, I cannot propose a Private Member’s Bill to say that NRM is very discriminative because when they are choosing a Cabinet, there are other people in Parliament that they do not choose them. It is their choice. I think that we will be making a fundamental mistake wanting to be what we are not.

Secondly, the Independents in Parliament are independent of each other. If they were political parties and they are 76, they would be 76 political parties of saucepans and pangas. Therefore, they cannot come here and propose a law to institutionalise them. They are not and it would be a fundamental mistake for this Parliament to begin institutionalising people who represent and are sponsored by different circumstances.

We have Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces (UPDF) in Parliament; tomorrow, shall we have another proposal that UPDF wants to be part of the Commission? I have heard that the Opposition will grow; there is no guarantee that they will grow. Suppose, they become five tomorrow and you have five people represented on the Parliamentary Commission? 

The moment we made a decision, as a country, that we would be under a multi-party system, we only, for fairness, created a window for those who do not want to associate but we cannot now make a window to become a door. If you want to come to Parliament through a door, under the Constitution, the doors are the political parties. If you want to come through a window, the Constitution guarantees that. Do not come here and pretend that you also came through a door. (Laughter)

Finally, Madam Speaker, there are things that we need to do and we can continue doing them administratively. Some of the colleagues on this side sometimes associate with NRM even more than the NRM itself –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for giving me space. I am the Secretary-General of FDC and the information I would like to give is genuine. There is a member who came saying, “Please, I want to stand on the FDC ticket.” As the Secretary-General, I signed the form because that member never wanted another member to stand. Having signed the form, she went and hid the forms and went and picked the forms for the Independents from the Electoral Commission. Indeed, she won on the Independent ticket. She came to the House and her behaviour is more of NRM than of FDC and that is the Member for Bukedea. (Laughter) 

MS AMONG: Madam Speaker, I have never filled in FDC forms to go for nomination. Can hon. Nandala-Mafabi bring evidence and lay it on the Table to show that I filled in the forms for FDC? If he cannot do that, can he withdraw his unfounded statement? Is he in order to start alleging that I am FDC? I am not FDC. I am Independent. Whether I lean towards NRM or not is not his business.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish you would not bring party issues on this Floor because we are dealing with legislation. Can you substantiate what you said, hon. Nandala-Mafabi?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, hon. Among was the Deputy Treasurer General of FDC in charge of fundraising. As a leader, definitely she was an FDC leader. We gave her a form. She knows she took the original but I have evidence that she was the Deputy Treasurer General. (Laughter)

MS AMONG: Madam Speaker, I am saying I would like documentary evidence to show that I filled in the forms. Secondly, the person who was the flag bearer was his wife who he brought to stand against me. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, please.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, if there are issues that we need to deal with administratively, it would be a fatal mistake to legislate them. We have had my constituent, hon. Aja, helping the Speaker administratively as the Dean of Independents. Those who want to go to the Government side and become ministers, like my OG, hon. Betty Amongi, have gone there and remained UPC and NRM. For my sister, the former Deputy Treasurer General of FDC, I have been told that if you want to see the President, she has become the most direct route. (Laughter)

Therefore, for issues that we want to deal with administratively, let us deal with them administratively – (Interruption) 

MS AMONG: Madam Speaker, I am not sure that the FDC team that has failed to clean up their house should bring their frustration to Anita, who left in broad daylight without using their party card for nomination. Are they in order to continue referring to me in this discussion? This is a serious debate.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I appeal to you not to bring your party issues here because I am not in position to rule over who had the forms and who did not. I was not there. Hon. Ssemujju, stick to the issue and forget your other roles.

MR SSEMUJJU: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I, therefore, would like to ask hon. Andrew Baryayanga to withdraw this Bill. If the rules do not allow him to do so, I ask the House to join me in defeating this Bill because it defeats the very existence of multi-party democracy that was ushered in, in 2005 after constitutional changes.

By their very nature, the job of political parties is to aggregate interests. The moment you are not part of a political party, you cannot aggregate your interests. They remain independent and separate interests. You cannot therefore come to Parliament and seek to aggregate yourself when, at the time of joining Parliament, you chose to come alone. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.11
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, with a lot of humility, I would like to speak with reference to the document that guides our functionality in this Parliament. First of all, I am humbled because when I look around, I do not see many members who were in the Constituent Assembly, which Assembly was responsible for this document that we are referring to.

The spirit of the Constitution is in the preamble. The preamble to this Constitution, which I urge members to read, is that we were mindful of our past and because we were mindful of our past, we came up with a guiding principle in the form of the Constitution to guide all our activities in order to avoid going backwards. That is an important fact that I would like to share with members.

Secondly, if we look at the National Objectives and Directive Principle of State Policy III, it talks about the importance of national unity and stability. It specifically goes to the extent of saying, we should do everything possible to avoid anything that polarises us and causes havoc.

I would like to remind the House about the qualification of becoming a Member of Parliament. The qualification of becoming a Member of Parliament in the legislature talks about the composition of Parliament. Nowhere, does it talk about ideological grouping; it only talks about what constitutes Parliament. It goes on to talk about the qualification itself. You must be a citizen and registered. Nowhere, does it say you cannot be a Member of Parliament unless you belong to political party. We had reasons why we did that. This is important and we did it very consciously aware of where we had come from. 

Madam Speaker, I was an adult and already practicing politics, when I saw Democratic Party (DP) move from the Opposition side to the Government side. It was an episode to be celebrated but it spelt disaster.

Madam Speaker, if there is an opportunity for us to intercept a situation and be able to create space for everyone, Parliament think must do it. (Applause) I am not saying this because I played a critical role in debating the Constitution.

I would like to say that this Parliament took a position to create space for any person that would want to stand, to come to Parliament without aligning to a political party. Madam Speaker, this Parliament made a particular law to cater for those Independents because they realised that there were quite a number of us who played critical roles in reshaping and remolding  the politics  of this country, who were about to be locked out.

Madam Speaker, it is also this Parliament that helped this country to come up with an accommodation for Independents. I would like to say that Parliament should play its role to be accommodative. In fact, we have already done that. We cannot therefore move backwards. Rule 157 accommodates the dynamics of Parliament; the different political parties especially, those in the Opposition, those in Government and Independents.

Madam Speaker, Rule 184 also accommodates the Independents and it recognises the dynamics of Parliament. It is in that spirit that it was agreed by this Parliament that a person representing the group called Independent Members of Parliament to be represented in the Pan African Parliament. It was also agreed in that spirit that persons that are known by that, be accommodated elsewhere. 

Madam speaker, I believe that what this committee and the mover of this Bill have done is to operationalise the spirit, which we have already displayed as Parliament. So, what can we do?  (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: One minute.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the law carries the spirit and if you do not have a spirit, you cannot make a law. You are very fortunate that I did not become a lawyer. Otherwise, you would be finished.

Madam Speaker, I beg to say that this Parliament has a right to legislate to accommodate all persons; those who want to associate with political parties and those who do not want to associate with political parties.

This Parliament also has a right not to give its powers to other people to do what Parliament should do best. (Applause) Parliament can do something better and so, we should allow it to do it. We should therefore not be dictated so that we can maintain the quality of Parliament. If we allow other factors to determine the leadership in Parliament, we shall fail the entire Parliament.

Madam Speaker, Parliament should stand up and take up authority to run its affairs. Let nobody undermine the authority of Parliament. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.19
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Relative Deprivation Theory states that people view social movements, change and others in accordance with the way they must take action so as to position themselves to either get into opportunity, wealth or status.

Madam Speaker, the very existence of a class of Members of Parliament called Independent is because the Relative Deprivation Theory provided that such members will take action in order to position themselves to cope with the dictates of the day.

When the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the Rules of Procedure provided for this category Members of Parliament, we okayed it. How then, as a Parliament responsible for ensuring that there are laws for the good governance of the country, do we blind ourselves that these people must not sit at the corporate governance policy organ of this institution? (Mr James Kakooza rose_) Hon. Kakooza, allow me to build on this point.

The questions that we are addressing today are not questions whether or not political parties should exist or thereof. The question that we are asking here is: Are we just, to all the various categories of persons that sit in this House? Madam Speaker, the argument of saying that people are independent of each other is only defeatist of people not remembering the theory of sets in mathematics at elementary level. In the theory of sets, there are one elements and those elements constitute the set or a subset. Therefore, they are called independent but as a whole, we are Members of Parliament.

I would like to say that the political parties to which I belong must not look at the law as a way to weaken them. The law is looking at having inclusive participation.  

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude. 

 MR ARIKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The role of Parliament therefore will be in exercise of its legislative role to determine whether or not these numbers will be varied. Why then, should we remain in fear of whether the other people must be provided for in the social justice system or not?

As I listened to the debate here, I got a little bit concerned. I sit on this side but I do not sit in the Opposition with the view that I want to have a permanent plot here. We should be arguing in the sense that tomorrow, we could be on the other side of the ruling party and another person should be here. Why then, do we want to tie ourselves in one position?
	
Madam Speaker, our argument should be making a law that serves the entire Uganda not simply one side of events as it fits what we desire as of today. Madam Speaker, hon. Aja together with the seconders of this Bill brought a Bill that fits into promoting social, distributive and interactive justice in Parliament which is the highest organ of democracy in a particular nation. Thank you.

6.23
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you guided earlier we need to be very careful when debating about this matter. This matter protects the rights of all the Members of Parliament in the august House; and the Members of Parliament who are here represent the constituencies where they come from.

I was an Independent Member of Parliament in the 9th Parliament and you guided us so well; during that time we elected our dean. It was hon. Otada Amooti. 

You gave us space and we were well organised as Members of Parliament who came in independently. The reasoning that members of Parliament are independent of each other does not hold water.

Madam Speaker, all members who are here are independent of each other; the opinion of hon. Acidri is quite different from the opinion of hon. Ogwang. Therefore, the starting point is that we need to give space to each and every member in this august House.

All Independent Members of Parliament represent their constituencies and they are very important in this country. The worry that other members in the political parties may think that they may replace them sometime to come is quite baseless.

All members who are here are capable of becoming Independent Members of Parliament any time; you know what normally happens during our primary elections. You will find big shots very potential Members of Parliament in this august tomorrow joining the Independents.

Therefore, when we are enacting any law, let us look ahead and accommodate all members in this august House. Belonging to a political party is very important for the future; after all the Constitution provides for it very clearly. We have three sides of the House: the ruling party, the opposition and independents. Therefore, any law that we enact should accommodate all members who are in this august House. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.26
MR FRANCIS MUKULA (Independent, Agule County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the Bill. First of all, being an Independent as members may call is not by choice but because of circumstances. We would have probably been in parties representing the people but we were marginalised during elections and we are powerful because the local man said it is candidate “A” much as he is an independent.

Now, because of the Constitution that provided the valve is why we are here but most importantly we are all one people and we all represent people. Our objective is proper representation of our people. We need harmony for all of us to be happy with the conditions here. We all need to be united with humility. 

If we were independent of each other why were we gazetted to sit together; I thought we would be having 64 independent chairs but we are here together. I beg to submit, thank you.

6.29
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Independent, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have to be honest and very realistic. The author of the original law was hon. Ogalo and it was a Private Members’ Bill by then there was no multi-partism.

The objective of that law was for administration of Parliament and nothing else; but because of the emerging situations that must be provided and catered for that is why hon. Aja is moving to amend because there is another shade of opinion in the House. We must cater for it.

If you read Article 72(4); it was a safety valve that all parties did not have the capacity to organise primary elections successfully. If members contest a national election and come in an institution of Parliament where everybody is and you want to improve the efficiency and administration of Parliament; it is equity.

Already when you look at the situation which hon. Cecilia said; the precedent is already there so I do not see any problem of creating another position. It will even be amended more.

Let us be realistic that there is a shade of opinion in the House for efficient administration of Parliament which must be catered for, thank you.

6.31
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know I am a potential independent candidate anytime but this time I am not supporting this Bill for the reasons I am going to tell colleagues.

Honourable members, mainly the Independents; you are so lucky to be Independent and have independent ideas but some of us in our parties because you must take a party position, you end up either confused if not misunderstood.

You should be praising God that you keep independent; I have heard so many saying that they do not have leaders; how I wish I would be led by Madam Speaker as my whip. We who have some divergent ideas have lived a nomadic way.

You go to a committee without your choice and if you are there once you never surface again - but Madam Speaker is a mother who can listen so you are saying that you need to get a dean but you might get one and be frustrated.

I have seen the honourable member claiming that they are orphans. How can they be orphans when the majority are NRM-leaning and they have benefited more than us the party-owners? In Kyankwanzi, they eat more than we eat and they are claiming - honestly? I will inform hon. Ruth Nankabirwa that they are shaming her. But they are benefiting a lot.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I need to caution all political parties on this. I have heard that all the parties intend to bring a Bill to eliminate –(Interjection)– yes. If you bring it here, we are going to bash it because we need Independents here and we know any time we shall be potential Independent candidates in this House –(Interruption)

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, I lead a political party. The information I would like to give my brother, hon. Mbwatekamwa, is that, there is no party that intends to bring a Bill to ban the Independents; it is not there and it has not happened. Somebody even mentioned it earlier that in IPOD - I sit in IPOD and that proposal is not there. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you very much. Let me hope the Hansard has captured that, otherwise – (Interruption)

MS LANYERO: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I would like to inform the honourable member that while the honourable members are asking for a leader, I would like to refer them to the Bible. That the children of Israel at the beginning were led by God Himself and at some point because they saw other people having leaders, they started crying out for a leader. And at the end of the day, they got Saul as a leader; everyone knows how the story ended.

Therefore, our honourable members, do not cry for what you may regret at the end. He rightly stated it that we have a leader who is a mother who is taking good care of you. Therefore, please do not go in for what you may regret. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, nearly 30 members have contributed to this Bill. I would like to put that the question be put. I put the question that the question be put –

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, this being a very important matter, we need to have quorum to take a decision at every stage.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to give you time to read the provisions clause by clause at your own time. Therefore, completion of this debate is deferred until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Therefore, we shall complete the Bill tomorrow. 

In the meantime, the Catholic Parliamentary Chaplaincy will hold a welcome for Mother Mary of Kibeho tomorrow at 12.00 noon here at Parliament and there will be a High Mass at 5.00 p.m. in the Conference Hall led by Monsignor Lawrence Semusu. Therefore, the chaplaincy of the Catholics receives Mother Mary of Kibeho at 12.00 p.m. but there is a High Mass at 5.00 p.m. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.38 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 7 November 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 
