

Tuesday, 27 November 2018

Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Like I said before, tragedy of the nature of what happened last weekend shocks the conscience of a country and must cause us to act in order to deal with gaps where they are and improve on things when they are not properly functional.

The nation is mourning the loss of its beloved citizens. Three tragedies took place over the weekend: the boat disaster on Lake Victoria, the car accident in Rutoto, Rubirizi District, claiming the lives of five teachers and the third accident which occurred in Busiika Motor Rally Circuit in Luweero District in which the rally car lost control and ran over people resulting into deaths and injuries. 

This is, indeed, a very sad moment when so many productive and useful citizens’ lives have been lost. On behalf of Parliament and my own behalf, I wish to convey our condolences to the bereaved family and pray for the quick recovery of all the injured. Let us rise to observe a moment of silence in honour of the people who have passed on. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

Honourable members, I wish to thank the Uganda People’s Defence Forces, the marine unit of the Uganda Police Force, fishermen and all the other Ugandans of goodwill who rushed to the scene of accident on the lake and rescued some lives. 

Reflecting upon past accidents on our roads and water bodies and without apportioning blame to anyone, in my opinion, many accidents could have been avoided if passengers were not negligent and responsible enough for the safety of their lives. This can be evident by the overloading of vehicles and vessels and the state of this repair or dangerous mechanical condition of some of the vehicles plying our roads and water bodies.

I commend the Government for establishing an inter-ministerial committee chaired by the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to look into the Lake Victoria accident. It is important that the matter is conclusively handled. 

According to reports available, it seems the water transport sector has not been given the due attention it deserves. This is glaringly evident that there is fragmentation of its administration. There are three agencies handling this sector, namely: Maritime Administration, which is headed by a Commissioner with a skeleton staff in the Ministry of Works and Transport; the Uganda Railways Corporation, which handles some ferries; and the Uganda National Road Authority (UNRA), which is also responsible for handling some water transport vessels. Better co-ordination and management is required in this area. 

Further, in a bid to improve on our water transport in this country, Parliament, on the 28 November 2017 authorised Government to borrow Unit of Account 10.21 million; equivalent of $14.4 million from the African Development Bank Group to support multi-national Lake Victoria Maritime Communication and Transport Project. Parliament is yet to accept the efficacy of this loan. 

In conclusion, with your concurrence, honourable members, I urge the Government to consider and actually do the following:

    1. To expedite the establishment of the maritime fast and rescue centre.

    2. To expedite the processing of the proposed Bill on improving inland water transport, namely “The Inland Water Transport Bill”.

    3. To step up efforts in conducting advocacy campaign to improve safety on water transport.

    4. To expedite the establishment of the Maritime Training Institute in Busitema so that skilled personnel in this sector can be built up.

    5. Finally, in the same vein, I call upon the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to carry out general oversight on the water sector in the country in accordance with the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and to specifically follow up on the implementation of the African Development Bank loan which was authorised by Parliament, which I have just spoken about.

Honourable members, on another note, which is not a sad one, on Sunday, in Kitgum, Kitgum Diocese received a new bishop. That diocese had not been with a bishop since 2015 arising from some differences the bishop then had with his flock. That led the Archbishop of the Church of Uganda to appoint a caretaker bishop to take care of the diocese.

So, on Sunday, there were heavy celebrations, ululations and general happiness for Kitgum Diocese to have finally got a new bishop, Rt. Rev. Wilson Kitara, the third bishop of Kitgum Diocese. We all pray for the best for the diocese to begin doing what it should do to prepare people for the Kingdom to come.

Secondly, yesterday, I had a visit to one of the very little known places. It is called Gulu Country Dairy Farm. I urge you to go and visit that place. A young veterinary doctor who is 38 years old has this output that you cannot believe it is in that part of the country. It is a big farm. He has dairy cattle and he is processing milk, yoghurt and he is about to start making butter in Gulu. I was very happy to witness that young people are taking up opportunities in this country. 

2.16
MR PATRICK OCAN (UPC, Apac Municipality, Apac): Mr Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. I rise up on a matter of national importance. Apac Hospital is in a very bad shape. There are many cases of deaths as a result of power that has been cut off from the hospital for the last three years.

In a more recent case, on Sunday 25 November, we lost a mother who was being referred to Lacor Hospital. Yesterday, 26 November, we lost a child who was also transferred to Lira Hospital. They all died on their way to the referral hospital. This is due to lack of power at the hospital which was cut off by Umeme in July 2015.

Mr Speaker, as I talk, the hospital functions below expectations. The theatre is not operating, X-ray and ultra sound machines are not working, and laboratory equipment that need power are not functioning. There is no water in the hospital because this hospital used a power plant that was at the hospital.

My humble prayer is that the line ministry should take up the matter seriously and urgently. As I talk, even the vaccines that require specialised storage facilitates have all got spoilt from the hospital. Thank you.

2.18
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, we have heard the message sent by the Member of Parliament from Apac. We shall take the matter with the responsible minister and we will come and give a response to this House. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, very much.

2.19
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol Acan): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week on 20 November, I was on this Floor of Parliament and gave a statement on the actions of police on us. The police work hard to prevent the Opposition members, and they give us no space for freedom. However, when it comes to stopping boats in poor mechanical condition, they cannot manage.

Mr Speaker, yesterday, again, the FDC leaders organised a function in Rukungiri and the police completely put off that function. They cordoned off the place of the function. It was supposed to be a commemoration and also welcoming the FDC party president to the western part of Uganda.

It became a battle and our people wasted their time and resources. That is how bad it is. We all know what the Public Order Management Act is about. It is about us notifying police about our functions, and not to seek for permission. When politicians go for their functions, there is no way you can stop them from recruiting new members.

We must recognise that Uganda is a diverse country and we have accepted multipartism. However, right now, space is not given to the biggest opposition party to do their work.

Today, our function was supposed to be in Mbarara and our people who went there, like the Party President and others have not been given any space at all. The police are there guarding all the places that our leaders have to visit.

They have arrested a lot of our members and decided to put them in prisons across various districts. Some are in Kabale, Sheema, Rukungiri and Mbarara; to the extent that they do not even allow their relatives from Rukungiri to be able to access them. If you take a person of Rukungiri very far away, sometimes it is not easy. Not all of us are blessed or have enough resources to follow up on our people when you take them too far.

Mr Speaker, I am up for a rejoinder of that statement, which I made last week. I request the Minister of Internal Affairs that, when he is coming - because I am reliably informed that he is supposed to come here on the Floor of Parliament on Thursday, and this matter is going to be debated.

However, today our function has flopped. Why and what is the fear? Why is it that the Opposition is not being given space at all? If it is fear, why do we allow multipartism – you should instead allow only one-party system to continue so that we get to know that we are like that instead of bluffing the world that we are in a multiparty dispensation and yet you stop other parties from carrying out their functions.

Very soon, I am also going to have a thanksgiving function in the north. When we had one in Soroti, we had to crawl down begging and ask for letters of no objection, yet we know that is not what the Public Order Management Act says. We were given a letter of no objection. The people who gave us the letter of no objection from the police headquarters did not receive very good remarks from their bosses to the extent that they were also in fear.

Therefore, tomorrow, when I am going for the thanksgiving, it will be prayers, it will also include other things because I am a politician and my politician friends will be there. Therefore, I am up here to plead for space for the Opposition. Why is it that the Opposition is not given space at all to exercise our rights? It is a right for Uganda to have a diversity and not only one political party or religion. 

We need to accommodate each other in spite of the diversity. We always call it unity in diversity. We are not enemies but friends. The way we do things - we should respect each other. Let me do my thing with integrity and you also do yours with integrity. 

Just to wind up, my prayer to the honourable minister when he comes, is that he should come and state it very clearly to us the Opposition whether we have no political space at all in this country to continuously put pressure on us and push us on the wall. I still have to say this; the day the Opposition will respond with pressure, will not be good. We want to be a peaceful nation.

Therefore, for us to be a peaceful nation, let us respect each other and recognise the diversity. Let the minister come and explain to us whether we should continue crawling for permission yet ours should be only to notify police, and tell them that we are going to have this function here and please make sure that security is guaranteed for all of us. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I was hoping that in your final remarks, you would invite us for the thanksgiving. Apparently we are not invited-(Laughter)

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, the hand is still sick. However, when it gets better, all regardless of your party, religion or whatever you believe in, you are all invited. Thank you.

THE DEPUY SPEAKER: Right Honourable, this is a new matter, there was a matter that was raised that the Minister had undertaken to respond to on Thursday on this particular issue.

2.27
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for her statement. According to her request, we shall ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and make a statement.

However, before that, I would like to assure the Leader of the Opposition that she should rest assured that this country is peaceful and multipartism is not a choice of anybody but Ugandans. They decided on it from 1996 through an election.

Therefore, what I want to guarantee is that the Government will make sure that there is peace in this country and everybody responsible for peace will maintain that peace and politicians who are allowed to practice multiparty politics should also go ahead. However, where there is conflict, then it has to be sorted out peacefully. 

I think the Leader of the Opposition should not fear. This country is peaceful and multipartism will continue within the law. Therefore, I think the fear that people are being interfered with does not arise. Thank you.

THE DEPUY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we now go to the Order Paper. However, I was going to request that we deal with two urgent matters. That is the issues under item 9 and 10- public accounts. Honourable members, you know this is a constitutional matter.

The Constitution is clear that at the close of the financial year, the Auditor-General is given six months within which he should do the audit and report and Parliament is equally given another six months to deal with the report of the Auditor-General.

Now, the report that we are dealing with here, I can say we are now making very good progress as a Committee of Public Accounts about Local Government and Central Government because now we are at 2015/2016. That means we have moved from those days when we used to do one for ten years ago but now 2014/2015 is just two financial years away. We should encourage the committee to finish work so that we are current with what we do.

Therefore, I am going to seek your indulgence after the statement from the minister that we go straight to items 9 and 10 after words and the chair of the committee is accordingly alerted to come and process these two reports and see if we can finish them.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week on Wednesday, I raised a matter about the Albertine loan which this Parliament passed and the districts in the Albertine Region were supposed to benefit by having scholarships for the students in the Albertine Region. 

The honourable minister of finance was asked by the Speaker to come and give a response to that effect and was supposed to do it the following day which was last Thursday but I have been monitoring hon. Bahati, he is not interested in making the response as the Speaker directed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How are you doing this monitoring?

MR NZOGHU: I have looked at the way he is seated and the manoeuvres he is taking- (Laughter). Therefore, Mr Speaker, the procedural point that I am raising is to the effect that the matter is still pending and it requires the honourable minister to give us an update on whether Kasese is no longer in the Albertine Region or whether Kasese is going to benefit from that loan because that is what Parliament considered.

THE DEPUY SPEAKER: I think the reason it is not here today is because we could not put it on the Order Paper before the statement is made available to us. However, if you need a short answer, the minister can respond to it. However, if you need a proper statement on that project then you will have to wait for it to come on the Order Paper probably tomorrow or the next day.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, I want a serious statement. I do not want a causal answer from hon. Bahati. That is why I said I monitored him and I saw that he was not prepared yet.

THE DEPUY SPEAKER: Ministers do not make casual statements neither do Members of Parliament. Therefore, we all make serious statements both Members of Parliament and ministers.

2.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, at the last meeting when this matter was raised, the Speaker then ruled that the Clerk to Parliament should check the records of Parliament to see whether Kasese was part of the loan that was approved.

Therefore, I would be ready on Thursday to give that information but it was the responsibility of the Clerk to crosscheck on what Parliament approved if that loan included Kasese.

THE DEPUY SPEAKER: So the honourable member was monitoring you wrongly.

MR BAHATI: I think his capacity is questionable.

THE DEPUY SPEAKER: Okay. Let us wait for this statement on Thursday.

2.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Mr Haruna Kyeyune): Thank you, honourable. The loan scheme was commissioned from Hoima and I can inform my colleague that Kasese was included and leaders from Kasese attended the function.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week, I raised the issue of illegal evictions of the people of Lusanja who are found in Kawempe and partly in Wakiso and we represent them- I from Kawempe and hon. Kyagulanyi for Wakiso. The Prime Minister, on Thursday, gave the assurance to the House that on Tuesday, which is today, the Attorney-General, would be here to give us the way forward for those people who are now suffering under tents as if they are in refugee camps.

When I look at the Order Paper, I do not see it. They are there in the gallery waiting for the response because even last week they were here. I would seek your guidance on how we are going to move since the Prime Minister assured this House that this issue would be handled today and the Attorney-General would give a position in regards to those people who were evicted.

THE DEPUY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon- he rose on procedure, you cannot give information on procedure.

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from Kawempe North County, Kampala District. They are represented by hon. AbduLatif Sebaggala and hon. Nabilah Sempala. They are here to observe the proceedings so please join me in welcoming them.(Applause) I am sure this was the matter they were waiting to hear a response from the learned Attorney-General, who has just come in.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE 11TH OCTOBER LANDSLIDE DISASTER IN BUDUDA AND PROGRESS ON RESETTLEMENT OF PERSONS AT RISK OF LANDSLIDES

2.38
THE MINISTER OF RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Mr Hillary Onek): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have a memorandum for Parliament. This is an information paper that seeks to – 

    i. appraise Parliament on the landslide disaster which occurred in Bukalasi Sub county Bududa District on the Thursday 11 October, 2018; 
    ii. highlight response interventions by Government; and 
    iii. show progress so far made in the resettlement of persons at risk of landslides following that mass casualty disaster and several other landslides that have occurred in the recent past in Bugisu sub region.

On Thursday 11 October, 2018 at about 2.30 pm, a landslide occurred inside Mt Elgon Forest triggering rock boulders to roll down into River Tsuume, which carried them down 10 kilometres to Bukalasi Trading Centre. The swift falling boulders were stopped by a bridge at Bukalasi Trading Centre causing a blockage of the river channel, which resulted in the river bursting its banks and sweeping through the trading centre killing, injuring and displacing people.

The cause of the disaster happened more than 10 kilometres up a steep hill inside Mount Elgon Forest where there were no people. The resultant flash floods accompanied by huge rock boulders smashed l86 houses and washed away gardens, trees and so much more in 13 villages downstream.
As you can see, there is a diagram in the statement showing what happened.

The Office of the Prime Minister quickly sent a search, rescue and recovery team that very day, who joined the District Disaster Management Committee and together with Uganda Police Force and Uganda People’s Defence Force (UPDF) helped the injured, recovered bodies of the dead and conducted preliminary disaster loss and damage assessment.

The pictorial evidence is available in the statement. There is a satellite map showing the damaged infrastructure in the Thursday 11 October, 2018 landslides aftermath in Bukalasi Sub county, Bududa District. 

The search team rescued 33 injured persons, recovered 54 bodies, registered 1,116 displaced persons, 186 houses destroyed and 12,000 people affected in 13 villages. The displaced persons are now living in host homes of friends and relatives in safe locations and are receiving continuous supply of relief food and non-food commodities from the Office of the Prime Minister.

On Sunday 14 October, 2018, H.E. the President of the Republic of Uganda, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, a number of Cabinet ministers and honourable members of Parliament and district leaders visited the disaster site. His Excellency the President made a condolence contribution of Shs 5,000,000 to each deceased person’s family and Shs 2,000,000 to each injured person. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister gave Shs 500,000 to the families that lost their loved ones to assist with the burial arrangements. 

On Monday 15 October, 2018, Cabinet met and directed reinstatement of the 10-year Resettlement Project that had stalled in 2014. In 2014, it had been agreed that every year, there would be Shs 8 billion released for the purpose of resettlement of those affected by the landslides in Bududa. However, from 2014 up to recent, we released these funds in all camps and we have now just started receiving them and we have started the resettlement programme. 

Following the Cabinet directive, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development re-instated the 10-year Resettlement Project and made an initial release of Shs 10 billion. 

The Inter-Ministerial Resettlement Technical Committee comprising officials from the Office of the Prime Minister, the Ministry of Local Government, the Ministry of Water and Environment, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Ministry of Works and Transport, Ministry of Wildlife and Tourism, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and the Uganda Police Force was re-activated and began meeting daily. 

Resettlement Housing designs were updated, bills of quantities of building materials schedule has been made, water supply plan completed, access roads are to be graded, medical supplies plan worked out and plans to set up a solar powered irrigation farming scheme has also been developed to assist the people to be settled in the acquired land.

The resettlement implementation structures are at three phases as reflected in the table attached in the statement: 

    i. The Inter-Ministerial Policy Committee which are composed of the various ministries and chaired by the First Deputy Prime Minister. 
    ii. The Implementation Steering Committee which is chaired by the Permanent Secretary, Office of the Prime Minister and it has the sector ministers of Water, Defence, Housing, Local Government, Education and Sports, Gender, Wildlife and Tourism and the Internal Affairs. 
    iii. The Inter-Ministerial Technical Committee from these ministries above. 
    iv. The Field Implementation technical officers there are led by Brig. Stephen Oluka, who is attached to the Disaster Department. The ministries of Water and Environment, Defence, Housing, Local Government, Education, Gender, Wildlife, Tourism and Internal Affairs are all involved. 

On 1 November 2018, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, area Members of Parliament and district leaders met in Mbale and agreed on modalities for a three-phased resettlement programme as follows:

    i) The first phase of the resettlement programme will involve the use of the 2,868 acres of Government land in Bulambuli District. The land has capacity to accommodate 900 households. 
    ii) A total of 6,300 beneficiaries of the 900 plots in Bulambuli District will be selected based on satellite vulnerability image assessment of villages at the highest risk. The registration will involve LC1 chairpersons and the district officials together with OPM and Members of Parliament. The list will be read during a Baraza meeting at parish level, to eliminate any impostors and the list will be validated by the district executive committee.

As you can see, in the satellite map; image showing the levels of risk of landslide disaster in the villages of the districts of Bududa, Manafwa, Namisindwa, Sironko and Bulambuli. The rate in the map shows the intensity of the dangers. 

(iii)	Once the Bulambuli Government land is full, the second phase of the resettlement programme will begin on other Government lands across the country; including parts of the Government lands reserved for refugees in Kiryandongo, Kyangwali, Isingiro, Rwamwanja and Kyaka. A committee of Cabinet led by hon. Alex Onzima, the Minister of State in the Office of the Vice-President has been assigned to visit these places and identify amounts of land available and report to Cabinet.

 (iv)	After all other suitable Government lands have been occupied, the third phase of the resettlement programme will begin involving Government identifying and procuring small plots of land available in safe locations within the villages at risk for establishment of “Village Urban Centres”. Under this resettlement strategy, households whose homes are located in very risky steep slopes will be required to shift their homes to the village urban centre but continue farming up the gentle slopes where the gradient is not too steep. The gradient should not be above 30 degrees and no farming will be allowed.

v) 	Under the third phase strategy, consideration will be made of purchase of land in any other parts of the country where suitable land is available at reasonable prices.

vi)	There will be no giving of money compensation to individual households to purchase land on their own arrangements.

(vii) The above three phases of resettlement will take a span of 10 years and will cover a population of 100,000 people.

Background

Over the past 10 years, over 400 landslides have occurred on Mt Elgon with varying numbers of injuries and fatalities. Mt Elgon hosts six districts on Bugisu side and three districts on the Sebei side.
In the recent years, the frequency of occurrence of landslides has increased because of a number of factors including:

    i) Climate Change 
    ii) Degradation of the forest cover and 
    iii) Population growth resulting in shortage of farmland in the safer areas.

During the period when the resettlement project was non-functional from 2014 to 2018, the disaster department working with the district local governments and communities stepped up efforts to build resilience of communities to disasters, especially in the sub regions of Elgon, Karamoja and Teso.

For example, the department conducts monthly satellite imaging of crop conditions in Karamoja and informs the people of the anticipated food security situation four months in advance, with accuracy of over 80 per cent. It assists the population with the alternative means of livelihood such as road works for cash, valley tank digging for cash and block gardens preparation for next planting season.

The department established a landslide early warning system in the five districts prone to landslides in Mt Elgon involving the use of smartphones, megaphones, motorcycles and bicycles, SMS and FM radio stations.

The system is effective this year. During this year alone, 67 landslides have occurred in the Mt Elgon sub region, in Bududa, Manafwa, Namisindwa, Sironko and Bulambuli. Due to this increased risk awareness, out of the 67 landslides, 66 have not registered any fatalities. The one of 1l October 2018, occurred 10 kilometres inside the forest where nobody lives, so the communities were not able to see the signals. The resultant massive flash floods and rocks in a fraction of one or two minutes had dropped 70 kilometres downstream.

Communities at risk of landslides, floods and drought are well aware of the dangers and respond shifty to warning signals; however, timely release of funds for interventions by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development remains the main challenge.

The Kiryandongo resettlement project
You will recall on March 2010, a landslide disaster in Bududa District claimed the lives of over 150 people and displaced over 5,000.

Following that calamity and many others, Cabinet then directed on two solutions:

        1. Resettlement of the survivors in part of the refugee settlement land in Kiryandongo. 
        2. Long term solution for those at risk of future landslides.

The 5,000 survivors of the Nametsi disaster were all transferred and resettled in Kiryandongo District. The number of Baduda resettled in Kiryandongo, however, has now increased to over 10,000 people as many others voluntarily followed on their own and settled alongside those brought to Kiryandongo by Government.

It should also be noted that some few people resettled in Kiryandongo opted to return to the risky hills of Bududa. The number that has return to Bududa is however, negligible when compared to the number that voluntarily shifted from Nametsi (Bududa) to Panyadoli (Kiryandongo) on their own, after the Government had closed the Kiryandongo Resettlement Programme.

During the resettlement consultative meeting in Mbale on 1 November 2018, one of the leaders of Kiryandongo resettlement gave a testimony of the reality of their lives in Panyadoli village of the Kiryandongo settlement. 

According to him, his life in Panyadoli village, Kiryandongo is far better compared to when he was living in Nametsi village in Bududa before the relocation.

Panyadoli (Bududa) resettlement village in Kiryandongo District is now one of the very few villages in Uganda with more than 285 families living in two-bedroomed permanent houses properly planned with straight roads and with provisions for installation of electrical-power lines and piped water supply lines.

Discussions with the Rural Electrification Agency (REA) to deliver power to each of the 286 houses are on-going. Also, piped water will reach each house in the next one to two months following recent installation of high yielding solar-powered production wells in the village.

The number of families who have managed to procure vehicles
(Dyna pickup trucks, motorcycles and et cetera), is higher in Panyadoli resettlement village of Kiryandongo than the number of families in Nametsi village of Bududa over the recent past seven years.

Panyadoli Village supplies more food to Bududa than it takes away from it on a daily basis. Actually, those who resettled in Panyadoli Village travel and take food back to Bududa. They are still attached to their villages there.

Colleagues, the second directive of Cabinet in 2010 was for Government to find long lasting solutions to the landslide challenge.

In implementation of the second directive of Cabinet in 2010, an assessment was done by a Cabinet sub-committee, led by the First Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business in Parliament, Rt Hon. Gen (Rtd.) Moses Ali. The Committee established that up to 100,000 people (approximately 12,500 households) were at high risk and required resettlement in safer locations.

The subsequent resettlement plan developed, proposed that Government procures, each year, 3,200 acres of land and allocate to each family at risk 2.5 acres for resettlement. According to the plan, in a period of 10 years, a total of 32,000 acres of land would have been procured and they are enough to solve the landslides problem.

Due to financial challenges, the 10-year plan stalled shortly after 2,868 acres of land had been procured in Bulambuli District. That land has a capacity of settling 900 households.

Following the purchase of those lands in Bulambuli District, a settlement plan was drawn and presented to Bulambuli District Council for consideration and approval as required by law. The District Council of Bulambuli District approved the plan in 2014.

After the settlement plan approval, Bulambuli District Works
Department, using its road works equipment, opened 13 kilometres of access roads with financial support from the Office of the Prime Minister.

Plots were demarcated by surveyors enough to accommodate 900 households. Beneficiaries were identified from the unsafe villages of Bududa, Bulambuli and Sironko Districts. This list will, however, be reviewed given the recent Bukalasi Disaster and the dire situations in Manafwa and Namisindwa districts.

So far, the process of construction has started. On Thursday, 15 November 2018, grading and levelling of one-acre site for base-camp for block making was done using road works equipment of Bulambuli District Local Government.

Four Units of block making machines were transported from Uganda Police Force Construction Base at Naguru on Monday 19 November 2018 to the block making site at Plot 94, Bunambutye Sub-county.

A contingent of UPDF and Police Construction Officers will take over the construction site on Wednesday, 21 November 2018. They have actually taken over to start setting up the block making equipment together with UPF officers.

The ten 40 feet containers for storage of construction materials (cement, iron bars, wheel barrows and tools) will be delivered - It was already delivered on 23 November 2018.

The cost of one unit of a two-bedroomed house (that is 10.2 metres x 4.4 metres) to be constructed, has been worked out to cost Shs 31 million following a three-day technical meeting of experts on the materials inputs led by myself and involving engineers and quantity surveyors from Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, UPDF and Uganda Police Force (UPF) and Uganda Prison. We are considering the existing cost and very little cost of labour was included except some small allowances for the soldiers who will be working on sites and so, saving us a lot of money if it was to be done by a private firm.

Delivery of murram and compacting by Bulambuli District Local Government is ongoing. Delivery of construction materials on sites is being done. This is continuous of course.

Construction of foundations and making of blocks will begin simultaneously. 

The first 110 houses will be ready for occupation by the end of January 2019. So, we shall build 110 houses in four months. 

The Bulambuli Resettlement Scheme is being developed in three plots of lands: Plot 94, which is 270 acres, will host 250 houses; each on one acre of land.

Plot 157, which is 918 acres, will host 615 houses; each on one acre of land. 

Plot 198, which is 1,680 acres, is reserved for mechanised agricultural production under SACCO arrangement. It will be fully irrigated using solar powered system. SACCOs formed will be provided with tractor mechanised planting, weeding and harvesting equipment. It will be productive throughout the year.

A large dam will be constructed to store water for the irrigation system. The area is flat; so, most often, when there is rain, the simmering water layer remains on the surface. Normally, when we build dams, we channel all the water into the dams and reserve it for irrigation.

The plan is also attached for you to see. 

We have formed a number of inter-ministerial sector committees. Inter-ministerial sector committees formed and their responsibility in the settlement are also in the table attached. You can go through the table attached. 

We promise, if in the next quarter we get another Shs 10 billion and in the subsequent quarter we get the remaining Shs 12 billion, we should be able to implement this project and have over 300 households settled by the end of this financial year. 

With that brief statement from our side, I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, this particular event does not need elaboration. We all know what happened and what has been explained by the minister. 

However, honourable members, we also know that our own Committee on Presidential Affairs is in Bududa trying to find out what is there, probably, as a way of trying to help us come up with a more comprehensive solution to this matter. Therefore, while we are going to open this matter for discussion, we should bear in mind that we will have another discussion when the committee comes back and presents a report to this House –(Ms Aol rose)- Yes, Leader of the Opposition, on what matter do you rise?

3.10
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. It is good that our committee is there on the ground because there are a lot of controversies. I would like to say I was there twice. In the first instance, I went there as a member of the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) party. 

As FDC, we found a lot of challenges. We know that we have diverse cultures. In my culture when you go to stand with a person who has problems – whether it is mourning or any other thing – you do not leave what you go with somewhere else. You have to go with it in your hands so that you do not go to explain: “You know, I was bringing you this and then…” For us in Acholi, that is not allowed. 

If I am going to mourn with somebody, I go with whatever I have prepared from my home. When we went as FDC – my hand was not yet broken – I could have also fought but I refused to fight because I am a peace lover. Our things were stopped at that junction, which moves to the right place. As a result, I decided and told other leaders that: “For you people, you proceed. Let me go to the district headquarters.” It was a forced courtesy but I decided to go to the district headquarters. 

I was welcomed by the district chairperson and we sat and I explained to him that: “Now that I have come, I have signed your book. We have our things, which we are taking to the victims of the landslide disaster. Can we go?” In the hearts of the police, I could see that they really wanted us to be free to take our things but it looked that there was order from above that “do not allow them to go with their things”. The minister in charge of disaster management needs to tell us properly. They totally refused until it was the people of the affected area who came, together with Dr Kiiza Besigye to collect those things from that junction.

I would like the minister to know that right now it is very difficult for us to handle disaster. Why don’t we have structures from up till down so that instead of stopping me at the district headquarters I go up to the ground and if the distribution of whatever I go with is not possible that day, then we have a committee on the ground which will say “okay, this thing has to be stored there” and we see the best way of distributing instead of storing everything at the district headquarters and you are not very sure if those things will reach the right people.

Honourable minister, this is one of the things I would like you to take interest in. In my district, those days when we had the problem of war, we had disaster management committees at the district and sub county levels. Why is it that we cannot revive that? That landslide will not be the last disaster. We will always have disasters for as long as we still live. Therefore, it is important for us to put in place some structures which can make it possible for us to get help very quickly because disaster response should be urgent. If there is no structure in place, it becomes very difficult for the victims and people who need help to reach the rightful place.

I would also like to say that Government has spent a lot of money on the land for relocation but I would like to tell you here clearly that there is a lot of controversy on that land. Why do you go and pay money – public money – before clearing everything? You need to clarify things before you pay money. When we went as the Opposition team – the report will come out – we were actually given that information and there were people who were protesting the action of Government. That is also a big controversy and it looks like the people who are to be relocated or resettled are too many to occupy the land. Another option could be to compensate them so that they can go to settle wherever they want. However, it looks like that option has not been explored. 

I would like to regret the money which you said the President gave. It is very unfortunate. Sometimes in the villages we cannot just give money like that – if a family lost maybe four people and you are there lining them up to give Shs 20 million, Shs 30 million or Shs 40 million to somebody who may not put that money into the best use, yet that is a public resource. 

We found it being done when we went as the Opposition for our oversight role and it was very political. I think we should not do that to our people. Let us always try to get the best model. I was even asked before I went there that: “Are you going to give half of your salary for response to that disaster?”

Honourable minister, you will also need to explain to us how you use your contingency fund which should go to disaster management. We need transparency. I have to support that. I think that asking us to give half of our salary for disaster management is not being fair to the Members of Parliament. There are very many other ways that we can actually allocate resources for disaster management in this country, if the will is there. However, if the will is not there, we will always go begging. Sometimes it is not easy. To respond to disaster, we need something at hand always. 

Mr Speaker, the minister should really work harder to avoid disaster in this country. I know we cannot stop hailstorms from happening but we have not even gone far to mitigate it. Therefore, I would like to urge that we must be prepared to respond to disasters; we should not respond when the disaster has already happened because we always look for where to get funding from to cater for disaster victims. It is very unfortunate.

There are a lot of things as far as the Bududa disaster is concerned, which have not yet been done - (Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a ministerial statement which attracts debate. However, our committee is in the field investigating the same matter and they will come back to report. Should we debate this matter now or should we wait for the committee so that we can have a proper debate on both aspects?

If we debate now and then the committee comes with different sets of facts, I think we may not know how to handle the situation. Would it not be proper for us to wait? I think let us wait for the committee to report so that we can have a full debate on this subject. Thank you very much. 

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER ON THE BOAT ACCIDENT THAT HAPPENED ON 24 NOVEMBER 2018 ON LAKE VICTORIA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us handle this statement because people are mourning. We shall debate the other statement after we have dealt with this one –(Mr Tinkasiimire rose)– Are you threatening the Chair? Kindly, resume your seat.  

3.18
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Ntege): Mr Speaker, this is a statement on the tragedy that occurred on Lake Victoria on 24 November 2018.  

On behalf of the Government of the Republic of Uganda and my ministry, I take this opportunity to convey sincere condolences to the families of those people who lost their lives on Lake Victoria on 24 November 2018. We regret the deaths of our citizens and we pray that the Almighty comforts the families of the bereaved.

On Saturday, 24 November 2018, a passenger boat sank off Mutima Beach, which is about 12 nautical miles from Ggaba Beach on Lake Victoria. The accident involved a private cruise boat allegedly owned by Templar Bisase and his wife. It was unregistered, unlicensed and may have been uninsured. Apparently, the vessel was previously a trawler, which was converted into a passenger vessel without the requisite approvals by the line ministry. It was operating cruise voyages mainly on weekends between various private beaches in Mukono.

According to the police reports, the vessel was destined for KK Palm Beach in Mukono District, having started its voyage at about 1630 hours, contrary to the time it had been planned for to leave, which was 1200 hours from KK Beach Ggaba in Makindye Division. The delay was caused by the captain, who refused to set sail because he had disagreed with the owner of the ship about its condition, which led the owner to engage a skipper to navigate the ship. 

A police officer intercepted and ordered the vessel not to make its voyage because the officer was suspicious of the vessel’s seaworthiness but the vessel owner and some revelers threatened to throw the officer in the water for interrupting their joy ride. Revelers insisted on sailing in the suspected vessel and it took off.

Mr Speaker, it has been established that on realising that the vessel had developed defects and could not make it to the planned destination, the skipper advised the owner of the vessel that they should dock it at the nearest landing site to enable passengers disembark  safely  and  also  save the  vessel  from  sinking. However, the owner apparently refused but eventually agreed and attempted to land at the sand at Mutima Beach.

Apparently, the accident was caused by none adherence to the laws governing water transport and willful defiance against lawful orders by both the vessel and some travelers.  

Mr Speaker, it should be emphasised that there is need for the citizens of Uganda to respect the government agencies especially the Uganda Police Force whose duty is to keep law and order in our society.   

Mr Speaker, the water transport sub sector is governed by the following legal instruments:

i. 	The Maritime (Fees) Regulations, 2010
ii. 	The Lake Victoria Transport Act, 2007
iii. 	Inland Water Transport (Control) Act, 1938
iv. 	The Rivers Act, 1907
v. 	The Ferries Act, 1905 
vi. 	The Vessel Registration Act, 1904

These laws have sufficient provisions that would have prevented this accident from happening, if they had been adhered to.

A local fishing boat passed by and advised them that the vessel was taking in water. Some of the revellers listened and disembarked to the small boat for their safety but the rest of the revellers proceeded with the journey towards Mutima Beach. 

Shortly after some revellers had embarked onto the small fishing boat, the vessel rapidly started sinking. As the vessel sank, a local boat operator phoned other operators in Ggaba informing them of the sinking vessel, and they also proceeded to help evacuate passengers. Unfortunately, his vessel was overwhelmed by the passengers who were attempting to embark and it also sunk killing the boat operator and some of the passengers.

The operators at Ggaba alerted the Ministry of Works and Transport officials who informed the Uganda Police Force, the Uganda Peoples Defense Force and private vessel owners to head to the site of incident.

Mr Speaker, the number of persons on board the vessel at the time of the incident was not known as there was no passenger manifest. By 26 November 2018, 32 bodies, including the proprietor and his spouse, were recovered as listed below:

            1. Mr Isaac Kayondo 
            2. Mr Arnold Mubale 
            3. Mr Templar Bisase 
            4. Mr John Bosco Nyanzi 
            5. Mr Bilditon Asaba 
            6. Mrs Sheila Bisase 
            7. Mr Bosco Owecho 
            8. Mr Moses Muyenga 
            9. Mr George William Ssengendo 
            10. Ms Diane Kanyumuzi 
            11. Ms Ritah Namale 
            12. Mr Yoweri Musumba
            13. Ms Sheila Gashishiri 
            14. Ms Sheila Nankunda Kainamura 
            15. Mr Tony Kawuki 
            16. Ms Rehema Ashaba 
            17. Ms Hajara Nagadya 
            18. Mr Paul Nsobya 
            19. Ms Sheila Mbonimpa 
            20. Ms Susan Ndyamuhebwa 
            21. Ms Winnie Kobusingye 
            22. Ms Esther Namutebi 
            23. Ms Zahra Diyani 
            24. Mr Paul Semakula 
            25. Mr Fred Mawanda 
            26. Ms Peace Busingye Kainamura 
            27. Ms Justine Namayanja 
            28. Mr Denis Wamala 
            29. Mr Brian Ndoori 
            30. Mr Michael Kaddu 
            31. Mr Michael Kaweesi
            32. Mr Fred Mawanda 

Those are the names of the deceased and they were identified. 

Twenty six people were rescued and some of these include:

            1. Ms Irene Namubiru
            2. Prince David Wasajja
            3. Ms Shamillah Nsereko
            4. Mr Francis Senkeezi
            5. Mr John Fred Kiyimba aka Freeman
            6. Mr Hope Mukasa
            7. Mrs Justine Tashobya Nsubuga and her sister
            8. Mr Edward Katerega
            9. Ms Rebecca Nassuna
            10. Mr Byabashija
            11. Mr Farouq Muzimba
            12. Mr Andrew Luziba
            13. Mr Joseph Kirimenzi
            14. Mr Mark Sseremba
            15. Mr Brian Jjuuko
            16. Mr Twesigye

Those are some of the names of the people who were rescued. That was as of yesterday but I am reliably informed that another body has been discovered today. It is yet to be established how many people are still unaccounted for as the search for casualties still continues.

Mr Speaker, I wish to recognise the on-scene coordinators; those who arrived at the scene of incident first on the night of 24 November and then sent out SOS’ to other relevant authorities. Among them are; 
    1. Mr Bosco Owecho. This is the person who attempted to rescue people but ended up losing his life in the operation.
    2. The local community boat operators from Ggaba, Port Bell and Mukono landing sites.
    3. The private sector 
    4. The Uganda Police Force 
    5. The Uganda Peoples Defence Forces marines
    6. The Ministry of Works and Transport staff
    7. Ambulance service providers
    8. Aeronautic support services of the Police
    9. Mulago Hospital Accident and Emergency Unit

There are also others who provided personal boats. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to recognise the members of Parliament who also turned up, especially hon. Johnson Muyanja, Member of Parliament for Mukono South, who was there right from Saturday night. Other Members were there on Sunday. (Applause)

According to preliminary investigations, it is indicated that there was an increasing water level in the lower compartments of the vessel. This signifies that the vessel was leaking with water entering the bilge that is underneath, which is the lowest compartment of the vessel. The bilge should be kept dry at all times by use of pumps. However, apparently it was not being emptied. Detailed casualty investigations are on-going to ascertain the actual cause of the incident.

Stakeholders and their roles in water transport

Currently, we have the National Transport and Logistics Policy. In addition, as this is being implemented, there are also other stakeholders who have roles to play in the water transport sub-sector and these include;

1. 	The Ministry of Works and Transport. The roles are;
i. 	To initiate, formulate and develop national policies, laws, plans and programmes for safe and efficient water transport infrastructure and services;
ii. 	Inspection, registration and licensing of all marine vessels and
iii. 	Monitoring and evaluation of performance of transport services.

2. 	The Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Industry and Fisheries; their role is to issue fishing licenses and monitor fishermen operations.

3. 	The Uganda Police Force which, enforces the laws and regulations and provides maritime services in search and rescue. 

4. 	The Uganda Peoples Defense Forces who provide security on water bodies and provide maritime search and rescue capabilities.

5. 	The Private sector, which invests in water transport. 

Mr Speaker, in a bid to reduce water transport accidents in Uganda, my ministry is currently undertaking the following measures:

    1. Strengthening inspection, registration and licensing of all marine vessels. 

Following the establishment of the Maritime Administration, the ministry will strengthen the inspection, registration and licensing in collaboration with security organs and communities through collaborative empowerment.

    2. Review and update of the legal framework

The Inland Water Transport Bill, 2018 is due for submission to Cabinet for approval. The principles were already approved. At an appropriate time, it will be presented to this Parliament. The Bill seeks to strength water transport safety management; streamline and better regulate water transport safety and strengthen enforcement.

    3. Strengthening surveys and inspection

The ministry is already working with classification societies to strengthen surveys on all conventional vessels and issue International Safety Certificates, on behalf of the country.

    4. Training of boat operators

In addition to maritime training services offered by the regional maritime training institutes like Dar es Salaam Maritime Training Institute in Tanzania and Bandari Maritime College in Kenya, the ministry is preparing to establish maritime training centers at Busitema University Fisheries Training Institute and support the private sector in the training of boat operators in basic skills like crowd management, swimming, use of life saving appliances and personal survival techniques. 

5. Monitoring and regulation of vessel operations

The ministry is strengthening and coming up with strict guidelines on the registration of passengers embarking and disembarking the vessels and vessels intending to offer cruise services.

The ministry is, in addition, developing infrastructure at landing sites, beaches and marinas for safe embarkation and disembarkation of passengers.

Water Transport Safety Sensitisation

The ministry will further strengthen sensitising of boat owners, operators, passengers and local communities about water transport safety using all available media together with other security agencies.

The Multinational Lake Victoria Maritime Communication and Transport Project

The Government has received a loan for the Multinational Lake Victoria Maritime and Communication Transport Project from the African Development Bank to, among other things;

i.  	Construct search and rescue centres.
ii.  	Improve maritime communication.
iii. 	Ensure weather alert dissemination in collaboration with the meteorological department.
iv. 	Ensure electronic tagging of all operational vessels.
v.  	Training and regular drills for search and rescue preparedness.
vi. 	Address issues of counterfeit lifesaving appliances through a system with the Uganda Bureau of Standards to accredit genuine products.
vii. 	Develop synergies with the aeronautical sector in search and rescue and prepare a national aeronautical search and rescue plan.

This project is already operational since the beginning of this year. Other areas of intervention and collaboration include;

The International Maritime Organisation (IMO) where Uganda is a member. The Government is committed to improving water transport safety as enshrined in the IMO conventions and protocols.

Cabinet recently approved the accession to International Maritime Organisation conventions aimed at improving water safety in Uganda. These include;

i. 	The International Convention for Safety of Lives at Sea.

ii. 	The International Convention for Prevention of pollution      from Ships as modified by the Protocol of 1978 and 1997.

iii. 	The International Convention on Standards of Training,     Certification and Watch Keeping for Seafarers as amended,     including the 1995 and 2010 Manila Conventions.
 
iv. 	The International Convention on Standards of Training,    Certification and Watch Keeping for Fishing Vessel Personnel, 1995.
	
v. 	The International Convention on the International    Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea, 1972.

vi. 	The International Convention on Facilitation of     International Maritime Traffic, 1965.

vii. 	The International Convention on Load Lines, 1966.

viii. 	The International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue.

Having acceded to the IMO, we will be subject to an IMO audit, which is very good for the country. 

Mr Speaker, all the above mentioned conventions contain international regulations governing water bodies and our ministry, through accession to them and preparing a new inland water transport legislation, will have a legal framework to implement them on all our water bodies.

We are also in the process of ratifying the African Maritime Transport Charter, which aims at enhancing collaboration on maritime affairs on the African Continent.

In conclusion, this accident could have been avoided if the owners and passengers had complied with the prevailing legislation and heeded to the lawful orders issued by the police officer. 

I would also like to emphasise that:

i. 	The general public should always take personal responsibility for their safety by ensuring use of appropriate lifesaving appliances and avoiding vessels without statutory certifications like operator licenses.

ii. 	Boat owners must abide by the prevailing laws and regulations governing water transport safety.

iii. 	Government will, henceforth, take stringent measures towards anyone operating any boat without statutory certification.

iv. 	Security agencies have been ordered to arrest anyone found operating any vessel without operator licenses and lifesaving appliances.

v. 	Government henceforth warns the general public to desist from obstructing security agencies from performing their lawful duties.

Mr Speaker, I also would like to emphasise that safety of an individual is very important to the individual; therefore, the individual should care about safety.

Right now, efforts by the Ministry of Works and Transport, the UPDF and the Uganda Police Force are under way to recover the wreckage, in case there are other bodies trapped in it.

Once again, our hearts are with the families of the bereaved. May God rest the souls of those who perished in eternal peace.

I beg to submit. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Like I said in my earlier communication, tragedies of this nature must shock the conscience of a country to make it act appropriately to avoid any further incidences of the kind.

3.45
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, in addition to the statement, I would like to convey condolences from the Government to the bereaved families and the people of Uganda on the tragedy.

On behalf of Government, I would like to declare Friday, 30th November a day of national mourning in recognition of that tragedy. Therefore, between today and Friday, we have time to investigate what happened in the water. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please take note. Friday, 30 November 2018 has been declared a day of national mourning for this tragedy. Can I have the Member for Kampala Central Division? Can we give some time limitation on this? If this debate is for one hour and we take too much time, then only a few people will speak. 

3.47
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek your indulgence that I take a few minutes more because I was one of the first respondents on this matter. (Interjections)– One of my colleagues said I was on the boat but rather, it was near my constituency.

Mr Speaker, on behalf of my constituency, I would like to join hands with everyone here to sympathise with the families that lost their beloved ones and to also thank God for those who were rescued or managed to swim to the mainland alive. 

What Ugandans witnessed on Saturday is unprecedented in Water Transport. We arrived at about 7 p.m. after receiving distress calls from some of the fishermen around there. They informed us that the boat had capsized. We rushed to K.K Beach, which was the point of departure of the boat, in order to get a few boats and try to rescue those who were still floating on the water. 

This is what we saw in real time - not what we were told. There were only two police rescue boats and one of them did not have enough fuel. Therefore, they called upon the fishermen and other people that own beaches in the neighbouring areas including hon. Kyagulanyi’s beach in Busabala, Ggaba that was closed, K.K Beach still had some rescuers and divers, Mutima Beach and the ordinary fishermen who had ordinary fishing boats that had hon. Ssewanyana’s names because he donated them.

Hon. Kasozi immediately arrived and we tried to make it possible for the divers to go back with jet-skis because many of the people had already been demoralised. We asked the marine officer what had happened and he told us that when he approached a few people, he was asked to turn back. However, a young fisherman who was there said when they went to stop this boat, the police officers were compromised. 

We should not sugar-coat these things. The police were compromised and the fisherman said he is ready to stand before any inquiry to testify because they told the people who were boarding the boat that the boat had been under repair and underneath it, it had developed a hole. For about four months, the boat was under repair. Some of the people who were warned backed off but others insisted. 

The only person whose burial I attended was Isaac Kayondo, son of Mr Moses Kayondo. He did not even know the boat had left. He, together with his wife, hired a speedboat all the way from Ggaba and raced to find this vessel. How could he have known that this boat had been under repair?

All our docking centres are not documented. There are no authorised people to allow boarding and disembarking of the boats.

Secondly, we asked the marine officers, “Did you check the people who boarded the boat and did you ascertain that the boat had liquor?” They said they watched while a truck of alcohol was offloaded onto the boat. This is a fact. After that, the people embarked on the boat with charcoal stoves to mention but a few. You can imagine the weight that went onto the boat. The fishermen warned the people thrice that the boat had been overloaded.  

The captain of the boat tried to protest but he was overpowered by the owner because a reservation had been made for entertainment purpose and definitely, business owners normally look at profitability more than safety.  

What ensued was what happened after. About a few metres away, the people who were on the boat, having realised that there was danger after they were warned by one of the fishermen, sent distress calls and called the police helpline. Mr Speaker, I don’t want to digress. However, when you call the police helpline, it starts by asking you to press 1 if you prefer to use a certain language or press 2 if you prefer Kiswahili. When you press 1, they will say, “If it is a criminal gang, fire or a child fallen in the toilet, press 2”. By the time you get someone to attend to you, it is over 15 or 20 minutes - (Interjections) - someone is saying, “What calibre are they armed with?” 

Therefore, by the time the police arrived, it was over 30 minutes. For all of you who have been on water, you know that after 30 minutes of a boat capsizing, you can hardly find anybody alive. Were there enough lifejackets? From the eyewitnesses, the answer was no.

Some people who actually died knew how to swim but they were overpowered by those they tried to give lifejackets. One eyewitness I interacted with removed his jacket and gave it to someone else but others clung on to the lifejacket and they all drowned. 

What are we calling for in this scenario? The minister talked about the maritime college. Since when did we realise we have water transport so as to train and license skippers? We have driving licences for every driver on the road. For the pilots, they are trained from Soroti Flying School. What happened to the other forms of transport, namely water and railway transport? Where are these training colleges?

Therefore, we understand that the mother of all calls of survival is necessity. Now that necessity has knocked at the door, you have to hire these services so that every captain of a ship that is floating on Lake Victoria holds a licence. Had the captain had a microphone and sent out warnings just like the captains do when a plane experiences turbulence, he would have warned the people and probably said, “Right now, we are experiencing some danger but sit down calmly and wear your lifejackets”. Probably, those who knew how to swim would have donated their lifejackets to others who did not know how to swim. 

Why should a vessel with 120 people leave a port without at least 10 divers and 10 life-savers? Ladies and gentlemen, we all have children here. Many of our children are called upon for trips. You might not know where your child is going today. The school may tell them they are going on a tour on Lake Victoria. Imagine that scenario befalling your child who was picked from school, assured he would be safe on a boat, which is well insured with all gadgets and a trained captain, only to return you a body. That is what happened.

We cannot blame the people who went to the boat to have fun. They probably thought that all these measures, standards and laws were followed to the letter only to realise in the middle of the water that nothing was followed.

Mr Speaker, finally, I would like to talk about Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR). Administration of CPR of those that have drowned should be a skill that is taught in school. There are two skills that must be mandatory because any boat can capsize anywhere in the world in case of terrorism or an attack. Therefore, every single Ugandan in school should be taught the skill of swimming. If they fail, then they should be trained CPR on how to resuscitate an unconscious person as a result of water getting into their lungs.

We were told that many people were still unconscious but people were fumbling with how to bring them back because most of them did not know how to apply CPR. It takes only 10-15 minutes to be taught how to apply CPR and the doctors are here. It is just a skill every one of us can bear.

Thanks should go out to the fishermen who responded first, who have been brutalised on this lake. They gave up their fuel and boats; these people have been beaten to pulp because of fishing. However, when they realised that there was danger, they are the people who gave in their all including their life, to swim and try to save these people and put them at Mutima Beach.

Mr Speaker, we witnessed something and I would like to talk about it. We, as leaders, should be living examples. When a leader steps onto a boat and takes a picture - they must be pictured wearing a life vest. I will not direct that message to anyone but we all know that in this country, before we ask for accountability, we must come with clean hands.

Leaders have been pictured on various boats including very strong leaders - I will not exonerate myself or anyone here without a life vest. Others are pictured on these boats with guns other than life vests.

Therefore, I call upon all of us that just like we enter a car and fasten seat belts, death on water is not discriminative. Every one of us who steps on the boat must –(Interruption)

MR SSEWANYANA: The information I would like to give to hon. Nsereko is that I just saw a picture of the President sitting in a fishing boat in Kyankwanzi without a life jacket. Therefore, this enforcement should start with the Head of State because we are all bound by the laws of this country. We don’t want him to die in that manner.

MR NSEREKO: As I wind up, Mr Speaker, you have all witnessed that they were trying to salvage the wreckage. However, as they tried to recover the wreckage, we all witnessed something on television and we would like the line minister and the Minister of Internal Affairs or the chairperson of the committee and the Prime Minister to let us know - there was someone issuing orders at Mutima Beach, ordering people to pull a rope of the wreckage. Which type of physics is that?  

A civilian ordering the Special Forces; I don’t know his name. I think he is called “white man” or something. He was telling people to pull the wreckage with a rope meant to pull cattle. We have well-trained engineers and better people in this country. We do not underestimate anyone’s effort in trying to rescue but when it gets to that level, there must be a chain of command. 

We cannot look on as Ugandans when an Assistant Inspector General of Police and the Maritime Police takes orders from a civilian called, Brian White, who promised people Shs 100,000 to pull out the wreckage of the boat. This is a joke. This country must have a chain of command and let us know if he is an army officer. He is moving – (Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the House that the team that is working to remove the wreckage is from the Ministry of Works and Transport working with marine forces and the police. They have ferried equipment to pull that rope and not people. If it was seen by people, it must a mistake but as far as we are concerned - (Interjection)– the people there are specialised to do it.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you very much, for your information. I don’t know whether to take it as information or disinformation because it was right in the media and everyone saw it; they were people labouring to pull the rope.

All said and done, we can have better equipment. If you don’t have the money, come before us with a supplementary for more funds. This is Lake Victoria, the nearest lake; how about if it happened on Lake Albert or Lake Kyoga and others? 

If the funds are not enough, this Parliament is there to appropriate funds in order to keep the lives of Ugandans safe and well protected. Thank you very much, for your effort but credit deserves to be given to all the people that have contributed in this course. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for the time granted to me.

4.03
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join hon. Mohammad Nsereko and all Ugandans to send out my condolences to the bereaved families and all Ugandans. I thank God for the survivors.

It is the first time for some of us to see bodies of that nature. Before I came here, I communicated with the chairperson of the sub county where the incident happened and he confirmed that they have managed to find new methods of retrieving the other bodies in the lake. However, what happened was terrible.

Mr Speaker, this is my appeal to this House - I always come to you; you have even named me “Koome” whenever I come to you because of the uniqueness of some of our areas on the lake. Hon. Bagiire, the state minister - whom I must appreciate - tried his best; the police, the army and also hon. Kasozi all responded very fast when the incident happened.

Where is the problem, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues? As we plan for other areas, the islanders are forgotten. You heard the conventions that the honourable minister talked about. How have they helped the fishermen and the islanders? You are talking of registering boats and vessels but do you have the exact number of vessels and boats? We just come out any day; break and repair.

The life jackets are of very poor quality. Those that are of good quality are very expensive for the fishermen and they cannot afford them. They don’t even bother about size. They are doing it like the boda-boda riders. When they see traffic officers, they wear the helmets but when there is no traffic officer, they are not bothered. That is how life jackets are being used; they are too small and of poor quality.

We appeal to the Government to get concerned with water transport. People are suffering. We are using canoe boats for pregnant mothers - and I have said it here several times. 
Mr Speaker, even the committee that was sent to investigate the harassment of fishermen could not consider coming to our areas of Kamuswa and Koome because there were no ferries. They could not risk their lives using canoe boats yet 27 per cent of the land size of our country is covered by water. It is inevitable that we plan seriously for how our people can be saved and how we can travel safely on the waters.

I would like to appreciate whatever has been done and what the ministry is doing, together with the police, to make sure that we get the remaining bodies.

As I conclude, even registering the numbers of people - we are now in doubt. Kaweesa told us that they were 111 and I informed the honourable minister but the policemen could not come out to say so because they know that according to the size of the boat, it could not even manage 70 people. However, there were over 100 people. 

We do not know the exact figure; how long are we going to take to search for the bodies because we do not know the figure. Had we known the figure, we would know the rescued people and the remaining number to look for but it is still a problem. However, I thank the Government; please continue and make sure that all the bodies are retrieved. Thank you.

4.09
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A colleague is asking whether Kasilo has a boat. My constituency is a peninsula surrounded by water. 

Mr Speaker, allow me send my sincere condolences to the families, to those who have lost their dear ones and to wish a quick recovery to those who are in hospital.

The way a fishing boat and a passenger boat are made is different. This boat was a fishing boat, which was picked and bought by the deceased from Mwanza, where it was operating as a fishing boat. Therefore, one wonders how one allows a fishing boat to be converted into a passenger boat. This goes to the ministry; I think you need to put your act right.

Mr Speaker, it is not the first time we are having this tragedy; 10 years ago, we had MV Kabalega sink in Lake Victoria and the same measures that the honourable minister is raising here today were the same that hon. Nasasira mentioned in this House. I am surprised that since then, nothing has been done. 

Today, the minister is repeating the same things, which should have been done after the incident of MV Kabalega. One wonders how long we take to learn. You have heard from her statement that the laws are as old as 1900 and 1905 but things have changed in the world. These should have been changed. I think the faster you do that, the better.

The minister has told us that this boat was unregistered and unlicensed and they are not sure whether it was insured. How long does it take for you to know that a boat is insured? How many days have passed since for you to establish that this boat was not insured? These were the same incidences regarding MV Kabalega, which was not insured as well. 

Therefore, there are so many anomalies and when things happen like this, we do not want to address them. I think it is high time that the ministry woke up and the committee in charge of this must also wake up.

I was on the investigative committee for MV Kabalega but unfortunately, along the way, the report never saw the light of day in this House because there were issues that were indicting the ministry officials. Therefore, somewhere along the way, the report never came here and our term ended and the report was sabotaged from getting to this House.

Mr Speaker, I think the Government must take us seriously and address the matter on the waters as it is a big problem. For us who live in those areas, the way people live and move on the water - people from Nakasongola and Kasilo carry out trade and these are the types of boats that they use for ferrying cows. They go and buy cows in Nakasongola and they load the cows to cross to Kasilo and vice versa. It is just a tragedy waiting to happen. How can we allow such a thing to happen on these waters?

The recommendations that hon. Nsereko has made here must be taken seriously for us to address these matters. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.13
MS ROSE KABAGYENYI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to convey my condolences to the bereaved families and the country. 
I also would like to thank the Minister of Works and Transport for her statement because we have been desperately waiting for it, as a country.

Mr Speaker, we are aware that it is the mandate of the Ministry of Works and Transport to regulate road, water, rail and air transport. However, according to what she has presented, not much has been done for years and it seems we have lost hope as a country and we do not see anything coming soon.

In Kisoro, we lost two people in this tragedy and as I speak, they are being buried. When I was in church yesterday, people almost stoned me. They said, “When it comes to amending the Constitution and increasing your salaries, you are there. However, when it comes to people dying, no one wants to talk about it.” This was in relation to the previous incidents of the fires, the victims in Bududa and River Mayanja - it was a sad moment.

I also would like to add my voice to my colleagues that Government has to come out seriously. The oversight mandate of the ministry has to be strengthened and these policies implemented. It is sad to have good policies that we always keep on paper but cannot be rightly implemented.

Mr Speaker, I pray that the victims of this tragedy, especially the fisherman who lost his life trying to save many lives, have their families supported by Government. This fisherman saved many but could not save himself.

On declaring Friday a day for national mourning, I think this should have come from the minister because we have lost many people and we do not even know how many are still trapped in the water.

The other recommendation is that before people embark on a water vessel, let there be a passenger manifest so that people can tell who was on the water and who was not. This has not been done. Mr Speaker, if you went to the lake even now, people enter these boats as and when they wish and there is no data as to who has been on the lake. This complicates establishing how many people are still missing on the lake. That is all I wanted to communicate, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the distinguished strangers’ gallery this afternoon, we have hon. Chrysostom John Muyiisa, former Member of the Constituent Assembly who represented Bujumba County, Kalangala District. He is here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming him. You are welcome. (Applause)

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have students from St Maria Goretti Primary School, Bulenga. They are represented by hon. Medard Sseggona and hon. Rosemary Seninde. They are here to observe the proceedings; please join me in welcoming them. 

4.18
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join the rest of Ugandans to sympathise with the families that lost their loved ones and also to thank God for the survivors. 

I am going to speak with authority because I come from the Islands. I remember in 1995, I almost drowned in the lake and I took almost seven hours in the water. The minister has talked about life jackets but I would like to make it categorically clear that some of the life jackets you are talking about help dead bodies to be recovered. A life jacket must go by your weight.

When we look at these boats, life jackets cannot save us. However, we have floaters. If a boat capsizes, a floater will help to rescue one or two people. That means that even if you do not know how to swim, you can touch that floater and float with it. 

When putting new laws in place, I would like the minister concerned to emphasise that these boats must have floaters instead of life jackets. This is because a life jacket help a person like Abott who can swim but not someone who cannot swim. 

As my colleagues have said, in 1997, we lost over 70 people in the waters. The type of transport used in the water, including for us members of Parliament, is pathetic. Therefore, it is our responsibility, as Parliament and the ministry, to make sure that when licensing these boats including the wooden boats that you license and get money from, you should ask how many passengers it can carry. The boats are licensed but there is no explanation as to how many people they are licensed to carry. 

Therefore, what is causing problems in the islands is overloading of boats. How do we understand that a boat, even when licensed, is overloaded yet the number of people it is supposed to carry is not indicated? I, therefore, request the ministry to make sure that we license boats and indicate the number of people they are supposed to carry. 

Mr Speaker, as my colleague said, we should examine how students of the schools within the islands are transported. They use wooden boats that carry over 100 students and pupils. Suppose they get an accident? You may lose a whole school. 

Instead of the ministry saying that they should make arrests, I am appealing that we sensitise some of these people because it is the most important thing. What type of boats should they use? Am I going to use a boat carrying fish or a boat that is supposed to transport people? We can go together to the islands and sensitise the people.

Mr Speaker, there are people with good swimming skills at the islands and I would like to bear witness to this that even if an engine drops deep into the lake, in my area, you will get a primary six or seven pupil who will go down for five minutes and retrieve it. Let us identify such people and train them to save lives. I have seen marines that have gone to the lake but cannot swim. The local people who are familiar with the lake should be trained. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.22
MR ROBERT KYAGULANYI (Independent, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues and the entire nation to mourn our people who perished in the lake accident. 

In times like this, we all get rude awakenings; both the population and the authorities. Indeed, nobody is innocent of the mistakes that are continuously made on the lake. It was noted by some of the survivors that there were some life jackets on board but some party goers rejected them because they were spoiling their sense of fashion and pictures. Therefore, in one way or another, the people take the responsibility.

We thank the Uganda Police Marines and the Uganda Peoples Defence Force (UPDF) for the swift move to save lives. Nevertheless, we must also remind ourselves that even when the police and the UPDF came to rescue our people, there were not enough boats. It had to take well-wishers from the nearby lake shores, including our own One Love Beach, Busabala, to bring boats and save people. 

As we speak, the wreckage of the boat is still stuck at the bottom of the lake and it is presumed that some victims are stuck in there. However, we are using villagers to manually pull that wreckage out of the lake; that alone speaks volumes regarding our equipment to save lives, especially on water.

Mr Speaker, the World Health Organisation issued water safety guidelines in 2005, which were supposed to be followed by all countries. Among those guidelines was insuring water vessels and that all water vessels are equipped with tracking devices to track them wherever they go and most importantly, to provide emergency boats and life jackets on all those boats. Those are some of the things that we have not taken seriously. 

Like my colleague, hon. Nsereko noted, we do not have a training facility for captains and the crew that run those boats. I believe that if Government moves to put such in place, we might probably mitigate further incidents. 

I continue to condole with the victims and thank God for survivors. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker. 

4.26
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to condole with my colleagues. One of our colleagues from Busujju lost a father; may his soul rest in peace. The former Member of Parliament for Jinja East also lost a wife. We condole with those families. 

Mr Speaker, a lot has been mentioned but I would like to emphasise the training aspect. We have a Fisheries Training Institute in Entebbe, one of its kind and unique in East Africa. I had the opportunity to train there for three years but the facility is lacking. The only swimming pool, which was started by the late President Idi Amin, is still not complete up to now and it is non-functional. 

We are training people who should be able to save lives on our water bodies. However, I would like to attest to the fact that all the students of Fisheries Training Institute do not train in life saving equipment because there are no practicals; it is only theories. 

I would like to appeal to the Executive that this institute should be strengthened and the necessary infrastructure should be put in place. Last month, they celebrated 50 years of existence and the Minister for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees was the guest of honour. Unfortunately, he has walked out but I wanted to point it out to him that some of the approved loans should be put to use and part of it be put in the Fisheries Training Institute because it is a key institute that we could utilise to deploy on our lakes for saving lives in such scenarios.

I would also like to emphasise that we seem not to have a central command centre for all the boats that are moving on the lake. Everybody seems to be doing what they like. This particular boat is one of those old Chinese boats, which were brought here sometime back for trawling on the lake; they were used for fishing. The design is not suitable for transporting human beings.

It is very unfortunate that a lot was ignored and it has cost lives of Ugandans, which I hope will not happen again since the ministry has seen that there is a gap. Please, move quickly. If it means repealing the old laws and coming up with new legislature, please can we do this quickly?

Regarding the use of alcohol, even on our roads - we have a ban on the use of alcohol while driving. Why is it that this new form of entertainment gets everybody excited? Mr Speaker, as we speak, there is a new advert of another boat that is supposed to go for a cruise next month. What is the status of that boat? It is everywhere on social media. Can the Ministry of Works and Transport find a way of regulating, monitoring and supervising all these vessels that get on the lake?

You can imagine this vessel did not have rafts. Rafts are small boats attached to the main one so that when there is an emergency, they are released into the water and people jump into them. They accommodate about five to six people at a go. However, there was nothing of that kind; so, how could people save their lives? 

The other issue is about the equipment that we use - the life jackets. They are of poor quality and their cost is very high. Sometimes, these fishermen forego buying them because their costs are very high. I think we need to look at reducing taxes so that we make them easily available for our local people who are using water as a means of transport to be able to acquire these life jackets and save their lives. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.30
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I condole with those who lost their loved ones. This is not the first time that such an incident is happening and actually, I do not know what Government is investigating. 

I have travelled with the Committee on National Economy and the Committee on Agriculture on a Government ferry, which my people use daily. The ferry filed in the middle of the way. Personally, this ferry has failed over 10 times when I am on board and at one time, it disintegrated and ropes were used to bring the parts together. 

We have complained to the Ministry of Works and Transport and Government and for the last four years, it has been in the ministerial policy statement of the Ministry of Works and Transport.

Mr Speaker, I have statistics here of water accidents since 2010. These are the accidents, which have been recorded by marines but the rest are not recorded. I would like to assist the minister so that we do not waste time in further investigation; we should only take action. 

In 2010, we had 106 accidents; 22 people were rescued and 84 died. 

In 2011, there were 286 accidents; 177 were rescued and 109 died. 

In 2012, we had 252 accidents; 101 were rescued and 151 died. 

In 2013, there were 173 accidents; 54 people were rescued and 119 died. 

In 2014, we had 377 accidents; 132 were rescued and 245 died. 

In 2015, we had 307 accidents; 135 were rescued and 172 died. 

In 2016, we had 388 accidents; 248 were rescued and 128 died. 

In 2017, we had 247 accidents; 138 were rescued and 109 died.
This information is with the Ministry of Works and Transport. 

The causes of these accidents are outlined and the biggest cause has been bad weather followed by poor vessel state and overloading. These are the things that we should be looking at. 

As someone who comes from a fishing community, the cause of this accident was not overloading but the poor state of the vessel. If this boat was in a good state, it could even carry 300 people. If you want to balance a boat, you should not put water in it because water moves from either side. Rather, you should put an object. Who was there to advise these people to use water to balance the boat?

Mr Speaker, this country lacks a tag boat; that is why, up to date, the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and the marines are struggling with ropes to bring out this small vessel. This is one of the smallest vessels that you can fight to bring out for two days without struggling.

I was a member of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and we have been tasking the Ministry of Works and Transport to acquire a tag boat. This is the equivalent of a ‘breakdown’ for the lake. 

In addition, the statistics we have here do not reflect Buvuma Islands because no one has ever been saved by a marine in Buvuma because it is very far from the headquarters. What have been brought out are actually dead bodies. You cannot talk about saving dead bodies because that is not what we are targeting.

The marine police at Kiyindi, which serves Buvuma Islands, receives 60 litres of petrol in a month. If we would like to assist our people - we passed a loan here and we were supposed to set up rescue centres. For example, Buvuma was supposed to have three centres but for more than a year, the team from the Ministry of Works and Transport has never visited Buvuma to interact with leaders on where these centres should be. 

Life jackets should be the last item to tax. However, people are finding it difficult to bring in life jackets and that is why they are bringing in those very cheap ones because they pay tax on them. Today, even if every fisherman was to decide to buy a life jacket, they are not on market. You are telling people to get life jackets but where are you sending them to pick them from? Are you going to sew them in Kikuubo? Are they sewn like ordinary clothes?

Therefore, it should be the obligation of Government to safeguard our people. Much as we may sensitise them to learn to swim -(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, hon. Migadde, for giving way. The information I would like to give to the House is that Government developed a 20-year Water Transport Master Plan worth $ 484 million. When the Prime Minister stood, I expected him to speak to us on what effort has been made to secure the money but he announced a public holiday on Friday. Thank you.

MR MIGADDE: Mr Speaker, I would like to lay this information for record purposes. Thank you.

4.38
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I would like to extend my condolences to the families that lost their loved ones, including us. We lost many people, when you look at the list.

Mr Speaker, I listened to the minister’s statement and indeed, it is the same statement that was issued over 10 years ago because it lacks tangible solutions. That tells me that probably the ministry has not done anything tangible in as far as water transport is concerned.

I would like to pray that the policemen who were on site and failed to do their work should be investigated. We cannot let all this happen as we lose people.

I would like to talk about the moral decay that has befallen our country. I think we could have avoided some of these deaths. When I looked at the video clips and - we need to change; it is not only on water. Somebody puts on headphones, covers his ears with loud music and is crossing the road without checking both sides. A driver drives on the walkway - this is total decay that Government needs to pray for and work against.

Finally, looking at all this, I think it would be humble to request Government to apologise for negligence because the Ministry of Works and Transport has not done much to save lives on water. Apologise and promise Ugandans good service so that such a calamity does not befall us again. Thank you.

4.40
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Mr Speaker, I bring condolences from Lake Albert and the people of Bugungu, to those who died but also to very many who die every week, are not registered and do not have a chance of us talking about them.

There are many deaths taking place on Lake Albert and other water bodies. I am part of the Bagungu community who are fishing on all lakes in the Great Lakes beyond Uganda. Therefore, I am speaking as a practitioner and as a person who has been on Lake Victoria and Lake Kyoga but also at some level, as a transporter on the lake.

Mr Speaker, accountability starts with everybody, including investors. However, Government and leaders should be responsible and make laws against excesses; to regulate and be responsible for others.

I would like Parliament, as we mourn, not just to announce a mourning day. Mr Speaker, I would like the Prime Minister to give us a road map with targets. Can the Ministry of Works and Transport and all related agencies, in two weeks, report to the Floor of Parliament the state of water transport in this country? 

How is the Police; the Marine Department? What is the state on Lake Albert and Lake Kyoga? I have ever been in Bangala, Kiyindi, Kasilo and Kagwara. What is their state of preparedness in terms of marine? Two weeks ago, in the Kilenga Project, we asked the question of preparedness of water transport in that region where we are going to have that industry.

Water transport is the cheapest mode of transport but in Uganda, it has become the most difficult to do. We all want to cruise - nobody should even afford to blame those who went for the cruise. You all enjoy cruising abroad. Why don’t we bring it back home but make sure it is safe?

We were told about the master plan long ago. Can it be presented to the Floor of Parliament so that we look at the cost and the intentions of Government to finance it because water transport is the cheapest mode of transport? 

To the contrary, UNRA is now in a venture of road axle and weighbridge management, which is a non-tariff barrier because cheap transport is not there. When I started logistics and transport, we never carried cement and steel on the road. From Hima, Tororo and Mombasa, we came by rail. However, because rail transport is not there and water transport is not working, we have a problem.

Even the challenge of Kenya taking the standard gauge to Kisumu should be an opportunity for us to invest heavily in water vessels. Let this master plan be presented here, let the state of water transport be presented here and the investment report brought here. 

We have had Public-Private Partnerships investment; where are they? This training should not only be because we lost people yesterday. It is a Government plan. Can we discuss it, as Parliament? We are responsible for appropriation; we have borrowed so many loans, including loans to support refugees. Why don’t we borrow to finance a functional and cheap water transport system?

Water transport also brings the best tourism arrival in the country. You all want to cruise when you are in Cairo, Amsterdam or Turkey. Why don’t we make this country - and it is trans-boundary water.

When we looked for the first oil, during the days of King Sir Tito Winyi and my grandfather, Lake Albert was navigable to Nimule, Sudan through Pakwach and Rhino Camp, to Semuliki, to Ntoroko and to Congo. Why don’t we revamp this every useful water transport?

We have left it to those who get some old scrap - I am told that boat was scrap from elsewhere and brought here. Government must also give incentives to people who are doing investments in water transport.

If I want to bring a good steamer, what do I get from Government, even if it means removing all taxes so that we can get the best investments? That is when we shall get Uganda as the best destination of tourism and that is when we shall have lakeside development. You all want to go to Durban and Cape Town because they have planned their water transport as the best model.

We have had the problem of Namanve, an industrial park without water transport. I thank the Bukasa Project for coming on board but this shows how uncoordinated we have been.

I would like to turn this challenge into an opportunity. Please, Rt hon. Prime Minister, bring us a detailed Government intention to revamp water transport in this country.

When I was young, I saw good steamers. When I came to Entebbe for the first time and even Lake Albert, we had good marines. Even if it means reducing these other vehicles for lead cars that we increase the marines on the lake, let us do that. Every time we are moving as delegations in other countries, whenever we are on a cruise, we are accompanied by police patrol. You see four boats accompanying you and you enjoy. We also take drinks like wine there but here you are blaming those with wine. 

I think the problem is not having a party on a cruise. The problem is having unsafe facilities and failure to have the right people to accompany them and the training that it requires.

My prayer is that we look at this as an opportunity to fix our challenges once and for all and most importantly, we should implement the $ 480 million water transport master plan. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this, like most ministerial statements, do not need us to take decisions on what we should do. We debate them as information and that is where it should end. We are drawing this to a close. It is supposed to be for one hour. I will take the Member for Bunya East and come to the Leader of the Opposition and the Prime Minister.

4.48
MR MAJEGERE WAIRA (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Mr Speaker, it is very sad that, just like you have said, we are debating a ministerial statement and we may not draw conclusions. I would like to suggest that a committee of Parliament, maybe the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries or we set up a select committee, to look into this matter because there are very many gaps and it is this committee that will help the ministry and the entire country to come up with measures, which can help us to have good water transport.

Mr Speaker, I always use a ferry, which connects to – (interjections) - I do not know who is disorganising the minister. Who is disorganising the minister? I always use the ferry, which connects to the minister’s home district of Kamuli-Kayunga but we just board the ferry without any record and that means there is a problem. I even see other MPs doing the same. Even for this disaster, which occurred, there is no record of the exact number of passengers. 

Therefore, we need a committee to come up and close all those gaps. The life jackets on that ferry are very few and dirty. I have never seen anybody using those life jackets. They can only put them there – (Interjections) - They provided them one time when there was a minister. However, I always travel on that ferry and there are no life jackets – (Interruption)

MR AOGON: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. The information I would like to offer is, whenever we go to the airport, there is always what we call check-in. However, when we are using water transport, there is no proper check-in here in Uganda where you are asked to remove your belt, if it is necessary or check the weight of your luggage. I am told that people are supposed to get life jackets, which are commensurate with their weight and height. 
This is lacking. 

MR MAJEGERE: We are blaming the policemen but I always travel on this ferry. Once the policeman knows that this is hon. Majegere, he just bows his head and I board the ferry. 

Therefore, we need strict regulations to be put in place. Otherwise, policemen cannot manage these rich men because they are investors. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to suggest that we have a committee to go and investigate and make sure that we close all these gaps we are hearing about. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the Public Gallery, this afternoon, we have a delegation of councillors and staff of Ayer Sub-County, Kole County South, Kole District. They are represented by hon. Peter Ocen and hon. Judith Alyek. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

4.51
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Mr Speaker, on behalf of my people of Gulu and on behalf of the Opposition fraternity, I would like to convey our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved families. When death occurs in big numbers like this, it is the children who suffer the most, especially the orphans where both mother and father have gone. We pray that something is done for them.

I would like to thank the minister for the statement made. Honourable minister, you clearly highlighted very many instruments, I think right from 1995 to 2008. Is it the implementation which is the problem? When we talk about registration, do you have some evidence that you have been registering these vessels? If not, why? Is it a problem of professionalism?

Mr Speaker, inland water transport has suffered a lot, according to the statistics that one honourable colleague gave us. Probably this is the biggest tragedy and an eye opener to all of us. We are down to see how best we can completely put this off or not allow it to happen in a careless situation like this. Why do I say “careless”? 

It is very unfortunate that you can come and say, police was overpowered by the people yet even when we are 3,000 members of the Opposition, we can never overpower the police. Why should the police be overpowered by these few people who were boarding this mechanically problematic vessel? This shows lack of seriousness. 

I would like to say that lack of professionalism is the biggest problem in Uganda. First of all, the policemen did not act professionally. In addition, I do not know if the so-called keepers; those who manage vessels, were professionals. 

I have some information here that the honourable minister may wish to clarify. In Financial Year 2016/2017, a total of 78 vessels were inspected but in the following Financial Year 2017/2018, only 11 vessels were inspected. Why is this different? 

Furthermore, in Financial Year 2017/2018, a total of Shs 880 billion was allocated under Vote 016 but only Shs 720 million was allocated to sub-programme 16, maritime, which caters for inspection of vessels. Out of Shs 720 million, only Shs 140 million was allocated for the inspection of inland vessels across Uganda under output 040103 public service vehicle and inland water transport vessels inspected and licensed of which only Shs 140 million - 

Mr Speaker, we should love our people. We are now crying after a big disaster because of negligence and lack of professionalism. The Police had to wait for orders but it should be done professionally. Sometimes, they respond very positively to orders, which are political in nature but not in a professional way. That is why we lose our people carelessly. Probably, if the police acted well, this vessel would not have gone into the water.
I would like to also urge the Minister of Works and Transport to recruit skilled people to manage these vessels. People have said a lot but what I am trying to say is that we are in tears. 

I thank the Prime Minister for declaring Friday a mourning day but as we mourn, we need some details. Will the public servants mourn in their offices or should they stay at home? When they stay at home, how should they behave? Will prayers be organised or should we dress in black to show that we are mourning? (Interjections) -  Yellow is hope but it is not a colour for mourning. However, for those who wish to dress in yellow, so be it but the Prime Minister should give us clear guidance about Friday, which has been declared a mourning day.

Mr Speaker, we are all mourning since the accident happened. (Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Thank you, the Leader of the Opposition for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to say that when 22 travellers perished on the road around Karuma, a day of mourning was declared by the Government. However, during that day, there was no programme to guide the people as to what they were expected to do.

Therefore, I would like to request that as responsible leaders, we should guide the population. Since we are all mourning – I feel very hurt when some people say there was no northerner on that list. You do not know that you are actually insulting us. We feel the pain of the other Ugandans. The whole of Uganda has been mourning. One of the ways of mourning the dead is to hold prayers in all the churches and have programmes run on radios and televisions to sensitise people on how to guard against such kinds of disasters. 

Yesterday, I came to Kampala using a ferry. I had to delay the ferry for 20 minutes complaining because there were many people in the ferry including buses and vehicles. However, we were not given life jackets and yet, this disaster had just happened. I said, “Why are you not giving us life jackets?”

Mr Speaker, the Government normally responds with very strong statements and big promises but implementation of those promises becomes a problem. When I insisted about the life jackets, they showed me a huge suitcase full of life jackets, which were all looking new. Most of us did not know how to swim and so, if anything had happened, we would have all perished yet the life jackets were right there in the ferry.

I wanted to share the experience I had yesterday and also to let the Leader of the Opposition know that the point she has raised about the activity to be done on Friday - whether you want us to wear yellow – yellow is associated with Catholicism. I was baptised in a Catholic Church. I can put on my yellow gomesi and go and pray in the cathedral. That is not my problem. What becomes a problem is how you feel about it and how to stop those disasters from happening. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, honourable colleague. To crown it all, we need a programme but the minister should treat these matters seriously. Why should we allocate something very minute, which is not even 20 per cent? If you look at Shs 140 million compared to Shs 880 billion, it is very minute. We should love Uganda and do our work diligently. We should also try to be professional when carrying out inspection. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.04
THE PRIME MINISTER AND THE LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Colleagues, I would like to join you and the entire country to convey condolences to the families and friends of the bereaved. It was obviously a national tragedy. The details, causes, problems associated with it - the fact of the matter is that Uganda had a national tragedy, which is a big loss. We should learn big lessons from this so that in future, we can prevent occurrences of a similar nature.

This tragedy has not only happened on Lake Victoria. When you look at other lakes like Kyoga, Albert, Bunyonyi et cetera - it is really a national problem. This being a major national issue, we should avoid pointing fingers at each other but know that as a country, we have a problem. The sooner we address these problems and see how realistically we can deal with them within our own means, the sooner we shall develop local capacity in terms of skills and training.
I will just mention two aspects about our lakes. The first is the responsibility of transporting our people and the other is the fishing industry. Both have in many ways suffered. If I may start with the fishing industry, our wanainchi in Buvuma Island - as hon. Migadde was saying - have always managed their affairs. However, as soon as we introduced commercial fishing and factories, within just a few years, the fish on the lake was gone and the sector suffered immensely. That is why Government and President Museveni were very strong about this. 

Mr Speaker, the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) was brought on board to ensure that order was re-established on the lake so that the fish could have its natural habitat restored. Of course, in the course of their work, UPDF or Police may have stepped on the toes of one, two or three colleagues but colleagues should know that the intentions by Government to ensure that UPDF restores order were well intentioned. I must say that results of the recovery of the lake as a result of those measures are quite evident, as colleagues will tell us.

The other area was transport. We have always used our canoes but they also have their own big problems. However, to me, no Government had ever tightly controlled Lake Victoria. That is why in the early 1980s, rebel leader Yoweri Museveni was able to move from Luweero and comfortably go on Lake Victoria and spend there a day or two because the Government of the day was not there.

So, it is now that we are getting to grips with the situation to control the lake and it is a process. It requires resources and many other things. That is why Government has already announced that we are going to ensure that boats are registered. That is why Government is establishing radars in order to be able to identify and locate boats that are on the lake.

In fact, the electronic registration will help both in identifying which particular boat it is but also to identify where that particular boat is. That will empower and increase the capacity of Government and the people of Uganda to be in charge of this great resource of Lake Victoria.

Colleagues were asking what plans we have. Plans are already in place and it should be right for the honourable minister to come and remind colleagues. However, you know there are big plans for this great lake. You very well know – and I agree with comments made by my brother from Buliisa – that with the railway reaching Kisumu, it will have almost reached Kampala because cargo will be able to come cheaply by boat to any part that Lake Victoria serves. So, these plans are there.

We also have Bukasa Port, which has already been discussed in this august House. It is going to be a large port, which will service the transport needs of our people. Therefore, Government has clear plans for both transport and fishing on our lake.


On this very accident, I have heard a lot of criticism about Government using a rope to pull out the wreckage. I would like to pay special tribute to the wanainchi of Uganda, especially those who were involved in the rescue operations because they did great work. (Applause)

They did not only do great work but one of them actually died, trying to save the lives of other Ugandans. You know, there cannot be greater commitment than that type. This brother and patriot who died, Bosco Owecho, was one of the villagers using his limited skills to ensure that he saved other Ugandans. It is these very Ugandans who said, “By the way, this boat may be covering some bodies of some of our compatriots that have died.”
So, on their own initiative, they tied a rope, came in big numbers - at least from what I saw on television – and tried to pull the boat out. Whereas they did not succeed in pulling out the boat, I commend and salute them for this initiative. (Applause) In fact, Government is obviously coming in to reinforce them by bringing the MV Kalangala ship, which should be arriving in the course of today, to ensure that we pull that boat out. We think there may be possibly some of our countrymen and women who may still be under that wreckage.

These people did the work and by the time our volunteers from Ggaba, UPDF and Police came, they found that these compatriots were already doing the work. The combination of UPDF, Police, volunteers and the wanainchi helped save the lives of those that we were able to get rescued.

There is a lot that we need to learn and know about our lake. I propose that there is need - Government is actually planning to set up a committee to look more deeply into these accidents and also other accidents that are taking place and have realistic recommendations made so that Government can take those measures and implement them so that this carnage can come to an end.

As I conclude, comments have been made about the day of national mourning. My sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal has also made additional comments on the matter. This has been a big national loss and a day of national mourning has been declared on Friday. It will enable relatives, friends and family to be able to gather and pray. The national flag will be flown at half-mast, in recognition and paying tribute to these friends who have lost their lives. 

It is a day for all Ugandans to remember, to think about and to pay tribute to the fallen friends who have died in these circumstances. It is true that Government, by the way, is now attaching greater significance to tourism on Lake Victoria. What has happened is that with peace and stability being abundant, more and more people are spending time on Lake Victoria and we cannot condemn them for doing that.

Government’s duty is to make sure that they are safe and indeed, measures are taken to ensure that the boats are proper and checked so that when you go on that lake, you know that you are safe. Then, this will also be an additional attraction for the visitors to Uganda, apart from spending money in national parks and hotels on the mainland, to also spend some time on the beautiful islands that Lake Victoria has.

I would like to thank you colleagues for these many suggestions and comments made. I also salute the solidarity of the House. We are all united in grief and it is only right that we remain united in looking for solutions that will save and bring back this powerful sector. It is a potentially powerful sector and a money earner for the people of Uganda. Let us protect it and do whatever we can to make sure that we benefit from it. 

The minister is reminding me to alert everybody that Friday is not a public holiday. I heard one or two colleagues making that point; it is just a day of national mourning - people will be able to go and pray as they wish in their churches and mosques. However, normal Government business will continue. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the honourable Prime Minister talked of a committee to be set up or a sort of inquiry to be set up by Cabinet. 

We also have our own committee of Parliament that can take interest in this matter but they do not have to be instructed. This is a mistake we always make. How do we instruct a parliamentary committee to do work, which it should ordinarily do? Let the committee responsible for this matter take interest to do whatever they can do and come and advise the House on what else can be done while the Government is also setting up what it needs to.

Honourable members, there are two institutions in this country. One is the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees; the other is called the Fire Brigade of the Police. If we all start behaving like those two departments, then things will be very difficult. If only the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees and the Fire Brigade Department of the Uganda Police could respond, things would get right.

Honourable members, we have a Bill that has one clause but I would also advise that we deal with the report of the Public Accounts Committee for Central and Local Government. Let us start with the Bill and come to the Public Accounts Committee.

The Bill is one of those returned by the President, which has one clause, which was deferred and the committee agrees with it. Let us dispose of that and get to the Public Accounts Committee.

5.20
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You had informed this House that later on, the Attorney-General would have to present the Government position on the people of Lusanja who are up in the gallery. I would like to know whether the programme is still on so that we can let them go or stay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is no formal statement as of now. Let us get a proper date when I can fit it on the Order Paper and then, they can come back and listen properly.

MR SEBAGGALA: Mr Speaker, they were here since last week and I brought it up last week on Tuesday and they said the minister would present a statement but it was postponed to today. May I know the right day on which it will be presented so that they can know when to come back? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I said that as soon as we have the necessary documentation, it will be put on the Order Paper; and due notice will be given to you so that you can mobilise them to come back.

We would like to now publish the Order Paper on the day before so that the country gets to know what is to be discussed; that will guide all of us.

MR KAFEERO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of procedure to Rule 140(2). As you may recall, on 26th September, a Bill entitled, “The Roads Bill, 2018” was laid at Table by the honourable Minister of Works and Transport and subsequently referred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure for consideration.

The committee has not been able to complete consideration because subsequently after this House went on recess for almost a month.

Now, I hereby pray that this august House grants us extra time for at least 60 days since the month of December is going to have some other holidays. We should be realistically able to present a report on that Bill on the Floor of the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am required to grant your permission on this but to request for a time period longer than that initially given to you by law is not fair. The law gives you 45 days but you have not even justified how you have used the 45 days. And now you want 60 days. Please, make a request that is reasonable.

MR KAFEERO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I wish to reduce the time to 45 days.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members. When these issues come before us and they go to the committee and when we do anything outside this country, we are cheating the people of this country. These laws will not affect Kenyans or people in Mauritius but the citizens in this country. 

All public hearings should be conducted for people who are here in this country; they should be given the opportunity to look at the Bill themselves and how it will affect them, how it should be changed so that they are fair to them.

How will going to America, China and having a discussion with Chinese help my people in Omoro to understand the Bill better; you are using the time that our people should have used within the 45 days to interact with the committee and taking it to some other people who do not need you and whom you do not need.

If we really have to benchmark, why don’t we benchmark implementation rather than the text of the law? Benchmarking will not change the text of the law. It is the people of this country who can change it so that it is context-specific.

However, if now you are going out to check the implementation of the law, that will make a lot of sense. I hope that the 60 days you were attempting to ask for was not to go somewhere to find out something that is being done by other people other than us.

MR KAFEERO: Mr Speaker, they are not for benchmarking and we have not planned for it as yet. We are planning for work here. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are giving the committee 21 days. I put the question to the extension.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

5.26	
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2018” be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this Bill was referred by the President. As the procedure dictates, we will listen to the committee and then go straight to the committee stage and finish this Bill because the principles of the Bill were already discussed. It is only one clause that needs to be changed.

5.27
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, The Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2018 was returned by His Excellency the President on 22 June 2018 in accordance with Article 91 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

The Bill was tabled in the House on 27 September 2018. His Excellency the President recommitted to Parliament for reconsideration of clause 3 of The Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2018 on self-assessment by taxpayers. The then proposed clause is herein reproduced and it states; “Where a taxpayer files a return with the authority and an assessment is not done by the authority within a year, interest on the money due from the period of the assessment shall accrue from the date on which the assessment was raised.” 

The returned Bill was referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development in accordance with the Rules of Procedure of this House. 

Mr Speaker, the President returned the Bill for reconsideration and deletion of clause 3 by Parliament for the following reasons:

    1. Incorporating this provision in the Act will encourage non-compliance by taxpayers as regards to filing one’s returns. The current system, which compels taxpayers to pay their taxes in time through self-assessment has been effective.

    2. The proposed amendment will further deter Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) from charging interest on tax arrears it would have discovered, hence creating revenue leakage.

Mr Speaker, the committee considered the returned Bill and made the following observations:

    1. Under the current tax policies and legal framework, it is the duty of taxpayers to file an actual tax return based on actual business transactions and self-assessed tax liability. If this is rightly done, there will be no additional assessment, interest and penalties that may accrue from default;

    2. The provision that was passed implies that where a taxpayer commits fraud or wilfully omits from his self-assessment declaration and URA discovers the fraud or omission, the taxpayer will not be obliged to pay any interest from the date when income was derived. Taxpayers will only pay interest once this fraud or wilful omission is discovered by URA;

    3. The provision potentially encourages non-compliance because taxpayers will not have incentives to comply. They will not pay on the due date knowing that even when they pay after three or more years, no interest will be paid on the due amount. This will encourage taxpayers to borrow Government money interest-free for years, which will significantly stifle revenue collection and funding of the national budget;

    4. Even where an audit is carried out and assessment is issued, URA may not be availed information that requires a revision of the assessment and imposition of additional penalty. URA should not be constrained to impose interest from due dates when the taxpayer has failed to pay the tax. This grossly encourages non-compliance with regard to filing of tax returns and declaring rightly and timely information, which ultimately affects revenue collection;

    5. The clause further limits the interest, which accrues on unpaid tax to the date on which the assessment is raised. This presupposes that URA must audit and assess all taxpayers within the period when the tax is due in a year, which, in most cases, is not practically possible considering the current staffing level of the Authority and the continuously growing numbers of taxpayers and also that the best practices require the same. Increasing the number of staff required to audit all taxpayers in one year will make the cost of tax administration expensive as a percentage of revenue generated;

    6. Further, Parliament in Financial Year 2017/2018 amended the Tax Procedures Code to limit the interest, which is payable on the principal amount not to exceed the principal sum. This amendment addressed the concern that the interest charged may exceed the principal amount without encouraging taxpayers to be non-compliant.

The committee recommends that the Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2018 be passed into law, subject to the proposed amendment. I beg to move.

Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on Table the original copy of the committee report duly signed by the required members.


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, this provision is captured under Article 91 of our Constitution because of the dialogue that happened between this institution and the assent process of the President. If according to the President and his Cabinet, there are issues with the text that has been passed, the Constitution gives him an avenue under Article 91 to send it back so that we look at it again. 

The committee is saying they have looked at it again and our Rule 142 authorises us to do just that. So, I will now propose a question to the motion that that particular reference be considered. Then, we will go to Committee Stage to deal with the clause and then come back to finish the Bill. 

I now put the question to the motion that the Bill entitled “The Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2018” be reconsidered. The specific reconsideration is in clause 3 of that Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

Clause 3

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Chairperson, we propose to delete Clause 3. Our justification is that:

    1. Incorporating this provision in the Act will encourage non-compliance by taxpayers in regards to filing of annual returns. The current system, which compels taxpayers to pay their taxes on time through self-assessment has been effective;

    2. The proposed amendment will further deter URA from charging interest on tax arrears it would have discovered, hence creating revenue leakage.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 3 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3 deleted.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the Whole House to report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has reconsidered the Bill entitled, “The Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2018” and deleted clause 3.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the Whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.




BILLS
THIRD READING

THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

3.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2018” be read the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2018” be read the third and do pass. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2018”

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015 ON THE ACCOUNTABILITY SECTOR

5.40
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Ms Angeline Osegge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to remind the House that this report was presented three weeks ago but just as a recap for purposes of debate. This is a report on the accountability sector including:

    a) Treasury operations 
    b) Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
    c) Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development
    d) Financial Management and Accountability Programme (FINMAPII) 
    e) Competitiveness and Enterprise Development project (CEDP) Component 2-5 and 
    f) Department of Ethics and Integrity

Mr Speaker, if you will allow me to just to go through the conclusion for purposes of giving a short notice of debate as reminder.

The audited accounts for the accountability sector for Financial Year 20l4/2015 present the following salient issues; Payments in respect of mandamus and accountability for it that was not clear. 
The lack of a legal status for the Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development and payment of annual subscription fees to international organisations. 

The payment of mandamus claims without "Writ of Mandamus" as evidence casts doubt on the payment process and leads to deprivation of those that should have otherwise benefitted from the funds provided. Further financial impropriety has been cited under the Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development (PIBID) yet the project lacks a legal status and has funds appropriated to it every financial year. Payments made towards this project should, therefore, be stopped henceforth until its status has been ascertained. 

Lastly, the committee also noted the poor financial performance of the Microfinance Support Centre with loans unrecovered and funds unaccounted for. I hope that will help us remember what was presented on the report. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I remember I had already proposed this question for debate but for purposes of acting now, I now propose the question that the report of the Public Accounts Committee (Central Government) and the report of the Auditor-General Financial Year 2014/2015 of accountability sector be adopted.

The motion is for adoption but the proposed question is for debate. That is the motion I am proposing for your debate that we adopt. If there is nothing to debate, I now can put the question for adoption. I will put the question for adoption of the report of the committee.

Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Public Accounts Committee (Central Government) on the report of the Auditor-General financial year 2014/15 of accountability sector be adopted?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (LOCAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE VALUE FOR MONEY AUDIT ON UGANDA SUPPORT TO MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTED BY 14 MUNICIPAL COUNCILS IN THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Committee chairperson, this was also ready for debate. Was it presented? [Hon. Osegge: “Yes.”]

5.45
THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Ms Angeline Osegge): Mr Speaker, in the same vein, that report was presented including visuals. I would like to propose that the House adopts it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee on Public Accounts-Local Government on the value-for-money audit on Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development Programme implemented by 14 municipal councils in the Financial Year 2015/2016 be adopted. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members this House now is adjourned to tomorrow two o’clock.

(The House rose at 5.46 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 28 November 2018 at 2.00 p.m.)
