PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - SECOND MEETINGTUESDAY , 8 NOVEMBER 2022PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6099Tuesday, 8 November 2022THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Remember, Members, that we are working as per the rules. Rule 129(2) requires that the chairperson must bring the Bill within a specified period of time. Since we have extended by 10 days, we will be glad to receive the Bills in this House. As I said before, our performance will only be determined by what we do and not what we say.Honourable members, yesterday the media was awash with reports of medical interns in Government hospitals that had gone on strike because of delayed payment. The timing of this strike is worrying, especially with the outbreak of Ebola. Not only Ebola, with all the other sicknesses. I am requesting the minister and Government to ensure that we see how to solve this problem - So that we have the medics do their work without any interruption. We will ask the Minister of Health to come and update this House on how far you have gone on the issue of the strike and whether it is true that the strike is on. You find in most cases some people write anything. You will give us an update after my communication.Honourable members, our national netball team, the She Cranes, emerged number five in the first worldwide netball championships in New Zealand. We really want to congratulate them. During this tournament, our gallant girls humbled the whole world with netball and became the first team to defeat Australia 32-30. Our own Mary Nuba was voted the best shooter in the world. I would like to formally recognise the team for their exceptional performance. IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 4TH SITTING - SECOND MEETINGParliament met at 1.58 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. Last week during the sitting of 3 November 2022, I directed the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to bring the Bill that is before them. I also directed the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to bring the Legal Aid Bill. I have not yet heard from these two committees. It is only the legal committee that has written asking for an extension, but we are only giving an extension for 10 days. We want these Bills in the House.Madam gender -2.00MS FLA VIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are most obliged, Madam Speaker, that you have extended our time by 10 days. Our hiccup came from recess. We are very pleased that you have added us 10 days. We shall be ready by that time, Madam Speaker.PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6100THE ALCOHOL CONTROL BILL, 2022 COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [The Speaker]We urge the Government to accord sports more resources than what was given. It is disappointing that much as this House did the appropriation, this House gave sports money, this House ring-fenced money that was going to sports. The money was not released as per what this House gave. When you look at sports, it is only sports that does not know political affiliation, religious affiliation; it is a very good tool for mobilisation. It is the best thing for tourism. It is better than Nyege Nyege . (Laughter) So, when we have a sports team that is doing wonders, then you know the country is being marketed. Somebody somewhere is asking, “Where is Uganda?” Even those who did not know Uganda, have known Uganda - that Uganda is based in such-and-such a place. It does not matter whether you belong to FDC, NRM or whichever; what matters is that it is only sports that brings everybody together. We thank our girls and congratulate them. And we congratulate the country.As we go for budgeting, we need to make sports a priority. These days, we even have girls’ football. As women, we should support our girls.Honourable members, of course, we have seen all that is happening due to the strike. I do not know what the minister has to say about it. Remember you said you are going to pay scientists a lot of money. I do not know what is happening with the scientists. Actually, I was about to change and go back to school and do science. We will want to hear from you. We are all stakeholders. We feel bad when our medics go on strike. All the same, we commend you for giving them an enabling environment to work but they need to be paid for them to be able to work. When you look at what is happening with Ebola, most of the people who have succumbed to Ebola are medics. So, they need to be motivated to do whatever they are doing. Thank you very much. We will look at matters of national importance, if there is no reaction. I was checking the other side if Hon. Ssemujju is around.2.06MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join you and colleagues, in congratulating our netball team for the performance that they have exhibited. I thank you, in particular, for promoting sports and for supporting various endeavours in seeing that our country is marketed outside.Madam Speaker, you will recall that you supported a team that travelled to Spain for football, in the showcase games. I also want to inform you and the country at large that of the boys who travelled to Spain, we now have two who are playing in Scotland in first division teams. As I speak, six players are travelling to Spain, again, very soon. Their one-year visas are being processed for them to go and play there with selected clubs that have accepted to sign them. Just today, I received another request from the English premier league clubs that have requested for three boys, who are going to also showcase the opportunities that this country has. So, when it comes to sports, I would like to thank you and the House. We must continue to support sports, promote the girls, promote the boys and see this country get to the roof. Thank you very much.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 20.8MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice in applauding you. You are a Speaker of Parliament, but you have a football team of ladies. I always see you in Jinja boosting that team.THE SPEAKER: I can officially say that I have Kampala Queens.MR SILWANY:  That is the team for the Rt Hon. Speaker. I felt a lot of pain though I was excited at the same time. So, it was both happiness and pain when I saw the performance 6101THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 8 NOVEMBER 2022of our national netball team in the world. It showed that we have talent in this country. However, we always pass budgets, especially the sports budget is always ring-fenced. I remember very well in the last budgeting cycle, we ring-fenced the money for the sports associations of this country and for the different sports activities.However, it is saddening that the finance ministry has adamantly refused to support the sports fraternity. Sports is the only place where you cannot find NUP and NRM in opposition, or black, yellow, or red; sports are a unifying factor. I would like to seek your guidance, if it would not be right for us to invite the minister, for the fourth time, to come and commit himself here on the Floor of Parliament that he is going to give the sports teams and the ministry of sports all the money that Parliament appropriates to them in the budget.This is the only field where we shall promote talent, and have young Ugandans develop - both women and men - and then the country will go to the clouds.So, I am seeking your indulgence if it is not right for us to reinvite the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come and recommit in the heat of this achievement that they are going to release the money meant to be released for the sports fraternity. I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER: Do we have the minister of finance, if I could ask again. Honourable minister - I am happy the Prime Minister has come; you people are pushing this House to the wall. The ministers come at their own time - they do not even come; at least the “arrow boy” has come. The only minister we have here who is permanent and pensionable is Hon. Bahati. (Applause)I would like the House to join me in thanking Hon. Bahati for being here. (Applause) There is an issue on the Floor where you are failing to give money to sports. The She Cranes have just won. They even travelled without money. All sports do not have money. Can we get a commitment that you are going to give us money for sports as appropriated?2.12THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Rt Hon. Speaker, I would like to thank the She Cranes for what they have done for this country. I think everybody is very proud of the job that was well done. And according to the appropriation of money to the sports area, we are going to consider that programme come the next financial budget -THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister - honourable members, the She Cranes have just won - this financial year. You sent them out without any money. You have the under-20 in Sudan now; they are doing very well in sports, but they are also there without money, yet we did appropriate money for sports. We ring-fenced the money for sports and you are yet to release it as per the appropriation, and you are talking about the next financial year!MS NAKADAMA: I was still developing my statement; I wanted to say that we are going to add more money in the next financial year, but for now, we are going to ensure that money that was appropriated for the She Cranes is released. I was adding on, except that I started the other way round. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Members, can I have some order? The money we are talking about is meant for sports. Can I have the minister of finance here and then we will give him an order?MS NAKADAMA: Rt Hon. Speaker, let us call the Minister for Finance, but the clarification I was giving is that we are going to make sure that that money is released; the money that was appropriated to those people; and we are going to call the minister for finance to come and give us assurance about that money. Thank you.6102THE ALCOHOL CONTROL BILL, 2022 COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER: I would like you to call the minister of finance. Do not take the blame, which is not yours.2.15THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. Let me also add my voice to that of yours and colleagues and congratulate the She Cranes upon that sterling performance. As you require the Minister of State for Health to respond to that concern about the strike of medics, there is another grave universal concern in the country. Especially, given that the usual donors like the USA have circumvented the Government and are now providing funding directly to UN agencies, partners and other bodies, rather than the line ministry. We would like to know from the minister what has gone amiss. Is it the usual misappropriation that bedevilled that ministry that has scared the donors? It is you to respond to that concern, which is of urgent public importance. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 2.17DR NICHOLAS KAMARA (FDC, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you, Rt. Hon. Speaker. I would like to comment about the interns. We have just been meeting interns as the Committee on Health; they have not been paid for two months: September and October. To put this into perspective, when we were interns in 2000, we used to be housed at the hospitals and we used to be fed, and we were few. Now we have over 1,700 interns in Uganda, and they are … being paid for even a month is a matter of life and death because most of them are housing themselves. They are feeding themselves. They are staying as far as Kira and even Wakiso. Therefore, I want to – and there is another issue. The ministry has refused to meet the leadership of the interns for two months. So, there is lack of information. The interns do not know why they have not been paid for two months. They do not know why there are salary disparities. I want the Minister of Health to also explain why they have refused to meet interns, when they know they are the backbone of the health system in Uganda. I beg to submit. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I have the last one from the former minister of sports, as you call for us the current minister of sports?2.19MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I cannot add more on congratulating the She Cranes. I want to inform the Members that if it was not for this Parliament, sports would not have reached where it has reached. If it was not the Speaker - by the way, even before she became Speaker, she contributed a lot to the development of sports. (Applause)Having said that, now that the Minister of Health is coming to give information about the interns – (Interjection) - let me develop my point, then you can bring your - THE SPEAKER: It is okay. Honourable member, sit. MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, the colleague standing there is the immediate former minister of state for sports –(Interjection) - former immediate. (Laughter) He now says, “If it were not you…” For 10 years, he was the minister of state for sports. (Laughter) Is he in order to confess that actually, he was just jaywalking there; there was no work for him? (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the former honourable minister Bakkabulindi is in order - (Laughter) - and he is just giving you a preamble of the success of the She Cranes.MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to remind him that by the time I joined the ministry, we had only one gold medal and I left when one could not count them. I am only saying it has devolved further because of this Parliament and personalities like the Speaker. 6103THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 8 NOVEMBER 2022Now that the Minister of State for Health has come to explain something about the interns - you will recall, honourable members, that during the COVID-19 period, they would inform us about the lack of funds because of certain drugs that were going to be used. I have heard that the ministry is lacking money and is requesting for money to fight Ebola, but I have never heard what type of treatment they are giving us or what they are buying, in order to help the Ugandans. Is it the food that I am hearing about in Mubende or are there certain drugs that are very expensive? Now that the minister is around, can she tell us more about the need for that money and also why their money is now being diverted to the agencies instead of it going to the ministry? Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 2.22MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As we join the country and the world in congratulating the She Cranes and the challenges of financing of sports in this country - part of the problem relates to the law that governs sports in this country. We have a very old and archaic sports law.Madam Speaker, Hon. Hashim Magogo and I came to the Floor here with a private member’s Bill to amend the law on sports. At the time, Hon. Obua was state minister for sports and he pleaded with us that Government was taking over that Bill. We had a meeting with Hon. Obua and sports officials in his office, and they promised they would bring the Bill to Parliament. However, it is now coming to six months and there is no Bill. There are no efforts towards that direction. That explains why Government even delays releasing money and some of the related confusion in the sports sector; it is because of the absence of that law. Madam Speaker, was it deliberate for Government to frustrate our Bill? Why aren’t they bringing it? Was it deliberate to frustrate Hon. Magogo and I, to bring the Bill here? Was Government doing it deliberately? Why haven’t you brought the Bill and why are we suffering? I thank you. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much. We now have the minister of finance. Minister, we have an issue here. We appropriated money for sports in general. We went ahead, as Parliament of Uganda, and upon the powers vested on us, we even went on to ring-fence the money for sports. However, what we appropriated has not been given.We have the She Cranes, we have football, we have boxing and we have all these. We have chess but they do not have the money. We want the money that was appropriated for sports to be given to that sector, mindful of the fact that sports is the only discipline that does mobilisation, that does not bring issues of political and religious affiliations, and which supports the presence of peace in this country. So, we want to hear from you, as the minister of finance, on the plans you have to finance sports.2.25THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT AND PRIV ATISATION) (Ms Evelyn Anite): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My name is Hon. Evelyn Anite, the wife of Allan Kajik.THE SPEAKER: She is called Anita. (Laughter)MS ANITE: Madam Speaker, there was a man asking so I had to tell him that I am the wife to Allan Kajik. (Laughter) THE SPEAKER: Who is asking? Hon. Abdallah Kiwanuka, that is Hon. Evelyn Anite, wife to Allan Kajik. (Laughter) MS ANITE: Madam Speaker –6104THE ALCOHOL CONTROL BILL, 2022 COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER: Order, Members!MS ANITE: Madam Speaker, I am aware of the role that sports performs in our country. Indeed, it is true that through sports, Ugandans get united, regardless of their political parties. Indeed, it is through sports that our young people get themselves engaged in meaningful activities. Therefore, as Government, we take the sponsorship and support that we give to the sports fraternity very serious. We do appreciate this august House, led by you, for appropriating money for sports in the Financial Year 2022/2023.The reason we were not able to release the money in totality is because, in the first quarter, we had challenges of resource mobilisation, owing to the fact that we are just coming out of aggressive COVID-19. So, we were not able to mobilise revenue from our taxpayers forthcoming.However, I want to give you the good news that this is in the past and we have been able to mobilise resources. We will release the money that was appropriated by Parliament for sports to its full totality. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Anite, thank you so much. Can we have the timeline when you will release the previous money that was supposed to be given because we are in quarter two? They never got a release for quarter one and have not got for quarter two. Please tell us when you will release it. You might maybe release it tomorrow, the next day or whichever.MS ANITE: Madam Speaker, as I informed the House through you, I need to make a commitment that when I come for tomorrow’s session, I will give the exact date and time of when we shall release the money. (Applause) THE SPEAKER: The honourable minister is going to give us the exact date when the money will be released for the first quarter and the second quarter. Thank you so much, Hon. Anite. Honourable Minister, the Government Chief Whip and former immediate minister of sports who took over the Sports Bill, could you give us an update of what happened to the Sports Bill? Yes - [Member: “Procedure, Madam Speaker.”]THE SPEAKER: Yes, a procedural matter. MR ZIJJAN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise under rule 83(1)(b) read together with rule 7(3). I would like to seek your ruling and clarification as to whether this House suspended rule 83(1)(b) with regard to sitting in this House.Madam Speaker, the rule provides that, “A Member shall not cross the Floor of the House or move around unnecessarily.” If I may refer to rule 7(3), it says, “In deciding a point of order or practice, the Speaker shall state reasons for the decision and shall cite any rule of procedure or other applicable authority.” Madam Speaker, it seems to have been perceived by Members in this House that at one time when you said that it was free sitting, it had become perpetual free sitting. As you can see and if you may recall, one day I sought to approach your Chair and I had your authority to proceed; I was sitting with you and the minister came and ordered me to vacate and leave. As you observe the sitting in this House, Madam Speaker, the NRM Members have continuously bullied other Members of the House and disorganised the sitting -THE SPEAKER: Can you use better language? Nobody has bullied the other. [Interjections ] Listen.MR ZIJJAN: Ministers have come and sat anywhere they have wanted, Members of Parliament from the NRM party have all come and sat wherever they have wanted and as for Independents and Members in the Opposition, we have felt or I have felt bullied. I speak as the Dean of the Independents that my Members have felt bullied and ostracised in this House. I seek for your ruling whether that rule is suspended perpetually, Madam Speaker. Thank you.6105THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 8 NOVEMBER 2022THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, you know Hon. Zijjan has been away for some time. Hon. Zijjan is at LDC; I think he has been revising the new rules –(Laughter)- Honourable members, Hon. Zijjan wants to show you that now he knows the rules. (Laughter)Honourable Members, at the beginning I said “free sitting.” I have never withdrawn my statement and the only seat that you cannot sit on is this one. (Laughter) However, Hon. David Zijjan, you are most welcome back to the House. Hon. Obua, can you - Can we finish?2.32THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues -THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can you listen?MR OBUA: As raised by Hon. Asuman Basalirwa, it is true that when Hon. Moses Magogo moved the motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill on Sports, we agreed with both the mover and the seconder. Under the then Government Chief Whip, who is currently the Deputy Speaker, we convened a meeting where the movers of the Private Member’s Bill agreed with Government that the two Bills be harmonised because the fact is, Government had started work to come up with a Bill on sports; it was halted, pending review of the sports policy. Madam Speaker, when we had that meeting, all the due processes were followed. The two Bills, in draft form; that of the private member and the one of Government, were formally submitted to the Attorney-General for harmonisation. By the time I left the Ministry of Education and Sports, the Office of the Attorney-General had made a submission back to the Office of the Minister of Education and Sports sending a copy of the harmonised Bill. Madam Speaker, I have on my phone - if you wish me to lay it, I will move and print but this is an internal memo where I was requesting to Table the various Bills and papers relating to sports to the top management. This was dated 15 June 2022 and on the list was the Physical Activity and Sports Bill. Therefore, what I can state is that the harmonised Bill, by the Office of the Attorney-General, was submitted back to the Ministry of Education and Sports. What was remaining was for the ministry to discuss the Bill in top management, proceed to the Cabinet and then come to Parliament. Madam Speaker, that is where I left the Bill. The issue is the harmonised Bill from the two Bills is back at the Ministry of Education and Sports; so, maybe the ministry can now answer because from that point, I cannot now speak for the Ministry of Education and Sports. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable, the harmonisation of what the Private Member had raised and what the minister was raising would have been done at the committee level. The Bill was basically coming for the first reading. I do not see any reason why somebody should be stopped from exercising his constitutional right to bring a Private Member’s Bill. You will continue hearing stories of “we are still harmonising, we are still doing ABCD or it is going through top management.” Minister, do you have some information?2.37 THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I just want to pass information on this matter concerning the Physical Activity and Sports Bill. As the Chief Whip has just said, my ministry has been working through this Bill and as I speak, top management of the ministry has gone through the Bill and passed it. Right now –(Interruption) THE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter. 6106THE ALCOHOL CONTROL BILL, 2022 COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRMS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The processes in the ministry have been explained by the former Minister of Sports. Madam Speaker, I recall that I seconded that Bill because the seconder then – Hon. Basalirwa - was out of the country and I stepped in. Aware that the Member had done consultations and moved far with the Bill to the point of now seeking leave with even a draft - By the time you come to seek leave, you have a draft and you have consulted. Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally right to allow Hon. Moses Magogo to move with his Bill, then the Government can join him along the way? Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to refer you to Article 94(4)(b). It says, “A Member of Parliament has the right to move a Private Member’s Bill.” The Member, in his own right, moved a Private Member’s Bill, sought leave and was given leave. It came for the first reading but it was hijacked and blocked by the minister then – Hon. Obua. I am, therefore, asking the private Member to come for the first reading tomorrow on this Bill. MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we raise issues in this Parliament, we expect ministers to come and answer. You were in the chair when I raised the issue of our relationship with Congo, following tweets by a one General of the military and you directed the minister to come here and give a statement –THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, before you finish, there is something I do not want to forget about the interns. 2.40THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Margaret Muhanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The interns have been paid to date and there is nothing left. The strike was called off. The dentists and doctors were paid Shs 2.5 million, pharmacists Shs 2,000,000, and nurses and midwives, Shs 1.5 million. However, July and August were paid from the first quarter, but the releases were inadequate. Thus, we paid for September and October in this quarter. Those are the arrears we had. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of medics; doctors and nurses - you said the releases were insufficient. You had rather not pay a Member of Parliament but pay a doctor because they look after our people. (Laughter) Honourable members, health is very important in this country.MS MUHANGA: Madam Speaker, when the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development sends less the money that is supposed to cater for wages and salaries, we have no option but to look around. Madam Speaker, we do not have the mandate to stop the payment of Members of Parliament. It is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that does so.THE SPEAKER: Did you come back to inform this House that you did not have money for salaries? We are the ones who appropriated.MS MUHANGA: We have been writing to this House and the Ministry of Finance about the money to do with interns. Madam Speaker, interns come at different times to our hospitals.THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, as far as I am concerned, we have not received any communication. If you write to this House, you write to the Speaker. We have not had any communication in terms of the payment of medics. 2.43THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker –THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, kindly listen.MR MPUUGA: Listening to my honourable sister - the Minister of Health - explaining her way, in summarily terms that the interns were paid, their matter settled and the strike called 6107THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 8 NOVEMBER 2022off - First of all, if they have been paid, I thank you. However, will you explain to this House, honourable minister, how many lives were lost out of that negligence and who we should demand to account?For the minister to casually come here and explain that they have, after all, paid when people are complaining about patients not being attended to because somebody is casually attending to duty is unacceptable. Will the minister explain and give information to this House on how many lives were lost? Who is accountable for this criminal negligence? It is unacceptable. I will take the information from the doctor.DR BAYIGGA: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. We have just been in the Committee on Health and met the leadership of the medical interns an hour ago. They have explained that they have never been paid even after a pronouncement that they were paid for September and October. They have not even been met by the Ministry of Health or anybody else. The information I want to give is that the strike is on. The interns have never been met, not been paid and, therefore, the minister is lying.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I said, the people we are talking about are very important in our lives. It is about one’s health. Assuming you went for treatment tomorrow and that intern refused to treat you, what happens? They are watching us lie in this House. Honourable minister, I want evidence that the interns were paid. I want it to be laid on the Table tomorrow.MS MUHANGA: I will do that, Madam Speaker. They were paid. THE SPEAKER: Before we forget, we also want our statutory instrument on Ebola. MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, you have been very generous by affording the minister some hours but the Minister of Health is a few minutes away. She should have laid that evidence today because if we continue with this kind of procrastination by the minister, lives are going to be lost overnight.He has said that he will be here tomorrow to lay the evidence of payment. I do not think Dr Lulume Bayigga is feeding this House with lies. Therefore, between the minister and the honourable members of the committee, we must find a liar and have that liar charged, Madam Speaker. MR OPIO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to bring further information to the minister. One, in addition to not being paid, the interns have stated that for six months, they have made efforts to meet with the ministry, but the ministry has refused to meet them. The only information they get is through the media. Secondly, the interns are also striking over salary discrepancies. The President directed that the interns be paid half the salaries of their seniors. However, the Ministry of Health has decided to apply their own salary scale. The nurses are supposed to get Shs 2.2 million, but they are getting Shs 1.5 million only. The intern pharmacists are supposed to get Shs 2.5 million, but they are getting Shs 2 million – as she has stated. Why has the minister defied the directive of the President of this country, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni? Can she, please, explain this? (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: Order! Let us hear from Hon. Aogon. Please, use one minute each. 2.49 MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, as we talk about the salaries for interns, I think it is important for us to state that it is a general thing. I got a call from somebody who works with the Uganda Management Institute (UMI). He complained that consultants working with UMI have not been paid for the last eight months. Therefore, it seems there is a big question around payment of salaries and allowances for civil servants.6108THE ALCOHOL CONTROL BILL, 2022 [Mr Aogon] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRI have also heard some people here saying – (Member timed out.)2.50MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (NRM, Workers Representative): Madam Speaker, as the workers’ representative, if a strike has been led by the interns, there is no way the Government can call it off. The minister should say, “I met the interns and they called off the strike” – but not the Government.2.51MR NABBOTH NAMANYA (FDC, Rubabo County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, the finance state minister, Hon. Henry Musasizi, was here and he told the House that salaries had been released 100 per cent.  It has become a habit for the ministers to say different things. The Minister of Health is telling us that there were insufficient releases when Hon. Musasizi told us, in broad daylight, that releases were 100 per cent. I think it is very important that between these ministers, we find out who is playing with the House – after we deliberated and allocated money. We need to find out who is lying. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 2.52MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago North County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This point about the interns - the way we are taking it must be even stronger than the way we are debating it. When you go to health centres, it is the interns that do all the work. In Kampala, at least we can talk, but outside Kampala, they do not even get this little money we are talking about. If the minister still says that in July and August insufficient funds were released and that for September and October, funds have also been released, I think these statements should be expunged from the Hansard. Otherwise, it will look as if we are joking about these interns. I thank you.2.53MR ISAAC OTIMGIW (NRM, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to echo Hon. Opio’s submission. I am also a member of the Committee on Health and we had the interns this morning. All the information they have spoken is true: the strike is on-going. They stressed it highly, especially the issue of accommodation. Before, interns used to get some accommodation, but currently in the country, only 26 per cent of the interns get accommodated within the health centres. This is causing a lot of pressure on them. We are more than aware that 70 per cent of the workforce within our healthcare system is actually filled by the interns. Therefore, it is right that we support them. Although we appreciate the Government’s efforts of increasing the salary of interns from Shs 750,000 to almost Shs 2 million for the doctors, the directive of the President must be –(Member timed out.) 2.54MS JANE PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I cannot agree with you more than what is stated: health workers in this country and the world over must be treated with the utmost care that they deserve because they are second to God, as far as life is concerned. The underlying cause of all these lies - all the inappropriate reporting by the Frontbench - must be traced. According to me, the problem is nowhere other than with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I did listen to the PS/ST saying the only arrears that workers in Uganda should have should date as far as September. That means, effective October, all of us, who earn from the Consolidated Fund, should have been paid.Madam Speaker, if you get to the lower governments, things are not good. You sent us on recess. I was in my constituency and discovered that people have not got paid. There is no service delivery. Concerning the PDM, no 6109THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 8 NOVEMBER 2022money has been released, yet we are talking of releases. Why can’t we, for once, be honest with the people of Uganda? (Applause)Even in our homes, there are times when things are hard and you tell your wife or husband that things are hard. You are frank and honest in dealing with it. It is so disheartening, Madam Speaker. I spent a night in Mulago on Saturday and Sunday with an ailing sister and I was only in my home last evening.  I saw how much the health workers were trying to do their best. Indeed, money motivates, but what I do not want to agree with is that because somebody has not been paid – (Member timed out.) THE SPEAKER: Hon. Avur is the Vice-Chairperson, Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. So, when she talks about the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, she knows more – she knows what happens in the ministry and she is the only person who can tell us what the ministry is hiding.2.56MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have listened carefully to the concerns and the responses.The issues of salaries are rights issues. Therefore, beyond even health workers, when somebody has done work, he or she must be paid. In appropriation, salaries and allowances take the first call. We have never reduced any provision in relation to salaries and allowances. In my view, now that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is in the House, the Government should take this up. Government should commit itself that this will not be repeated. We can play with other things, but not people’s salaries. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have clerkship students who are currently doing internship with the Department of Legislative and Procedure Services in Parliament. Where are you? Please stand up and just say hi; you are most welcome. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House this afternoon; join me in welcoming them. You are welcome; please sit down.Members, on the issue of the strike and the discrepancies in payments of salaries, we need a comprehensive statement in this House tomorrow, which we shall debate. We also want evidence of payment laid on the Table, and we want evidence that the ministry of finance did not release all the money - if you are saying they did not release.Nevertheless, as far as we know, the Minister told us that all the money for salaries was released. Therefore, we need all that tomorrow and come ready for debate on the issue of medics.We had talked about the Salary Reviews Commission; how far has it gone, Prime Minister?2.59THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Rt Hon. Speaker, with the permission of the Prime Minister, I can authoritatively say that on the Salary Reviews Commission or Board, arrangements and discussions are now almost concluded through Cabinet. As soon as they are, definitely, we shall be here on the Floor of Parliament - not long to go - and present that board before Parliament. THE SPEAKER: How long is that? MR MURULI: Most likely two weeks, it depends, Madam Speaker –(Interjection) - Yes. THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I just want to notify you that you are already on the Order Paper for that. So, do not tell us stories that not long ago; check item 10 on the Order Paper. So get ready and come and present. (Laughter)There was a procedural matter from - 6110THE ALCOHOL CONTROL BILL, 2022 MATTERS OF NATIONAL IMPORTANCEMR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had given a preamble. I did raise here a matter to which you directed Government - specifically the Ministers for Defence and Foreign Affairs to come and brief Parliament.The reason I am reinstating and raising a procedural issue - THE SPEAKER: To brief Parliament on what?MR SSEMUJJU: The issue was that there was a demonstration in the DRC. But there was also a resolution of the Parliament of Congo that Uganda should be expelled and even Operation Shujaa, for which we passed, should be stopped.  Madam Speaker, things have now escalated. Recently, we had the CDF in Kenya and they agreed to send an East African Standby Force in the DRC, Uganda inclusive. This week, the President of Kenya actually inspected a parade and instructed Kenyans to go to Congo and begin fighting M23.However, as the East African Force was about to begin landing the same General said, “If you fight M23, you will be making a very big mistake.” The CDF was in Nairobi with the CDFs of the East African armies, assembling a team to go and fight M23. Now a General here in the military, the one who keeps tweeting - I mean the son of President Museveni, he said if you go-THE SPEAKER: Hon. Hajj, it is our rule that we cannot discuss a person who is not here, who does not have capacity to respond to whatever is being discussed here. If he made a tweet, how sure are you that it was his account? Next item. MATTERS OF NATIONAL IMPORTANCE3.03THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since last week, we have been dealing with a complex community health situation in this country that compelled Parliament to even sit in phases. Over the weekend, we were getting reports from other areas, especially Dr Abed Bwanika’s constituency, over Ebola escalation. I was expecting the Minister of Health to debrief this House, - probably if they were responsible enough- on a daily basis on the progression and the steps taken to arrest the situation. Now that we are getting reports of the same problem escalating in other constituencies, as part of remedial action of updating the nation, especially leaders in this House; how far have they gone in dealing with the situation; whether we are dealing with an escalation or a containment of the Ebola situation in this country? We do not have a brief and we only listen - we are picking up information on social media about the latest in the country as leaders, but not really what we know for us to be able to inform ourselves and the people we lead as to what next, especially with escalations in other regions.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think you will need to give us an update again, on Ebola by the end of the week.3.05THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Margaret Muhanga): Most obliged, Madam Speaker. We shall prepare another update for Thursday.THE SPEAKER: Thank you.3.05MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Thursday last week, I raised a matter concerning the expired women councils. And you directed the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs to appear today and brief us on the fate of these expired women councils. I expected him to be here today. I do not see him here and I am 6111THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 8 NOVEMBER 2022concerned, as a Member who respects women so much; a Member who loves women so much –(Laughter)As a Member who has women councils in my constituency, Madam Speaker, we take your directives very seriously. I would like to know why the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs does not take your directive very seriously.THE SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip. 3.06THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker.The Hon. Francis Mwijukye is my colleague –(Interjection) - I am sorry; I do not know how to speak beyond this.Madam Speaker, I am humbly requesting that we make a presentation to that tomorrow, in writing. It is not ready for today. It will be here tomorrow.THE SPEAKER: Make a presentation on that and give us accountability of the Shs 15.6 billion, which was released to the Electoral Commission.MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, for that matter, I would like to request that you give us more time. THE SPEAKER: No. We have already given you time. Being accountable is something very easy. Unless you are saying that you are going to cook it -MR KAFUUZI: Rt Hon. -THE SPEAKER: Can I have the report tomorrow? MR KAFUUZI: Thank you.3.07MR GODFREY SAAZI (NUP, Gomba East County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am raising a matter of national importance regarding increased deforestation and the total conversion of our natural forests into Eucalyptus plantations in Gomba. Madam Speaker, Gomba has 10 forest reserves, covering 10,753 acres, but all these have been given out to private investors who have gone ahead to plant Eucalyptus trees all over, consequently, losing out on the natural benefits of forests. Section 13 of the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003, states that Forests shall be managed in a manner - THE SPEAKER: The section is in the “Tree Planting Act”.MR SAAZI: Yes, - consistent with the purpose that was declared. Madam Speaker, that is to say, “conserve biological diversity ecosystem, protect soil, air and water quality”. Madam Speaker, these forests have been given out. They have even gone ahead to prevent residents from getting firewood, water sources and even natural things like herbs. Madam Speaker, to that effect, I have two prayers: 1. The ministry responsible should come out with a statement to brief us on the status of Uganda’s forest cover. They should tell us how the NFA has given out these forests to private investors and why of all tree types, they are planting Eucalyptus all over.2. Madam Speaker, assuming it is not in the law, the Minister responsible should direct the NFA people, through a regulation, to coordinate with local leaders on the ground to establish forest protection committees so that we can at least reserve some forests. Madam Speaker, on Friday, as Members of the Buganda caucus, we toured Buikwe District and experienced the same situation; forests have been depleted. The leaders are not consulted and the land is being shared. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.6112THE ALCOHOL CONTROL BILL, 2022 MATTERS OF NATIONAL IMPORTANCETHE SPEAKER: Honourable member, thank you so much.THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WIHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, I thank the honourable colleagues for their concern about our environment. I would like to say that the NFA has the authority to allocate land to the public to plant trees. It depends on the person who has been given the land to determine which type of trees he or she wants to plant, according to the guidelines. Therefore, I will say that the people we should investigate are those who have been given land and are not planting trees. However, those who are planting trees are responding to the call to preserve the environment. Those who are going to the forests to get firewood are destroying the forests. He was saying that the people are stopped from collecting firewood; they are continuing to destroy the forest yet they are not supposed to do that –(Interjections) - they are not supposed to collect firewood from the forests.THE SPEAKER: Members, order! Prime Minister, maybe, we need to understand what you are saying; that it is actually the encroachers who have planted Eucalyptus trees in that place? Now his question is, who gave power to those people to destroy the original NFA forest?MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, I am going to call the minister of environment to come and give us a statement as he has requested. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: His other issue is, did anybody take over the powers of Parliament to degazette the forest, which belongs to Government?MS NAKADAMA : Madam Speaker, I think when the minister comes to make the statement, he will answer all those questions; whether there are people who have degazetted the forest, apart from Parliament. Thank you. MR IDDI ISABIRYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, I raised a similar issue. The Prime Minister committed herself that today, Tuesday, she would bring a comprehensive report on the land titles that are being issued in my constituency, Bunya County South, in South Busoga Central Forest Reserve. If I hear the response of the Prime Minister, promising again, for the minister responsible for the environment to come another day, yet today, she was supposed to bring a report about the same, I get scared –(Interjections) - the point of procedure that I wanted to raise is, are we proceeding well, for the same Prime Minister to come on the Floor of Parliament.THE SPEAKER: She is not the same.MR IDDI ISABIRYE: The same Office.THE SPEAKER: Actually, there is a difference between an office and a person. The Prime Minister at that time was the Rt Hon. Nabbanja; now this is Hajjat.MR IDDI ISABIRYE: Madam Speaker, I am questioning the Office of the Prime Minister and she is standing in for the Office of the Prime Minister. I think she is in the right position to respond to the matters being raised here in the House. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, issues of degazetting forests, issues of all the forests should be handled - Chief Whip, can we have all those issues on forests that members are raising - the issue on wetlands - give them to the Ministry So that they can make a comprehensive report on all that. 3.16THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): The Chief Whip could continue consulting as I give this notice, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Yes. He can consult but not on phone –(Laughter)MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, I did an excursion in Bunyoro. I have been doing an 6113THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 8 NOVEMBER 2022extensive excursion in the Central Region here in Buganda. The issue of the Central Forest Reserve is a very serious matter. The Shadow Minister for Environment is computing a document and I put the House on notice; it will be laid here and debated, about who is doing what in the Central Forest Reserve. For example, in Buikwe, where we were last week, on Friday, licensees cut down a natural forest and were logging trucks of firewood for sale. Madam Speaker, this is criminal and we were going to provide a report here but it is appropriate that the Prime Minister lays her report so that we can debunk the concoctions in it, from our own presentation.THE SPEAKER: You can both lay your reports and I will refer them to the Committee on Natural Resources.MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, we shall be ready with the report next week.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, Hon. Kaducu, the Minister of State for Education and Sports has given me a document that the Government Chief Whip wanted to lay, that is, the Cabinet Memorandum on Physical Activities and Sports Bill, 2022. I do not see anything in this letter that stops a private member from proceeding. So, this letter cannot be a document of Parliament just to stop Parliament from doing its work; it only hijacks the powers of Parliament.3.12DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In Kimaanya-Kabonera, Masaka City, we lost a daughter of a one Kamulegeya in Kimaanya A, who succumbed to Ebola on the 1st of November. Since then, we have had so many contacts currently coming to 100 in the area. Some of these contacts have gone to the communities, which puts their lives and the lives of the communities at risk. While the response team in Masaka City has been put in place and the central ministry has come there to reinforce, there is no money. My prayers are that Government should avail funds to enable the response team on the ground to do their work. Secondly, Government should deploy technology to track these contacts who are within the communities because they are putting the community at risk. Thirdly, Government should deepen the sensitisation and mobilisation of communities to understand Ebola so that they understand the dangers associated with it and stop being in denial; people should not be running into the communities. I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER: And running to witch doctors. Yes, honourable minister.3.20THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Ms Margaret Muhanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you, Hon. Dr Abed Bwanika, for raising this concern. I hope your case is not a probable one; it has been tested and confirmed as Ebola. Once the person is tested and confirmed to be an Ebola case, we do not allow them, first of all, to live in society. Secondly, we trace all the contacts and quarantine them. And thirdly, this person is buried scientifically. If all these took place, then that person is confirmed.However, if it is a probable case then we cannot tell because anybody can fall sick in a village, die and people bury them but where the person has been confirmed to be an Ebola case, we always take all the contacts into quarantine. Thank you.DR BWANIKA: Madam Speaker, I am talking about a confirmed case, not a probable one. This case was confirmed by the ministry and the lady was buried in Butale yet now for a week, you do not have those contacts. One of the contacts is said to be in Bugiri, another one is in Jinja; I am talking about serious things.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I have order in the House? In the last submission, you said that whichever burial takes place now, 6114THE ALCOHOL CONTROL BILL, 2022 [The Speaker] MATTERS OF NATIONAL IMPORTANCEit is your team that takes over irrespective of whether it is a confirmed Ebola victim or not. So, I think he has an issue that really needs to be answered. It is very valid and you need to go back and agree and maybe get more information from him.3.23MS AISA AGABA (NRM, Bugangaizi East County, Kakumiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the land grabbing and illegal evictions of the people in Bugangaizi East County in Kakumiro District. Over 12,000 residents in three villages of Kijwenge, Jumangabo and Buhumuliro are facing evictions from the Kashambogo Group that is claiming ownership. The land in question is on Plot No. 58, Block 333 and it hosts three villages out of which two are part of Bugangaizi East and Bugangaizi West, which is one village. The affected communities have settled on the said land since 1992. They were the people that were evicted from Mpokya Forest Reserve in Kabarole District; that was in 1992, and were resettled in Bugangaizi East and Bugangaizi West in Kakumiro District. For about 30 years now, these people have settled on this land and others have been born and raised on this land uninterrupted and they live in harmony. It was until 2017 when the Kashambogo Group emerged, claiming ownership of this land and within no time, they presented a land title as evidence of ownership, whose details indicate that it was acquired in 2017 -THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, try to summarise your issues and give us your prayers.MS AGABA: They have no details on the transactions of the transfer of land titles. My prayer is that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should cancel the land title in the name of Kashambogo Group, which is claiming ownership of the land in question. The ministry is also asked to halt all activities of this group on this land until the matter is resolved. Further, Government, through the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should survey and demarcate the land such that it issues land titles to the occupants of the land, who by law, are bonafide owners in Bugangaizi East to avoid conflict. Government should embark on the process to compensate all genuine absentee landlords to end conflict on this land. Lastly, the Office of the Attorney-General should take on and defend all cases in Masindi High Court that were filed by the absentee landlords against the occupants in Bungagaizi East. I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER: I would like to ask you to amend your prayer by not asking the minister to cancel the titles but to investigate the ownership, and after take action.MS AGABA: I ask the minister to investigate an issue relating to the Kashambogo Group and the land in Kijwengye, Buhumuliro and Jumangabo in Bugangaizi East. I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER: I have seen the lands minister; she is around. 3.27 THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. One of the prayers was that the Attorney-General should defend all cases – (Interruption)THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, there is a procedural matter.MR SSEMUJJU: Without attempting to prejudice the matter raised by my colleague, the procedural issue I am raising is - because my understanding is that, that area is also represented by the Prime Minister, who has been moving all over the country stopping evictions. However, now in her backyard, an MP representing a county is complaining. 6115THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 8 NOVEMBER 2022The procedural issue I am raising, Madam Speaker, is whether by the MP coming here, actually the Prime Minister is just pretending everywhere else she goes; because if you cannot stop eviction in your own backyard, you cannot be stopping it elsewhere. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: Hon. Agaba represents a constituency that is affected and she is raising an issue in her capacity as a Member of Parliament. If the Woman Member of Parliament has not raised it, then she is doing her role. Maybe, the woman Member of Parliament is not aware of what is happening; so, she is right to do it.MR KAFUUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable Member of Parliament made a prayer that the Office of the Attorney-General should defend cases filed by absentee landlords against sitting tenants. I wish to inform the honourable member and colleagues that as the Office of the Attorney-General, we cannot defend cases to which we are not party. Unless the Attorney-General is sued alongside the sitting tenants, it is not possible for the Attorney-General to interest himself in those cases. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister?3.29THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Judith Nabakooba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the honourable colleague for having brought up the issue. I want to commit myself that we will investigate and present a report to the House. However, on the issues of Kakumiro, as a ministry, we have compensated some landlords and I think very soon, over 2,500 titles are going to be issued to the bona fide occupants in Kakumiro District. Thank you. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much, honourable Minister of Lands. What I can tell you is that when Hon. Nabakooba tells you, “We are going to do this”, she does it. (Applause) Hon. Mugabi?3.30MR MARTIN MUZAALE (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a matter of national importance concerning the high penalty rates on loans overdue, and the rampant sale of collaterals by commercial banks. Ugandans are clients to banks and Ugandans pick loans from them. In 2020, COVID-19 hit this country and the country went into an economic recession. The President made a statement and said to banks, “Please, give your clients or Ugandans a grace period”. Instead, the banks decided to treat those who were unable to pay their loans as defaulters, and this attracted high penalty rates on those loans. Not only that; but whenever you go to the bank and want to pick a loan, there is an agreement that you sign with those banks with a clause that when you fail to pay in time, it will attract a daily penalty, and at a very high percentage. What is happening today is people are failing to pay loans because the penalty rates are high and they are accumulating interest. Bank of Uganda, which is the supervising entity, is not helping Ugandans. People are struggling to pay loans and their properties are being seized because there is high accumulation of penalties on those loans. Madam Speaker, my prayer is simple; that the Committee on National Economy should handle this matter to help Ugandans not to lose properties. I thank you.THE SPEAKER: The Prime Minister was supposed to come with a response on that issue but these are matters of the law. I want you to look at the Financial Institutions Act and see whether you can – Remember, most of these banks that we are dealing with are private and foreign.6116THE ALCOHOL CONTROL BILL, 2022 [The Speaker] MATTERS OF NATIONAL IMPORTANCEWe do not have a bank that is ours, that we should have that contract with but at the same time, you need to look at the Financial Institutions Act. You need to look at the Bank of Uganda Act before we can do this but these are matters of the law. Hon. Acrobert Kiiza -3.34MR ACROBERT KIIZA (Independent, Bughendera County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding abandonment of a contract to extend hydroelectric power to Bughendera, by Modest Company. The issue of contract abandonment is becoming a serious issue in this country. Modest Company was contracted to extend power in 2018 but to date, Madam Speaker, they have since abandoned the contract after installing the poles. Bughendera has 12 subcounties, two town councils and many Government installations without power.Madam Speaker, my prayers are that:i) Modest Company should be investigated for breach of contract;ii) The Ministry of Energy should seriously intervene to ensure the contract is honoured; andiii) The Committee on Environment and Natural Resources includes Bundibugyo in their oversight visits, to investigate issues regarding abandonment of contracts.I beg to submit. Thank you so much.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Government?  There is a minister.3.35THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Sidronius Okaasai): Madam Speaker, I take note of the concerns of the Member of Parliament and we shall investigate Modest Company – (Interjection) - Who am I? You do not know me? (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, who has said, “Who are you”? Do not introduce yourself. You are a Member of Parliament elected by your constituents. How can you ask your colleague, “Who are you”? He is a Member of Parliament, and a minister. [MR OKASAAI: “Do I need to introduce myself every time?”] So, Members, when coming into this House, put your nametags on your chests. Hon. Okasaai, please finish –(Laughter)MR OKASAAI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are going to investigate it and ensure that the area is connected to electricity. We shall also make sure that we implement areas where contracts are not completed.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okasaai, there is also an issue in Rwampara and Bukomansimbi. A letter was written by Hon. Amos but you have not responded to it.MR OKASAAI: Madam Speaker, we have a number of letters and we shall respond to them.THE SPEAKER: Okay. Can you come back with a response on what Hon. Acrobert raised regarding Bukomansimbi and Rwampara, on Thursday? MR OKASAAI: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.3.38THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Madam Speaker, your instructions to the minister are of course most generous. However, I am afraid the honourable minister seemed non-committal on the awareness that there are non-performing contracts, as reported by the Member. I am aware that every subregion has offices. Could it be true that the honourable minister has no report anywhere about the performance of contracts issued for more than three years and therefore, the House must wait? Madam Speaker, it is the reason, at the tabling of a loan, I insisted that the House must demand from the Minister of Energy and Mineral 6117THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 8 NOVEMBER 2022Development a catalogue of the destinations for the energy lines they are talking about, where they are going to distribute power countrywide. In some of the constituencies I have visited, poles were dropped in villages and abandoned for more than three years. Were these paid for? It is a very serious matter. Therefore, can the minister assure this House that he has a fair understanding of his docket? Otherwise, the minister’s confidence is being impeached by his submission. In fact, is the minister aware of the resources of the ministry scattered everywhere? Poles are gathering moss and others are being used as firewood by disenchanted communities. Is the minister aware? Otherwise, he is not convincing, on my part.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can we have a report of all your contractors. How far have they gone? What is the status? In West Nile, Nyagak project stopped. We do not know whether West Nile now has power. That region has been in darkness for a long time. We even had a petition from West Nile; so, we need a statement from the minister, on Thursday, on all the contractors. (Applause)  MR OKASAAI: Madam Speaker, I will get the report for the House. I wish to pronounce that we have commissioned a 33KV-line to West Nile and the Members of Parliament from that region will attest to it. They are actually rejoicing. We are now addressing how we can distribute that power to the communities.THE SPEAKER: Whether you commissioned or not, we want power in West Nile and in all the areas that have been talked about.  Otherwise, there was an issue.3.41MR RICHARD LUMU (DP, Mityana County South, Mityana): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance regarding the closure of police posts around the central region - THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, listen.MR LUMU:  - especially in the savannah region and elsewhere. I am alive to the fact that police posts were raided. Some police officers were killed and guns were stolen. I do not know whether it was retaliation but what happened is that the police authority decided to close down all police posts in my constituency. Ssekanyonyi Police Station was closed. Madam Speaker, the closest police station from Ssekanyonyi is about 12 kilometres. Kikonge and others were also closed. The other day, a local newspaper recorded 200 police posts closed within the Buganda region. Madam Speaker, what is happening right now is that criminals are rejoicing; they are having a feast day because the police are away. The mandate of the police is to protect people and their properties. Now, when issues happen - THE SPEAKER: What is your prayer?  MR LUMU: Madam Speaker, I have two prayers. One, that the police posts are reinstated. Two, the Minister of Internal Affairs should come to this House and make a statement on how and why they decided to close police posts, which are very important to the people. Thank you. MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to add that even the existing police stations lack motorcycles. They do not have motor vehicles to monitor areas that have now been enlarged. Therefore, we would like to call upon the Inspector General of Police (IGP) to recall this directive. They have been prepared since 2019, but up to now, they do not have motor vehicles or motorcycles to monitor the big areas. Madam Speaker, that is the biggest call. We also call upon the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, who is here, to recall this directive and ensure that they are organised. Thank you.6118THE ALCOHOL CONTROL BILL, 2022 MOTION FOR PRIV ATE MEMBERS’ BILLTHE SPEAKER: It is actually not only motorcycles; they do not even have patrol cars.3.44 THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, we take the concern and I know His Excellency the President has responded to this. I would like to call the former Minister of Security to come and give us a brief on what is happening right now. Otherwise, the Government is in charge.THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we want - I do not know how we should bring it up but the other day, we approved a loan here. We said we must have priorities and security is one of them. Health is another. Let the vehicles be purchased. Let us have motorcycles and police stations operationalised. You should not call the former minister; you have a current minister. Where are your ministers? Why are you even disturbing the former minister?MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, I was of the view that Members wanted clarification. THE SPEAKER: No. We want action, not clarification. MS NAKADAMA: Some of the people who raided the police stations have been arrested and the Government is still investigating and handling the issue. That is why I said that the former minister can come and give us a brief. However, I am going to call the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and give us a brief on what is going on. THE SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister, the closure of police stations has nothing to do with the former minister of security. It was not closed at his time; it was closed yesterday. Secondly, purchase of a motorcycle or patrol vehicle does not have anything to do with that. Let us help our poor people. Next item.MOTION SEEKING LEA VE OF THE HOUSE TO INTRODUCE PRIV ATE MEMBERS’ BILLS:I) THE CONSUMER PROTECTION BILL, 2022THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Article 94(4)(b) of the Constitution of Uganda is a bedrock of the right of a Member of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill. This constitutional provision is operationalised by Rule 121 of the Rules of Procedure. The starting point of this process is by seeking leave of the House to introduce a Private Member’s Bill. Today, we have two Members seeking leave to exercise their constitutional rights, under Article 94(4)(b). The first Member is Hon. Ssentayi. However, we, as private Members, would not be introducing Private Members’ Bills if Government was doing its work. We are disappointed because of the pace at which Government is moving. So, we are forced to make the House active. I now, therefore, ask Hon. Ssentayi to come and present his Bill. (Mr Ssemujju rose_) Yes?MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, the matter of the police has been raised and you have directed that the minister responsible - the current minister - should be the one to come and give a statement -THE SPEAKER: The Rules of Procedure do not allow us to go back to an item that we have left. We are now on another item, so, you are taking us back. Check the Rules of Procedure. I can give you the time to speak if that is what the rules allow. 3.50MR MUHAMAD SSENTAYI (NRM, Bukoto County West, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I represent the people of Bukoto West in Lwengo District, where my elder brother, Hon. Ssemujju, was born. (Laughter)6119THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 8 NOVEMBER 2022I stand to move a motion seeking leave of the House to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Consumer Protection and Management Bill, 2022.”THE SPEAKER: Do we have a minister for trade here? Okay.  MR SSENTAYI: Madam Speaker, this motion is moved under rules 56, 121 and 122 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda;AND WHEREAS clause 4(b) of Article 94 of the Constitution and Rule 121 of the Rules of Procedure permit a Member of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill;AWARE that Rule 159(b) of the Rules of Procedure provides for specific functions of a committee of Parliament, including initiating any Bill within the committee’ s area of competence;AND FURTHER AWARE  that Rule 123(2) is to the effect that a Bill initiated by a committee shall be introduced by the chairperson of the committee in the same manner as a Private Member’s Bill;COGNISANT  of the fact that Article 21 of the Constitution provides for equal protection of the law and equality before and under the law in all spheres of political, economic, social and cultural life and in every other respect;AWARE that a consumer protection law is necessary to offer protection of the law to consumers, not only against fraud and dishonesty in commercial dealings, but also oppressive bargains and qualitatively deficient goods and services;CONCERNED that there is no legislation in Uganda, which deals specifically with consumer protection but rather provisions to deal with consumer protections are scattered in different laws and different ministries, departments and agencies, leading to ineffective and insufficient protection of consumers;FURTHER CONCERNED that the failure to enact legislation, which specifically provides for legal protection of consumers in Uganda will continue to undermine the quality of goods produced and supplied in Uganda and put consumers in a weaker position than those with whom they deal, depriving them of their money’ s worth and product value and continue to escalate the violation of the right to equal protection under the law;CONVINCED that the enactment of a consumer protection law in Uganda will enable the setting of standards for quality, safety and liability of goods and provisions of remedies actionable in law, in case of noncompliance with those standards as well as prohibit unfair or misleading trade practices;NOW, THEREFORE,  be it resolved that:1. Parliament grants the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, ‘The Consumer Protection and Management Bill, 2022’ a draft of which is attached hereto, and;2. Do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.” Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the draft of the Bill.THE SPEAKER: Please, lay.  MR SSENTAYI: I beg to move. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_) It is seconded by Hon. Silwany - unopposed - by the whole House, including Doctor, and the minister for tourism. Hon. Ssentayi, would you want to speak a little about your motion? MR SSENTAYI: Yes, Madam Speaker. It is the moral duty of every business to protect 6120THE ALCOHOL CONTROL BILL, 2022 [Mr Ssentayi] MOTION FOR PRIV ATE MEMBERS’ BILLthe interests of its customers. Business organisations must follow ethical values and any form of exploitation of the consumers such as unfair trade practices, adulterations and misleading advertisements must be avoided. In order to fulfil this moral duty, the business community should be provided with guidelines, laws and regulations, hence, the need for this law on consumer protection – (Interruption)-THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, remember he is just seeking leave. Hon. Jonathan, that is his maiden speech.MR ODUR: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for your indulgence. I do not intend to disrupt him, but he rightfully cited some rules. Under Rule 122(1) of the Rules of Procedure, the Member is supposed to attach the draft of the Bill. What has been circulated to Members, apart from what he has laid here, has not been circulated to Members. I certainly do not have it. I tried to inquire - THE SPEAKER: I have a copy. The good thing is that he has laid it on the Table and we have access to it. I am very happy that Hon. Jonathan Odur is inducting the new Member. That is very good.MR ODUR: Madam Speaker, I will now follow your guidance and get a copy from you so that I can follow.THE SPEAKER: I am going to give you my copy. Thank you very much, Hon. Jonathan.Honourable members, why don’t we allow the young man to finish his submission? The man comes from your constituency, Hon. Ssemujju.  MR SSEMUJJU: I very much want to allow my Member of Parliament - but the reason that we have rules, Madam Speaker, is to guide all of us. THE SPEAKER: Okay, on which rule? MR SSEMUJJU: The rule he has cited, Rule 123(2), reads, “A Bill initiated by a committee shall – shall - be introduced by the chairperson of the committee.” The procedural issue I am raising is whether this rule has now been suspended; that someone who is not a chairman can now confer -  THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the chairman, who is none other than Hon. Mpaka Mwine - one of the very good chairpersons - did delegate. He believes in empowering the young Members of Parliament. (Applause) He believes in teaching people what to do and he delegated Hon. Ssentayi. Hon. Ssentayi, can you proceed? MR SSENTAYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the protection. I introduced myself as the area Member of Parliament of Hon. Ssemujju, thinking that he would not interrupt me since many consumers in Lwengo are being exploited due to the fact that we lack a law to protect them. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the guidance. Under the modern philosophy of marketing, the consumer is supposed to be king. Business is expected to provide maximum possible satisfaction to consumers, but in reality, consumers are often exploited. In a country like Uganda, there is a shortage of many products. A few companies just enjoy monopoly powers in the marketplace. A large majority of consumers are ignorant and illiterate –THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is enough for us. We will discuss the rest when it comes to the House. MR SSENTAYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the motion seconded?4.00MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion. We are talking about standardisation, fairness in the business, remedies for the very many breaches in trade and fake products on the 6121THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 8 NOVEMBER 2022market. We are also talking about redress for the aggrieved in business. We have also had instances where ministers make directives. For example, to say, “Do not increase school fees,” but because there is no law, the head teachers will go ahead and increase the school fees and there is nothing you can do. We have had situations where hospitals increase costs. Do you remember during the COVID-19 pandemic? Costs went as high as Shs 200 million, but you could not seek any redress. You will go to a petrol station, get bad fuel and your car engine will break down, but you have no redress; you cannot go anywhere. It is a liberal economy but even in a liberal economy, we must have rules and laws. I have seen people being cheated. A woman goes to a shop and buys jelly - like Vaseline - that destroys her skin, but she cannot find redress anywhere. Madam Speaker, to compel the Government to come in and do something about this, we need a law so that those who are aggrieved can seek redress.We have had a situation where even Government directs banks not to increase their interest rates. It directed loan officers not to hunt for people during the COVID times, but they would still do it because there is no law.  Madam Speaker, to provide for this fairness in business, shields, cushion and protection, and promote fairness and equity - we believe that we need this law. Therefore, I stand to support the motion that the Member be given leave so that this Bill is brought for us to process. This will enable us to have a good law in this country for business. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Attorney-General, do you want to second the motion? 4.02THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the proposals brought by my colleagues. They are for the good of the country.However, as the Attorney-General’s Chambers, we have prepared a Bill –(Interjections) - I am requesting - please, hear me out. I am requesting that you give us time to harmonise with the mover of this motion so that we do not have conflicting clauses - THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, why don’t you leave the Attorney-General to finish what he wants to say. MR KAFUUZI: Thank you very much, Madam speaker. Let me repeat: I fully support the proposal, brought by my colleagues. As the Attorney-General’s Chambers, we have prepared a Bill. We have not had the opportunity to look at the proposal presented by Hon. Ssentayi. We would like to request - THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, is it right for one to bring a Private Member’s Bill? MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, I am not stopping his right. I am requesting – THE SPEAKER: I am asking, is it a right? MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, let me repeat: We have prepared a Bill. We are seeking time to harmonise with him so that we have a harmonised Bill.MR ENOSI ASIIMWE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not know whether we are proceeding right. A few minutes ago, we were talking about the Sports Bill that was mishandled in a similar manner. It was brought by a private Member and Government said it was going to take it up but it has never brought it back. Now, in the same manner, the Committee on Trade is bringing a very important Bill to us, and the same Government is saying that they already have it in the pipeline. Are we proceeding right if we allow the minister to lie to us that he has the Bill in the process?6122THE ALCOHOL CONTROL BILL, 2022THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, first of all, what I need to correct under Rules 7 and 8 is that I suspend Rule 123(2). Honourable members, by the powers vested on the Speaker under Rules 7 and 8, I suspend Rule 123(2) of the chairman being the one to present, because I received a letter on Friday, where the chairman delegated Hon. Ssentayi to present the motion. However, I have heard the concerns of the learned Attorney-General, we have always heard those stories; they have always been there, and that is the same thing that happened to the Sports Bill and all the Bills.That is why I asked; do we have the minister of trade in this House? Now that we have the minister of trade, he is the only competent person to talk now. Minister, can you talk? - (Interjections)Honourable members, the Minister is speaking, he was one of the seconders.4.02THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Mr Francis Mwebesa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are already preparing the Consumer Protection Bill and we are ready to work with him. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, have you heard what the minister has said? He has said that they have prepared the Consumer Protection Bill and they are working together with the mover, and that they are ready to move together. (Applause)Honourable members, I now put the question that the House grants leave to Hon. Mwine Mpaka, who has delegated Hon. Ssentayi, to introduce, “The Consumer Protection Bill, 2022”. (Applause)(Question put and agreed to.)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now direct the Clerk to ensure that the Member is accorded the necessary assistance in drafting the Bill, and sourcing the Certificate of Financial Implications and I am giving the committee two weeks to come back with the Bill.THE ALCOHOL CONTROL BILL, 20224.09MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Alcohol is consumed by many people. I am here to seek leave to introduce a Bill entitled, “The Alcohol Control Bill.”“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for the peace, order and development and good governance -(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, we need to have order in the House.AND WHEREAS Article 94(4)(b) -THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, listen to Hon. Sarah. I know those who are talking are the ones who take a lot. (Laughter) But Hon. Sarah is only controlling it. MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, we shall not stop anyone from consuming alcohol but we only want it regulated.“AND WHEREAS Article 94(4)(b) and Rule 121(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament give the right to a Member to move a Private Member’s Bill; NOTING that as a result of the passage of time and the changing circumstances, the current legislation regulating the manufacture, sale and consumption of alcoholic drinks namely; “The Liquor Act Cap. 93”, “The Portable Spirits Act Cap. 97”, and “The Enguli (Manufacturing and Licencing) Act Cap. 86”, all enacted in the 1960s have become obsolete and do not address the current circumstances and challenges caused by the excessive consumption of alcoholic drinks; CONCERNED that the harmful use of alcoholic drinks, causes a high burden of disease and has significant social and economic consequences 6123THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 8 NOVEMBER 2022and often results in harm to other people such as family members, friends, co-workers and the greater society;RECALLING that the World Health Organisation Global Status Report on Alcohol and Health of 2018, ranked Uganda among the top alcohol per capita consuming countries in Africa, and has been ranked the leading per capita consumer of alcohol in East Africa; NOTING that the Government of Uganda has the responsibility to protect its citizens from the harmful use of alcoholic drinks;AND AWARE that there is a casual relationship between harmful use of alcoholic drinks and the range of mental and behavioural disorders, including alcohol dependency, and other non-communicable diseases such as liver cirrhosis, some cancers and cardiovascular diseases; CONCERNED that a variety of factors, which affect the levels and patterns of alcoholic drinks consumption and the magnitude of the alcohol-related problems in populations have been identified at individual and societal levels. Societal factors include the level of economic development, culture, social norms, availability of alcohol, the implementation and enforcement of alcohol policies; AWARE that the Ministry of Health in 2019, formulated the National Alcohol Control Policy that guides actions by all relevant stakeholders to reduce the harmful use of alcohol;CONVINCED that there is need to repeal “The Liquor Act, Cap. 93”, “The Potable Spirit Act, Cap. 97” and “The Enguli Act, Cap. 86”, to enact a comprehensive piece of legislation that contains provisions that address the prevailing circumstances regarding the consumption and challenges caused by the excessive use of alcoholic drinks, particularly: to regulate the manufacture, importation, sale and consumption of alcoholic drinks, to licence persons trading in alcoholic drinks, and premises where alcoholic drinks are sold, to prohibit the sale of alcoholic drinks to specified persons, to regulate the promotion and advertisement of alcoholic drinks, to create public awareness on the dangers of the excessive consumption of alcoholic drinks, to rehabilitate, counsel and treat persons who have developed mental challenges arising from excessive use of alcoholic drinks; NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that this House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill for enactment of an Act entitled, ‘The Alcoholic Control Bill’.” Thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Sarah. Is the motion seconded?It is seconded by Hon. Lucy, Hon. Okot, Dr. Namara, Hon. Enosi; by the whole House. (Laughter)Hon. Sarah, can you speak to your motion in two minutes?MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since time immemorial, the Government has been grappling with the need to regulate the manufacture, sale, access and consumption of alcohol in Uganda. The current legislations have their weaknesses so we need stringent measures or penalties to control the consumption of alcohol and its production in the country.Honourable members, we are not stopping people from drinking. All we are saying is regulating the sale, production, and consumption. There must be hours - people cannot drink from morning till evening, Madam Speaker. Legally, Madam Speaker, the manufactured - THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can you listen to the Member? Can we have decorum? Those who are talking, I know, are the drunkards. (Laughter) All they are saying is, drink but do not overdrink. Now listen to the Member. If you do not want, you will say nay. Okay?6124THE ALCOHOL CONTROL BILL, 2022MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Anyhow, go ahead with your drinking if you want.MS OPENDI: Legally manufactured alcohol constitutes just 39 per cent of the alcoholic drinks in the market. The rest of the alcohol in the market is unlicensed, with its production from different sources, and some of it with very high ethanol that has had even a devastating effect on the health of the people.Recently, Madam Speaker, you all heard about the problem which was presented here from West Nile. Some people died. People have gone blind because alcohol is produced by unlicensed people. The East African conference on alcohol was held in Arusha in 2012. At this conference, partner states were urged to control the consumption and production of alcohol. Countries within the EAC have moved. Uganda, as a country, came up with the alcohol control policy, which is in place. And so, following this policy, there is need for us to have a law.On the health aspect, 40 per cent of the patients in Butabika National Referral Hospital are due to alcohol and drugs or substance abuse. Fifty five per cent of these patients use alcohol as their primary drug of abuse. Various studies have clearly linked alcohol to partner violence. The road traffic accidents that we have been seeing around and injuries, and a range of Non-Communicable Diseases like mental health, liver, and heart diseases, all relate to alcohol. It is costly to treat non-communicable diseases. Also, we should be aware of the fact that Government loses just at Mulago Hospital alone, over Shs 120 million in treating accidents arising out of Boda Boda related accidents and most of these are associated with drink driving. Five per cent of the deaths in this country are linked to alcohol, according to the World Health Organisation report of 2014.I want to conclude by stating that regulating the production, packaging, and sale of alcohol will result in economic benefits for this country, the community and the families as a whole. In the interest of time, I beg to move. Thank you very much.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, can we have the seconder, Hon. Obiga, but only in one minute?4.20MS MARIO OBIGA KANIA (NRM, Terego East County Terego): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second this motion. I came from West Nile, and I can say that recently we lost a big number of our people due to drinking a drink called Five City. We had also a number of people who took Adriko vodka and lost eyesight, and many perished. Further, I would like to allude to the fact that many heavy alcohol consumers do not take care of their families. It is a major source of domestic violence, failure to pay school fees and take care of the children and wives. Most of us here take care of people who take heavy alcohol and we know that they do not take care of themselves. We are not saying that no one should consume alcohol; we are only saying that let us regulate it. Can you take a certain percentage? This House passed a law to regulate cigarette smoking; the people should be able -THE SPEAKER: There is a point of order.MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, whereas I support this proposed Bill and, therefore, I am in for the motion, I want to know whether it is in order for the Hon. Rose Obiga to sexualise this Bill by saying that people fail to take care of children and wives. What happens to the wives who drink?THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sseggona, my PAC chairperson, it is a fact that when people drink, they abandon their families. It is also a fact that when men drink, they even fail to “perform.” (Laughter) Can you finalise?6125THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 8 NOVEMBER 2022MS OBIGA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Thank you for that quality formation. We have evidence in hospitals that many people who consume a lot of alcohol have given birth to children who have health challenges. Therefore, it is very imperative for this House to regulate alcohol production and drinking. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, Hon. Obiga.4.23MS AKELLO LUCY (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to add my voice in seconding the motion, as moved by Hon. Sarah Opendi. I want to thank her for that. The current Enguli Act was enacted when we had limited spirits and alcohol. Right now we have all kinds of brands that are packaged to even suit the poorest of the poor. They are also pocket friendly. You find children, as young as 10 years, affording this alcohol. They can go with Shs 500 and buy alcohol. I believe if we support this motion and go ahead with this Bill, we will actually cure this problem. Madam Speaker, where I come from in Amuru, the young people - there is a particular brand called - allow me to use the local language; I will translate. They call it Ka’deng Chi’Deng. It means, “Even if I swell, let me swell.” When they drink this, actually they swell; their cheeks get swollen. They think that is being healthy, they do not know that they are actually dying. Ka’deng Chi’deng, that is it. This is what our young people are actually drinking now and because it is pocket friendly, they can walk to any shop and buy it. It is only Gulu District that tried to regulate this kind of alcohol, which is packaged in small sachets, but other districts have failed. I am sure with the coming of this law, we will be able to regulate and control the abuse of alcohol, especially among the young people. Thank you so much. I second the motion.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, Government Chief Whip. Honourable members, this is not an item for debate for now; they are just seeking leave of the House to introduce the Bill. Attorney-General, do you have something to say?4.25THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A colleague here is alleging that I have a factory producing alcohol. I do not but, please, allow me to say this. I have looked at the motion and the proposed Bill attached. However, I strongly believe that this Bill offends the provisions of Article 93 of the Constitution, which is a restriction on matters of financial implication. If I may read specifically the provisions that offend Article 93, the Private Member’s Bill should not make a proposal that offends or that creates a charge on the Consolidated Fund -THE SPEAKER: Read for us in the Bill that part _ -MR KAFUUZI: I am going to the Bill. Clause 4 of the Bill providing for designation of a licensing authority, Part six of the Bill –(Interruption)THE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter by a learned person like you.MR BAKA: Madam Speaker, this is not the time to cry about the implications of the Bill to the Consolidated Fund because the Member is seeking leave of this House to go and prepare her Bill, which includes seeking for a certificate of financial implications.The Government could say they will take care of the applications. That will be later and not now. The Member seeks our permission to go and prepare her Bill, to run up and down in the Ministry of Finance and Attorney-General’s Chambers to get the authority to bring the Bill for the first reading.Is it procedurally right for the Attorney-General to rise on a matter of certificate of financial implications at this stage?6126THE ALCOHOL CONTROL BILL, 2022 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTMR SSEGGONA: I know that my young brother, Hon. Kafuuzi, whom I went to school with – actually, he came following me - is a good lawyer. Unfortunately, he has not addressed his mind to the procedures and the processes of Parliament. The Government, as Hon. Baka said, and I am very happy my young brother, Hon. Baka Mugabi has stated it clearly. The processes of Parliament require that you first seek leave before you go for a certificate of financial implications and not the reverse. Why I chose to rise on a point of procedure is to first of all, inquire whether it is procedurally right for the honourable Attorney-General to sit far away from the front bench and that whenever he rises, we see him as a stranger.Also, in particular, with relation to this, whether the Attorney-General is in order to misguide as opposed to guiding this House by choosing to read the law selectively; one, only looking at the Constitution mechanically, which is not one of the canons of interpreting the Constitution and two; ignoring the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act as well as the Rules of Procedure of this House. Is he in order?THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Baka, Hon. Sseggona and the honourable Attorney-General. He is acting like a robot; that when they say you say “no”, he comes in and says “no.” For instance, if we are to look at designation of a licensing authority for the purpose of this Act, a licensing authority shall be a minister. Don’t we have ministers? Will it have an impact on Article 93? No.You are speculating and it is like you are on an instruction not to allow in any Bill but we shall allow it. I now put the question that the House grants leave to Hon. Achieng Sarah Opendi to introduce the Alcohol Control Bill, 2022. (Question put and agreed to.)MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members for the support. As we said, we have no capacity to stop anybody from drinking but Government has the capacity to regulate. I think we all want order in our communities. Domestic violence is on the increase because of alcohol consumption. People can drink but after work; thank you. The Bill is attached to the motion and so, there is no point for me to lay it here.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I direct the Clerk to ensure that the Member is accorded all the necessary assistance in drafting the Bill and seeking for a certificate of financial implications that the Attorney-General is already talking of. We had an election throughout the entire continent of all chairpersons of accountability committees and in that election, our chairpersons of accountability committees were part of the conference where an election of a chairperson was conducted. Fortunately, one of our chairpersons came in unopposed and so, we now have a chairperson of African Organisation of Accountability Committees in the whole of Africa and that is none other than Hon. Medard Sseggona.  (Applause) Our own, we would like to congratulate you. Congratulations. MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON COMBATING FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASETHE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, as you may recall on Thursday, 3 November, Hon. Nakut raised an issue concerning Foot and Mouth Disease in Karamoja subregion and other neighbouring regions of the area. An attempt to respond by the minister was futile and we needed a minister like Hon. Rwamirama who knows about cows. Please, give us an update.6127THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 8 NOVEMBER 20224.34THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Madam Speaker, on behalf of Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, I wish to respond to the questions raised about the status and the actions of Government in controlling animal disease, specifically the Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD). We have uploaded this report on the intranet. We have an introduction where we are talking about how FMD affects animals and its economic consequences, and how it is spread. I wish to state the status.From January to October 2022, 22 districts reported FMD outbreaks. These include Adjumani, Amuru, Bukedea, Ibanda, Jinja, Kalungu, Kapchorwa, Kayunga, Kiruhura, Kween, Kyotera, Lyantonde, Masindi, Mpigi, Nakapiripirit, Nakasongola, Napak, Ntungamo, Sembabule and Tororo. It is also important to note that quarantine restrictions were lifted in 11 districts, which is 50 per cent of the affected districts since then.Action taken by the GovernmentIn Uganda, FMD prevention and control is achieved through animal movement control (quarantine restrictions) strategic/ring vaccination and awareness creation campaigns. With regard to vaccination, given its cost implication, the strategy adopted by the ministry is to conduct strategic/ring vaccination where an outbreak is reported. Ring vaccination entails vaccinating all the immediate herds surrounding the affected herd so that the disease can be contained and eventually, controlled without causing serious socio-economic consequences. Colleagues, the success of ring vaccination hinges on the timely reporting of the diseases. It is, therefore, important that disease outbreaks are reported as early as possible so that measures of prevention can be instituted in a timely manner and cost effectively since only surrounding herds will be vaccinated to prevent the spread of disease to other areas. We have insisted on this strategy because we do not get enough doses to vaccinate the national herd. You must be aware that Uganda has almost 17 million herds of cattle, 17.4 million herds of goats, five million sheep, 4.5 million pigs and all these are susceptible animals to FMD. Due to limited resources, we came up with this strategy. When it is reported early, this strategy works but we are looking forward to when we have enough resources to make sure that we do it and cover the entire national herd. Currently, a combination of animal movement regulations through quarantine restriction and ring vaccination remains the most appropriate approach for FMD control in Uganda. Colleagues, the following actions have been undertaken to contain the current FMD outbreak in these affected areas. These include:i) Institution of quarantine restriction at the subcounty level and areas within the 20-kilometre radius to prevent the spread of disease. This involves the prohibition of the movement of cattle, goats, sheep, pigs, their products and by-products from, to, through and within affected areas. Livestock markets, slaughter places including butcheries and animal shows within the affected subcounties were also closed. This is premised on the “prevention is better than cure” adage;ii) The ministry plans to vaccinate the susceptible livestock in the affected 22 districts listed above with 930,200 doses of FMD vaccine expected in the country this week on 10 November 2022. The next consignment, which is 1.6 million doses is expected in the country in two months’ time. You must observe that this is not adequate but once deployed effectively, it does prevent FMD to some extent;6128THE ALCOHOL CONTROL BILL, 2022 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTiii) The ministry has also embarked on creating awareness among the masses. Sensitisation meetings were also undertaken by both technical and political leaders from the ministry and districts. This was intended to make sure that all stakeholders adhere to and comply with quarantine restrictions and other disease control measures to prevent the spread of FMD. Farmers and producers were also encouraged to implement biosecurity measures to prevent the introduction and spread of FMD virus. Madam Speaker, in an effort to prevent and control the spread of FMD, the ministry is facing a number of challenges and these include:i. Inadequate funding;ii. Inadequate diagnostic services at the regional and district veterinary laboratories to allow timely detection responses to disease outbreaks;iii. Inadequate disease surveillance and outbreak investigations. Surveillance provides information, which is critical in establishing early warning systems for every detected disease early enough to allow timely responses to be carried out. This is constrained by inadequate funding and logistical support. I, however, want to inform the House that in an effort to address this, we are putting up - almost completed - a diagnostics centre at Agwata Livestock Farm in Nwoya District to take care of Northern Uganda and another one at Sanga Field Station to take care of western and Midwest, while the central and eastern parts of the country continue to use Entebbe. We are also planning to put another one in Soroti and another one in Hoima in the near future.i. Abandonment of roles by local district administrators to mobilise communities to comply to quarantine restrictions by the ministry. We have had a challenge with some leaders; when we put quarantine restrictions, for them, they are interested in revenue and so, they break the quarantine restriction. Others do not report and this causes a lot of problems and actually, fuels the spread of the disease. ConclusionMadam Speaker, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries wishes to assure the country that we are doing our best within limited resources to fight animal diseases and in particular, FMD and request the support of all honourable colleagues. I would like to urge the political leadership in this country to have a united front in creating awareness on the impact of animal diseases - revenue foregone - and the importance of adhering to the guidelines of animal disease and control provided by the veterinary-competent authority. Thank you, for your attention, Madam Speaker. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you for the statement, Hon. Minister. The next time you come back, we will want the action taken, especially in the areas where cows are dying. We will allow a debate for only 15 minutes. (Mr Sseggona rose_)Hon. Sseggona, do you also have cows? (Laughter) MR SSEGGONA: That is correct, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Let me start with Hon. Asiimwe, the cattle keeper.4.45MR ENOS ASIIMWE (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the elaborate report. However, he left out something of interest: he mentioned what he plans to do in managing the disease and listed the challenges but never told us how he plans to meet these challenges.Specifically, when he mentioned funding for vaccination – I am aware that we are putting up a vaccine production plant in Gayaza but you are not telling us how far you have reached [Lt Col (Rtd) Rwamirama]6129THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 8 NOVEMBER 2022and how much support we can give you, as Parliament, to see this project to its completion. I believe it is one way of resolving this issue once and for all. Thank you, Madam Speaker.4.46MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju West County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I respect Hon. Rwamirama but there are a lot of challenges in the ministry. Regarding FMD, we have failed to control our borders. The neighbouring countries are a source of this problem. For quite some time – I think we talked about it in the Eighth Parliament and the Ninth Parliament. At the same time, we have failed to control our own technical staff. Actually, when you talk about the revenues, you forget, honourable minister, to tell us about corruption. When you quarantine, people neglect it. Therefore, honourable minister, you need to work very hard on your staff. They have no respect for whatever you talk about.Honourable minister, other than the FMD, it is very ashaming, in this country, that we have had the problem of ticks. Madam Speaker, the drugs on the market are fake. You wonder whether we have Government in control. Otherwise, I respect you, Hon. Rwamirama. You have done a lot for this country but your ministry has a problem. Thank you very much. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you.  4.48DR ABRAHAM ISAMAT (NRM, Kapir County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I worked as the District Veterinary Officer and I am a professional in the field of veterinary medicine. Year in and year out, the issue of FMD has persisted and it is not because we do not have competent staff to deal with it. The truth is that all those approaches that the minister suggested in the report work.The major challenge we have in Uganda has been pointed out by the honourable member who has just sat: in Uganda, we have porous borders. Places like Karamoja, particularly a place like Katakwi, FMD is prevalent at the moment. There is no effective control of animal movement. That is a very big problem in Uganda. Secondly, a country like Kenya, which is also a member of the East African Community, has established a factory that manufactures FMD vaccine. They have a routine programme as far as the control of FMD is concerned. Uganda is a Member of the East African Community and has all the resources. It should be our cardinal duty to allocate sufficient resources to ensure that we equally establish a factory like Kenya has done and manufacture sufficient doses of FMD vaccines to ensure that the situation is controlled. In my district, where I was – I remember I worked for 20 years – there was no outbreak of FMD. The staff are available. We need many doses of FMD vaccines if we are to bring this problem to an end. I thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if we can recall, for the last three years, the Government has been reporting on the fast-tracking of a vaccine for FMD. Despite the allocation we gave – there was a financial allocation that was given for that in Financial Year 2020/2021 and the House approved Shs 2.5 billion, under supplementary expenditure No. 1 to finance the shortfalls of this vaccine. To-date, we do not know the level at which those vaccines are. We do not know whether the vaccines are working – and this was aimed at getting four million doses. I do not know whether we even have a single dose. (Member timed out.) 4.50MR MOSES ALEPER (NRM, Chekwii County (Kadam) Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to follow up on the issue of control of animal diseases in this 6130THE ALCOHOL CONTROL BILL, 2022 [Mr Aleper] MINISTERIAL STATEMENTcountry. I would like to say for a fact that 80 per cent of the animal diseases in Uganda are caused by ticks – and these are very easy to control.There is an elaborate veterinary structure in this country; we should be able to take care of all these. There are directors, commissioners, etc. What I am really wondering is: why isn’t surveillance done effectively – although the minister has listed it as one of the strategies that they are undertaking? I remember, vividly, that in December, last financial year, the ministry submitted a supplementary request for buying doses of the vaccines. I categorically, in that Budget Committee meeting, stressed that: “You are defining the cattle corridor, which comprises only central districts in Uganda but you should be talking about all districts that have livestock.” By the way, for the information of this House, 20 per cent of the livestock he listed, especially cattle, are in Karamoja. You should plan for even other districts other than what you define as the “cattle corridor”. For that matter, Madam Speaker, I would like this country to define the “cattle corridor” not to include only districts within a certain part of the country. This is because when you plan for only those, you live out many other parts of the country. (Applause) Therefore, I would like this House to put it to the minister and ask him: “What you have listed as your strategies are just generic strategies, which should not come when you are reacting to this issue.” Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. (Applause) THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Sseggona?4.53MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to, first, associate with my colleagues that have spoken on this subject, particularly, about the border controls and, secondly, the development of our own vaccine.I would like to thank my brother, Hon. Rwamirama. However, I wish to add that part of the problem is that he keeps lamenting about resources and this arises out of people who want free things. For example, when you have banana weevils in this country, does the Government provide drugs for that?You have some of the richest men and women in this country – someone can afford to have 1,000 or 10,000 heads of cattle but he is also waiting for free things from the Government. Then, the next day, you tell us the Government does not have the money.I have interacted with the farmers because I am one of them. For the information of the Rt Hon. Speaker, I actually have more cows than Hon. Asiimwe. (Laughter) However, the point I am making is that I have interacted with farmers: quite a significant number of farmers in this country are willing to pay for their own vaccines. All they need is for the Government to regulate and guide them, especially on the quality. In this case, we would be catering for a few farmers who are not in position to pay for the vaccines. That is point number one. Point number two: When shall we learn to develop our own? Just last month, the minister - his senior colleague - I think, launched a project of vaccines for ticks. We have the capacity but do not invest in those people who are able to develop such. If you look at the case of Dr Ogwang - the one of Covidex - I think after very many months, it took the intervention of the President to say, “We must help this man because we have a crisis.” When shall we realise that we have a crisis in the agriculture sector? Finally, a lot has been said about our Government officials - that they benefit. They trade in these crises of FMD; they go and block other people from selling, they buy those cows and sell them at a very big profit. There is no explanation you can give that farmers in a particular area will not sell their cows for a 6131THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 8 NOVEMBER 2022whole year. You are promoting this business of trying to beat the system by corrupting your extension workers and the subcounty enforcement people. Why? It is a problem that persists for long. How do you want them to survive? You have extension workers, what is their duty? How do they escape from those subcounties you have quarantined? Therefore, because it takes long for you to solve a problem, you force the people to create avenues of beating the system. Nonetheless, I thank you for attempting to explain to us.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. What Hon. Sseggona is saying is correct. Why don’t we empower our local people who want to produce vaccines? There is somebody called Tumusiime Enos who is producing medicine. Why don’t we support such people?You are teaching us to be over-dependent on Government. If you told us, “This is the right medicine,” we could be able to buy our own for our cattle. By the time you start looking after cows like somebody there, then you are a rich person. Therefore, you need to help the industry and ensure we plan well for this livestock industry. 4.58MR AMOS OKOT  (NRM, Agago North County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, Mr Minister, for the statement that you have provided to us.Foot and Mouth Disease is a sporadic disease; once an animal has been infected with it, you do not have medicine to treat it. You only manage those symptoms until such a time when the animal recovers. The only way to control it is by vaccination. Once FMD occurs in an area, it needs extension workers and veterinary officers to do surveillance and be vigilant on the ground. Whenever they spot any kind of symptom of that nature, they need to take action immediately. Before the ministry for veterinary affairs was merged with Ministry of Agriculture, veterinary people were very active to the extent that they would reach down to villages and even go as far as sensitising farmers to take care of their animals. However, from the time the veterinary section was put under the Ministry of Agriculture, the urge of doing that work died out. Therefore, it is a matter of policy also to us, to consider and evaluate –(Member timed out)- just a minute. Thank you so much. Away from that point, FMD also attacks and infects wild animals like buffaloes. They are the ones that even harbour FMD. In this country, we have wild animals that are roaming around. They move even beyond the area, which has been gazetted for them. When you talk about Napak, it is nearer Kidepo. That means that all the other districts neighbouring those game parks - if the Uganda Wildlife Authority cannot take a step to control - much as we shall do ring vaccinations or quarantine, the wild pigs and buffaloes will still bring FMD pathogens and affect us. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We do not have wild animals in Bukedea but we have Foot and Mouth Disease, which must be controlled. 5.01MS AISHA KABANDA  (NUP, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to address myself to challenge no. 5. The minister has stated that “abandonment of roles by local district administrators to mobilise communities to comply with quarantine restrictions by the ministry,” is another problem. This is not a small challenge. We have just given permission to a Member to go and come up with a law on alcohol content or alcoholism. These are things that local governments previously worked on. Now, you will find that they have almost abandoned the roles they used to play. There should be a big question. I wonder whether the minister has gone ahead to find out why local governments have 6132THE ALCOHOL CONTROL BILL, 2022 [Ms Kabanda] MINISTERIAL STATEMENTabandoned their roles. Government cannot be everywhere; it is the local governments to help us. If they are not helping, have we mobilised them? Why haven’t you mobilised them?We have actually demobilised them by taking away the little money they used to get and the roles they do. If it had been a rebel gang to cross - we are talking about porous borders – the information will come. Why, about these issues, information is not coming up? It means people have not seen the importance of it. Once they do, they will comply.Can we mobilise and move along with them other than giving them directives? Mature people do not want be directed. They want to be mobilised and they will understand and move along with us. I think that will help us. 5.03MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the minister submit. The fact that we have had this case repeatedly shows that something is not done right. I have seen in other countries for disease control and prevention - they have put in place elaborate animal movement permitting system. Here in Uganda, all LCIs can actually issue permits for people to move with animals in the village. What qualification do they have to decide that a particular animal can move from one place to another? If you go to the places where they sell vaccines, there are reports about poor quality vaccines and counterfeit products being sold. The ministry is doing very little to control the quality of vaccines that are on the market. I would, therefore, implore the minister to ensure that the issue of vaccines should not just be to create economic disparities - because I have seen a lot of people with ranches are the ones who benefit from these vaccines, free of charge. The poor people who should have benefited from these kinds of things do not benefit. It is a whole system issue within the ministry that is not being addressed. Therefore, I encourage you to look at digital systems that are now being used to manage things like that. Imagine we centralised animal movement system and there are designated points for the issuance of these permits. How much more would we actually make as a country? There is something, which is not being done right and I think the minister should go back, do a conference with his technical team and get to the bottom of the problem, building on the experiences of all these people who have submitted. I thank you.5.05DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am the Shadow Minister for Agriculture. Allow me to inform the House that the mandate to control communicable diseases in animals is a mandate of the Government. As it is on the other side of human health, private people do not buy polio vaccines. That is the mandate of the Government. They are not involved in that. On this side, every disease that is communicable, including FMD - is the mandate of the Government to control, including availing vaccines. We have issues with FMD control, mostly around movements and the viability of vaccines. We also have an issue with porous borders. If you are going to design an efficient control system, it must –(Member timed out.) THE SPEAKER: Please, do not make it like an essay.DR BWANIKA: Madam Speaker, I have requested for time since I am the Shadow Minister of Agriculture.THE SPEAKER: Did you do veterinary medicine? DR BWANIKA: I am a veterinary doctor and I am the Shadow Minister of Agriculture.6133THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 8 NOVEMBER 2022THE SPEAKER: Okay, I have added you one minute because of veterinary medicine. (Laughter)  DR BWANIKA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I am proposing that if we are going to control the movements around the borders, we must come up with an East African policy so that we do it together. The vaccination programmes must also be done together. We need to put very little money in the animal sector, including research. We put less than two per cent of our budget in the research of the animal sector; Ninety-eight per cent goes to crops. We are asking them to produce vaccines. We visited Namulonge and saw that they have done a good job. They are ready to go for production but where is the money? We have heard the minister say that they are going to procure only two million doses of vaccines out of the 17 million heads of cattle in this country. We need to inject enough resources into this sector so that we help the farmer. That is very crucial.  We need to recentralise regulations; the control of diseases in this country. We have fragmented the law. The LC 5 chairpersons are involved in the control of disease; the same goes for the sub county chairpersons, who are issuing movement permits. You cannot control disease that way. The disease must be controlled from the Centre. We need to recentralise veterinary health services in this country so that we can access international markets. We have invested a lot in the infrastructure –(Member timed out.) 5.08MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for availing himself today. Madam Speaker, you mentioned here that there are some issues that cannot only be on the Floor of Parliament but could go to the relevant ministers. However, honourable minister, I have been to your office 15 times. I have written, I have left notes and I have left my phone number; I do not know what next.THE SPEAKER:  Is it specifically to Hon. Rwamirama? MS OBIGAH: Yes, him.  I have written to all but I have failed to get any of them. When you meet them in the corridors, they say, “We shall get back to you.” However, for him, specifically, as the lead minister, I have really tried. Honestly, it is difficult to reach the honourable minister. THE SPEAKER: Hon. Rwamirama, please, look for Hon. Rose after this.  MS OBIGAH: Thank you. Madam Speaker, we had cows that should have been flushed out of Terego. These were “Baralo” cows. The Minister for Internal Affairs went to Terego and instead of flushing the cows out, he flushed them in. They went with FMD and now, our indigenous goat-like cows are perishing like nobody’s business. We used to have technocrats who would stamp meat but this time, I can assure you, meat is never stamped. The people slaughter meat in any corner. Dead meat is eaten and there is no control. I suggest that NAADS should come back. I do not know what happened to NAADS. NAADS was our saviour in Terego but now, it is nowhere. I advise that NAADS should be given more money to rescue the people of Terego. Thank you. 5.11MR JOSEPH KOLUO (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to also add my voice, first of all, by agreeing with what the minister has suggested. My colleague, Dr Isamat, has alluded to a very important point on the uncontrolled movement of cattle, especially in Katakwi and Karamoja. Madam Speaker, the dry season is coming up; the problem in the cattle corridor is that the majority of the valley dams are totally silted. I am not a veterinary doctor but I am a farmer. Cattle are struggling to get water from a small valley dam that has very little water. 6134THE ALCOHOL CONTROL BILL, 2022 [Mr Koluo] MINISTERIAL STATEMENTI would like to humbly request the minister to open up all these valley dams. For example, in my area, there used to be a very big valley dam but it is now totally silted. Lastly, if there is a way for us to get a health team, like village health teams or village veterinary teams to sensitise the local farmers about the dangers of these ticks, I think it can help to control this disease. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, I think what you need to do is to use the available funds to do mass vaccination of all cattle. That would help us a lot. Remember, somebody said this sickness cannot be treated; you only need to vaccinate the animals against it. That is what you need to do. Ensure that whatever resources you have, we use them for that. Remember that once we lose our cows, some people like Hon. Obua have only five cows. If he loses the five, then he will become poor and this will impede the development of the people of Uganda. When we have our own cattle, we are able to educate our children and do everything with our cows. It is very important to some of us that have grown up in such conditions. Do you have anything to say? Do you have a rejoinder? Yes, honourable minister.5.14THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRI-CULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I must appreci -ate your contribution and advice. I will give answers to most of the questions. I will start with you, Madam Speaker. I am going to di-rect Dr Rose Ademun who is the Commission-er, Animal Health, to attend to your concerns. I will keep monitoring to ensure that they are addressed.The second point is the funding for vaccines. We are in the final stages of completing our own vaccination plant for FMD, for the tick vaccine and swine fever. However, we do not have enough resources to fast-track this process. I have invited Members of the agriculture committee and some of the Members from the herding community and taken them through our process in Namulonge. In addition, the shadow minister has been a regular person following up on what is happening with our research at Namulonge for livestock. Therefore, we are actually not looking only at procuring vaccines, we are also in the process of manufacturing our own vaccines. Yes, we do not have enough money, as most of you have said, but we have put money into research although not much, and we are on course. Last weekend, we launched the final trials for the anti-tick vaccine in the country and the first ever in Africa. Hon. Kagwera raised a fundamental issue. Diseases do not know boundaries - we actually call them trans-boundary diseases - and so, did Hon. Sseggona. Therefore, on the issue of trans-boundary, we are trying to go through the East African framework. Originally, we had Kenya and Rwanda harmonising with us. We have now South Sudan and the DRC on board; we are moving so we can actually harmonise, as Hon. Dr Bwanika said. And when the policy is harmonised and the vaccine is done, it is done on either side. When there is an outbreak on the other side, for example, on the borderline, will also do the same. Madam Speaker, the issue of tick resistance is being addressed through vaccines. Yes, it is true that most diseases are tick-borne but over time, in Africa and the third world, we are consumers of acaricides. Therefore, we have invested in research for us to actually find a home solution and I think I have also answered what Hon. Sseggona asked.6135THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 8 NOVEMBER 2022Madam Speaker, why not support our own people? We are doing so. The person you are referring to, there is a paper we have prepared for Cabinet for us to be supported with $400,000 so that we can do trials in the different parts of the country to ensure we actually have a home solution. Hon. Okot Amos asked whether wild animals keep diseases; yes, we are very much aware of that. When I said that we ring-vaccinate, we vaccinate regularly in high-risk areas, transit routes and affected areas - the high-risk areas are the ones nearing game parks like in Nwoya where we have a prevalence of so many elephants and wild animals, crossing. When we have a substantial amount of doses, we make sure that after every six months, we vaccinate in those areas, transit routes like Wakiso or any route entering Kampala goes through Wakiso, and so, it is important that Wakiso gets regular vaccination because when you are from the West, you enter through Wakiso, same when you come from the East. Those are the high-risk areas I am talking about. Hon. Nalule Kabanda, do we need to mobilise the local governments? Yes, we need to. If you have been following me, you should have noticed that most of the time I am in the field with the district leadership; we are trying. However, we still have a challenge, which the shadow minister raised, and which I am going to talk about at the end - what we are not actually dictating - we mobilise them. I also want to inform you, Madam Speaker, that out of the money you gave us here, we actually facilitate veterinary doctors to vaccinate as opposed to charging farmers -(Interruption)MS ABABIKU: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I am only seeking clarification on how best you are going to do the mobilisation, when for example, in the case of Adjumani, the whole district has two staff. And we have heeded to Government’s advice to increase animal production; there is that fatigue because of the thin number of staff. Two, you raised the issue of late reporting. I agree with you that this was the case with Adjumani. So, how are you going to address the two issues to ensure we enhance mobilisation? Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the issue of recruitment at local governments really is a district issue. We have recommended, especially for vets and entomologists, where the economic activities engaged by the farmers require. Now, on the issues of monitoring and the chain of command, we have put up regional veterinary officers. We are now facilitating them to make sure they do monitoring in those regions. We are actually trying to address - and the requests by Members of Parliament from Northern Uganda have been responded to; we are actually near completion. We have put up a modern diagnostic centre at Got Apwoyo Farm in Nwoya District near Pakwach Bridge. We are trying to do everything possible to make sure we actually control animal diseases. Hon. Oguzu Denis, LCIs giving permits is illegal. Nobody is allowed to give permits. Actually, if the LC chairperson gives a movement permit, he should be arrested –(Interjection)-  please, I am telling you because that is the law. The only competent person authorised is the veterinary officer although veterinary officers are also restricted; they cannot give international and regional permits. The regional permits are issued by the Commissioner –(Interruption)MS AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for giving way. Yes, it is true that it is really the veterinary officer who should give those permits - that is technical. However, when it comes to theft, then usually, it is the LCs because some other people steal from an area and move. So, if you have a movement order from an LC to clear you that you have not stolen, then you can move. 6136THE ALCOHOL CONTROL BILL, 2022 [Ms Aol] MINISTERIAL STATEMENTHowever, my point of clarification is: if you have just two or three veterinary assistants and a veterinary doctor, in a very big area, especially for the ordinary people down there, how do they reach these veterinary doctors or veterinary assistants to be able to get the necessary help? Honourable minister, I would also like you to clarify on privatisation - you decided to privatise and so, the ordinary people cannot get the services they require from the doctors or the veterinary assistants. Do you bother doing research to find out if people are getting help now that you privatised everything? Thank you.LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, this is something new. THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you summarise?LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Yes, I am, Madam Speaker. First, we liberalised; we never privatised veterinary services - well, in a way it is private but we still have a public responsibility through our veterinary district officers. Therefore, it is not true that the Government is neglecting the lower people.  The LC1 stamp is supposed to prove ownership; it is not a movement permit. It is from the village to say that Hon. Rwamirama is the owner of cow number this and this then the veterinary officer, on that strength, gives a movement permit. Now, Hon. Bwanika -THE SPEAKER: Is that meant to improve on the safety of the cows?LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Yes, Madam Speaker. Hon. Bwanika, regarding trans-border, I have explained. On the East African policy, I agree with you. On re-centralisation, yes, we are trying to work with the Ministry of Local Government to find out how we can control effectively. We have some control where the chairmen and the CAO are compliant.We have a challenge where CAOs and chairpersons are not really responsible. We are trying to harmonise with the Ministry of Local Government to see how we can do it. In the meantime, we have set up regional veterinary officers, I think you are aware. However, I agree with you on those interventions. Finally, Hon. Rose Obiga, I am sorry, you have missed me when you need me – (Laughter) - I am going to make sure that I am available and take interest to address your concerns. Now the issue -THE SPEAKER: You are seeking clarification on how somebody missed the other? (Laughter) First wait.LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Regarding the issue of giving more money to NAADS to address the challenges in Terego, NAADS is not responsible for disease control. NAADS has been an agency of Government to do strategic intervention, especially in providing seed and planting materials. However, you must be aware that we are rationalising Government agencies and I think we shall advise you on how we can effectively deal with people in Terego.Hon. Koluo, the issue of desilting dams - Yes, Government has been constructing dams in those areas but what is very important to note here is that some people, especially in parts of the country I do not want to mention, do not want to keep these water facilities as their own. I went to commission a water facility near Moroto and they brought all the cows and poured them in the dam. When they do it regularly, they desilt. I think it is very important that when Government constructs infrastructure for water, the community should really preserve that facility as theirs. I will be in Moroto and in that part of Katakwi - I will be in eastern Uganda in the last week of November and one of the challenges we want 6137THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 8 NOVEMBER 2022to address is that one. We must also note that we sent there equipment to desilt some of those dams and the locals chased the engineers.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can I find out who is responsible for construction of those dams? Is it the Ministry of Water and Environment or the ministry of agriculture?LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: The ministry of agriculture is responsible for on-farm water, which is what I am talking about. The bulk water is for the Ministry of Water and Environment but many times there have been overlapping mandates because irrigation, water for livestock, water for aquaculture is non-farm water and it is done by the ministry of agriculture. Madam Speaker, I want to thank you, again, for your support. I want to also say that using the Shs 25 billion that was appropriated for this activity, we did a very good job. One was to facilitate the veterinary professionals to do the vaccination. We also put in place diagnostic centres. It actually helped, although it was not adequate to cover even 50 per cent of the national herd but it helped. Finally, Madam Speaker, I will come in a month’s time to update the House on the progress made on the exercise we are going to start next week of vaccinating the affected areas.THE SPEAKER: I think the LOP has something to say.5.30MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa): Honourable minister, now that you have committed to come to Eastern Uganda on your way to Moroto and the honourable’s district, there is this quarantine that you imposed on districts of Bududa, Manafwa and Namisindwa to curb the spread of anthrax.The livestock farmers are irked with the delayed intervention. Even when anthrax is no longer ravaging the animals as it was much earlier, you have not mentioned when you will lift this quarantine in Bududa.LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, the lifting of the quarantine is actually dependent on the district. The veterinary officer of the district writes to us and gives us a status report that they have recovered then we send inspectors and clear. The issue of anthrax is very dangerous because it is zoonotic; it affects both human beings and livestock. It comes out because of spores and we recommend that the affected animals are really buried with soda ash. I know we have been monitoring anthrax in your area. When I come back next time, I will give you an account. Actually, I will call you and update you. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, there are districts that reported the issue of Foot and Mouth Disease and you have not put them under quarantine.LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I do not know which district you are referring to but there is no district -THE SPEAKER: My district.LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, there was late reporting from the district.THE SPEAKER: In your opening statement, No. 3 of the districts that were reported, was actually Bukedea. LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Yes.THE SPEAKER: I am just reminding you that I come from Bukedea.LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: I know, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: And I am one of those people who have lost cows.LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I want to be on record that I have detailed Dr Rose Ademun to address your concern. 6138THE ALCOHOL CONTROL BILL, 2022THE SPEAKER: Thank you.LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: I will follow up the developments in Bukedea. I also want to inform the House that Bukedea is one of the high risk areas because it is a trade route and an international trade area for livestock. Bukedea, Wakiso, Jinja are high risk areas that we pay attention to, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Thank you.5.34MR MOSES GOLI OGWAL (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo): Thank you, honourable minister. The strategy you have mentioned mainly rotates around treatment. If we are supposed to work on cattle to support us in exports, the market must be disease free. The product must be disease free. I would be happy to see your strategy, which allows situations where there are no diseases, but you do not treat. That is why you see other countries where when one animal gets sick, they slaughter everything. You need to look at a strategy that  provides that and one of them is developing feedlots so that you do not have a challenge - you are seated near the Minister of State for Investment - look at the investments there. Nothing can be used for export due to the challenges we have. You cannot export to Europe or China. In fact, China would be one of the best markets we should be looking at. Therefore, change the strategy so that you can develop disease-free products through feedlots.You are even seated next to the Parish Development Model (PDM) person. Those could be the resources to support creating the feedlots, and investments, and the PDM would help you move ahead. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Goli Ogwal used to be the Director Uganda Export Promotion Board. This is why he is speaking about export. Hon. Goli, we work for our country and you may know what I do not know. I would like to ask: can you get a concept paper and give it to the ministry to see how much we can promote the export of our cows? [Member: “at a fee”] It is not a fee. Give me a copy of that concept paper. Thank you.Parish Development Model person, we are very happy to see you. 5.36THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Madam Speaker, it is a pleasure. I am just reflecting on what he said. How much can we do under the Parish Development Model to strengthen veterinary services? I thought Hon. Goli raised a very important point and I linked it to what Hon. Aisha said. The challenge, Madam Speaker, is poor facilitation of local Government officials who are supposed to do that. Hon. Bwanika, let us not think about re-centralisation. It is not possible to take on control, quarantine, closure of markets and sensitisation of the public. These cattle are everywhere. It is the local authorities who can help, but how many veterinary officers do we have in the subcounty? How many of them are facilitated in terms of transport? We need to sit with you, honourable. I was talking to my brother here, the Minister of Public Service. I asked him that have you heard that? We need veterinary assistants at the subcounties.” He said, “That is the minister of finance.” So, we need to sit as Government and address the issues Members of Parliament are raising. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Minister in charge of the PDM, I have chosen you as the chairperson of that meeting. Can you give us feedback on what you will have agreed to improve what is in the communities in terms of the local and extension workers, creating awareness of the diseases that are dangerous? We need feedback.MR MAGYEZI: Rt Hon. Speaker, this is the problem today; cattle are dying. We cannot talk about the next budget. The Prime Minister is here; so, I want to commit that in two weeks, we shall get back to Parliament on what we need to strengthen.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT6139THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 8 NOVEMBER 2022THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Item six. The minister is coming after two weeks so you will give your information.LAYING OF PAPERSI) STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS ON THE REGULATION OF EBOLA IN UGANDATHE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Health, can you lay on the Table the Statutory Instrument on the regulation of Ebola in Uganda? Honourable members, as you recall on Tuesday and Wednesday last week, a matter of legality on the restrictions being imposed on areas that are currently under lock arose in Mubende and Kassanda. We asked the minister to come with the regulation and now we are ready to receive the regulation. Kindly lay it on the Table and I will ask Hon. Asuman to verify it.5.39THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Margaret Muhanga): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to lay on the Table the Statutory Instruments and the Gazette. Also, I want to bring up to speed this House that the instrument will now be overtaken by time. Over the weekend, the Minister of Health addressed the nation on behalf of the President of the Republic of Uganda and extended 42 more days. Considering that the outbreak and contact tracing is ongoing, the Attorney-General has been given instructions to prepare rules, which will extend the health measures in these affected areas. I have been informed by the Attorney-General that the regulation will be published tomorrow in the Uganda Gazette. I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER:  The instrument is for information. Next.II) REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE UNDP FUNDED PROJECT - BUILDING RESILIENT COMMUNITIES, WETLAND ECOSYSTEMS AND ASSOCIATED CATCHMENTS IN UGANDA; IMPLEMENTED BY THE MINISTRY OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 20215.41MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the UNDP Funded Project - building resilient communities, wetland ecosystems and associated catchments in Uganda, implemented by the Ministry of Water and Environment for the year ended 31 December 2021 THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Commissioner. The report is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government), pursuant to Rule 174(4) of the Rules of Procedure. I urge the committee to take cognisance of rule 174(6), which is derived from Article 163(5) of the Constitution to present back the report after perusal within the six-month period, or else it will be adopted as a report of the House as per Hon. Nandala-Mafabi motion. III) REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE UNDP-FUNDED PROJECT OF HARNESSING NATURE AND DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY TO STIMULATE RECOVERY AND BUILD A RESILIENT TOURISM INDUSTRY IN UGANDA; IMPLEMENTED BY THE MINISTRY OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 20215.43MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri):  Rt Hon. Speaker. I beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the UNDP-funded project of harnessing nature and 6140THE ALCOHOL CONTROL BILL, 2022digital technology to stimulate recovery and build a resilient tourism industry in Uganda, implemented by the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities for the year ended 31 December 2021. I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Commissioner. It is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) pursuant to Rule 174(4) of the Rules of Procedure.IV) THE FINAL AUDIT REPORT RELATING TO THE AUDIT OF THE OFFICE OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/20215.44MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay the final audit report relating to the audit of the Office of the Auditor-General for the Financial Year 2020/2021. I beg to lay.  THE SPEAKER: Referred to the Committee of Public Accounts (Central Government) pursuant to Rule 174(4) of the Rules of Procedure.V) REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE MUYEMBE – NAKAPIRIPIRIT ROAD PROJECT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 20215.54MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road project for the year ended 30 June 2021. I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER: The report is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts (Commissions, Statutory Authorities, and State Enterprise) and that is under Rule 181(4) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. VI) REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR ENHANCING MANAGEMENT OF SURFACE AND GROUNDWATER RESOURCES IN SELECTED TRANSBOUNDARY AQUIFERS PROJECT IMPLEMENTED BY THE NILE BASIN INITIATIVE FOR THE SIX-MONTH PERIOD FROM 1 JULY 2020 TO 31 DECEMBER 20215.44MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, lastly, I beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for Enhancing Management of Surface and Groundwater Resources in Selected Trans-boundary Aquifers Project, implemented by the Nile Basin Initiative for the six-month period from 1 July 2020 to 31 December 2021. I beg to lay, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Commissioner. The report is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government), pursuant to Rule 174(4) of the Rules of Procedure. As I communicated last week, it is not healthy for us to sit for too long –(Laughter)- and we agreed that we should always finish the session at 5.30 p.m. – official time for civil servants. However, now, we have gone beyond the time. That, therefore, makes me adjourn the House to 2 o’clock tomorrow. (The House rose at 5.46 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 9 November 2022 at 2.00 p.m.)COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [Mr Silwany]