Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Tuesday, 5 November 2019

Parliament met at 2.50 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you this afternoon sitting. I have an update on the situation of our colleagues. Before, we adjourned last week, I informed you that hon. Ngabirano had been involved in an accident. However, we were able to airlift him to Kampala and to Nakasero Hospital. I would like to thank colleagues in the House who worked very hard - hon. Koreta, hon. Mwijukye and hon. Okupa - we worked together to ensure that he is brought to Kampala and admitted.

However, today I have also some difficult news. Our colleague hon. Akol, the MP for Kilak North was also involved in an accident today. He was returning from Kilak. He is now at International Hospital Kampala (IHK). I thought I should let you know about that.

Secondly, honourable members, the bulk of the Cabinet are not here. So, I am setting aside Thursday this week for them to answer all the questions that were left pending on the Order Paper last time. There are many issues that have not been responded to and so, the first two hours of Thursday will be dedicated to responding to all those outstanding questions. 

Therefore, I would like to ask - I do not know who the acting Prime Minister is today to ensure that the ministers are here to respond to the members’ concerns.

We have a few matters of national concern but I think we shall bring them a little bit later in the day after item six has been concluded. 
I will amend the Order Paper because the Leader of Opposition wants to make some statement. During the course of the day, we shall be able to do that. Last week, Hon. Magyezi also indicated the desire to present a petition on behalf of tobacco farmers. We shall allow him to present his petition today.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE FINANCING MODALITIES FOR THE KAMPALA-JINJA EXPRESSWAY AND OTHER KEY ROAD INFRASTRUCTURAL PROJECTS

THE SPEAKER: I think you have the update from your minister.

2.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, yes, last week we made a statement on this matter. However, I want to inform the House that Cabinet is still discussing this issue and will finalise on it on Monday next week and so, we will be in position to report to the House on Wednesday next week.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, this matter is deferred to Wednesday next week.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE REPORT OF THE VERIFICATION TEAM TO LONDON, UNITED KINGDOM, TO RESOLVE THE BOUNDARY DISPUTE BETWEEN TORORO COUNTY AND WEST BUDAMA COUNTY

THE SPEAKER: The minister is not here. Yes, hon. Nyakecho.

MS NYAKECHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to ask if later on it would be procedurally correct for us, when the minister walks in, to go back to 3(B) and see if the question can be asked. I am seeking your indulgence, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if the minister surfaces, we shall handle this. So, let us wait. Maybe the minister in the acting capacity of the Prime Minister should send her a message to say we are expecting her to come and handle some urgent issues in the House.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE GOVERNMENT’S COMPREHENSIVE PLAN TO ADDRESS YOUTH UNEMPLOYMENT IN THE COUNTRY

THE SPEAKER: Where is the minister for youth? Still not here?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE FAILURE TO GAZETTE THE 29TH DAY OF OCTOBER AS A PUBLIC HOLIDAY IN COMMEMORATION OF THE MURDER OF BISHOP JAMES HANNINGTON

2.57
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Wilson Muruli-Mukasa): Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Public Service considered this issue. I can say that discussions regarding it are in high gear though consultations are still going on. I beg the indulgence of the House that as soon as the consultations are ready, we can come back and make a comprehensive statement in about two weeks’ time.

THE SPEAKER: Noted. It will be responded to in two weeks’ time.

LAYING OF PAPERS IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 31 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE SPEAKER: Yes, minister.

2.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Annual Budget Performance Report for the Financial Year 2018/2019.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the relevant committee on finance for perusal and report back.

2.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Annual Macroeconomic and Fiscal Performance Report for Financial Year 2018/2019.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the committee on finance for perusal and report back.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO STANDING AND SECTORAL COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULES 15(10)(c), 157(2) AND 184(2) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE SPEAKER: Yes, Government Chief Whip.

3.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, in accordance with rules 15(10)(c), 157(2) and 184(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to designate, on behalf of the Government Chief Whip, hon. Mugenyi Harriet Busingye and hon. Tubo Christine to the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Committee on Rules and Privileges, respectively.
THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, you have heard the members who have been nominated to the Committees on HIV/AIDS, Rules and Privileges. I put the question that those members be allocated to those committees. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: You did not hear the names?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I am now going to read the list of the members designated to the Committee on Climate Change. I will read them all at once. 

Madam Speaker, in accordance with our rules, I beg to re-designate the following members to the following committees: 

    1. Hon. Rosette Mutambi – from the Committee on Rules and Privileges to the Committee on Climate Change. 
    2. Hon. Molly Lanyero – from the Committee on HIV/AIDS to the Committee on Climate change. 
    3. Hon. Jack Odur – from the Committee on Government Assurances to the Committee on Climate Change. 

I also beg to designate the following members to the following committees: 

    1. Hon. Margaret Muhanga – Committee on Physical Infrastructure 
    2. Hon. Moses Angundru – Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry 
    3. Hon. Harriet Mugenyi - Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry
    4. Hon. Christine Nakwang – Committee on Education and Sports

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chief Whip, I would like you to address the Committee on Physical Infrastructure; it is over subscribed. Can you move hon. Muhanga to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry? 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I beg to designate hon. Margaret Muhanga to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the nominations. I put the question that these members be allotted those committees. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I will now invite the members to raise their matters of national concern before we go to other responses. 

3.04
MR FRED TUMUHEIRWE (FDC, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a matter of national importance concerning the Sugar Bill and the regulation of the sugar industry in our country. 

Suffice it to mention, Madam Speaker, that I am addressing you and the august House as the incumbent Shadow Minister for Trade and Industry. 

Parliament processed and passed the Sugar Bill, 2016 on 22 November 2018. However, the President did not assent to it and thus returned it to Parliament for reconsideration in his letter of 1 March 2019, urging Parliament to include the zoning clause in the Act emphasising that, “… failure to implement the zoning policy was destroying the sugar industry.” 

Debate on the Bill was due to start during the plenary sitting on Tuesday, 30 April 2019, following presentation of the report from the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. 

Following guidance from the presiding Chair, the Government Chief Whip requested the House for more time to consult further on the Bill and the Government was granted one month for the consultations. 

However, Madam Speaker, the Bill is long overdue, putting into consideration the importance of this law to our economy. The Government’s silence on this law is a thorn in the flesh of the common man in the sugar growing areas. Potential investors are being held at bay due to uncertainty created by the Government resulting out of this silence. 

Sugar farmers were recently stuck with excess cane and had to seek the intervention of the President to allow them to export raw cane to Kenya due to the limited crushing capacities of the existing millers. This simply means that there is need for more mills and/or expansion of existing ones to increase crushing capacity. 

Madam Speaker, it is written everywhere that the President’s proposal has not seen the farmers’ favour and as a result – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, I thought you wanted to know when the Bill will be brought to the House but now you are submitting your objection to the Bill.

MR TUMUHEIRWE: Okay, let me present my prayer. I am the shadow Minister of Trade and Industry. 

Madam Speaker, I only have one prayer: that the Sugar Bill, 2016, as passed by Parliament, be returned to the President in its current form and content for assent in accordance with rule 142 (7) of the Rules of Procedure of this House. I beg to submit and so pray. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know if I should ask the Government Chief Whip or the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives but where is the Sugar Bill? 

3.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, given the importance of this Bill, as everybody knows, we found it necessary to do further consultation on this matter. 

Madam Speaker, we would like to request that you give us a month so that we come back and finalise it. We are going to go to the field so we are requesting for more time and a maximum of one month would be sufficient for us. We beg to request. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think many members here represent sugarcane workers. The situation is really grave; the uncertainty, inability to export and inability to sell. Children are out of school and it is a very serious situation. We cannot give you one month, honourable minister. We shall give you a fortnight. Honourable minister, please understand the plight of the farmers. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we shall oblige with the two weeks you have given us. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, join me in welcoming the speaker and clerk to council of Nakapiripirit District. You are welcome. (Applause) 

3.10
MS HOPE MUKISA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national concern. I would like to inform this House that the pupils of Habala Primary School in Namayuge Parish, Buswale sub-county are studying under trees following a heavy storm that blew off the roofs of all classrooms last week. The situation is alarming and I would like to call upon the ministry concerned to intervene immediately and save the situation. 

As I speak, Madam Speaker, pupils are not attending classes due to the fact that they do not have where to sit. It is therefore my humble request that the responsible ministry acts quickly to save the situation. 
Madam Speaker, I interacted with the minister and he told me to request the district disaster committee to act. They submitted everything that was needed but the ministry has not yet responded. Two months ago, the whole parish in that same sub county was affected by floods. We still requested the ministry but the same population were not helped.

I would like to request the minister responsible to come and save the situation. As we speak, P.7 candidates are sitting for their examinations under trees. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Minister in charge of relief, disaster preparedness and refugees, there have been two disasters; first with the food and now, with the inability of the children to have where to sit. 

3.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, it is true there are very many hydrological emergencies in the country, as a consequence of what has been described by meteorologists as the above normal rains that have come not only with a lot of water that has submerged some places but also with strong windstorms and hailstorms causing a lot of degradation in almost all the corners of the country.

It is true that we have been notified from different districts about the challenges that are affecting the communities. What is also true is that we have attempted as much as we can to intervene. The honourable member is correct to say that her district may not have been reached but I know that the way we have been responding was mainly depending on the magnitude of the problem. However, this one, which occurs and affects the pupils; we have been liaising with our partners who have been kind and have given us temporary tents that can be used as classrooms. United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund has been supporting us in that direction and we have distributed the tents to some areas.

After here, I will go and check to ensure that the children in that school can be helped to sit for their exams. However, to say that we just ignored Namayingo may not be accurate. I submit.       

THE SPEAKER: Can we also ask the Minister of Education and Sports to ensure that – are Primary Leaving Examinations ending today? Can he ascertain whether the children did exams today? If they have not, please assist them so that they sit somewhere and do them.  

MR ECWERU: Madam Speaker, we have also shared this and agreed with the line ministries. For example, I see from the Order Paper, there are some responses that I am supposed to make. We will be handling the humanitarian face of the intervention but the critical interventions like agriculture, we have agreed with the ministries that they must do what is supposed to be done by their sectors.

I will consult the Ministry of Education and Sports. Hon. Muyingo is here and I would like him to take on from there.

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The latest information I have is that Uganda National Examination Board has been able to conduct exams successfully in all examinations centres without any serious difficulties. 

However, I will get more details from my colleagues after here so that I follow up that particular case.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

3.15
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here on a matter of national importance concerning Entebbe Express Highway. This Government spent billions of money on that road. However, if you travel with KLM, which arrives at Entebbe International Airport at around midnight and you drive on Entebbe Express Highway, it is completely dark; not even a single street light and even the cameras are not sufficient, yet we have a road toll, which is supposed to collect money to solve such problems. Since that road was inaugurated, the road tolls are not functional.

My appeal to the ministry is that they make the road tolls functional and generate money in order to at least put on street lights and cameras within a distance. The other available cameras are far. You have to drive between four to five kilometres to find the cameras. If the cameras are very expensive, let us generate the money through the road tolls; unless, they have a hidden agenda. There is no single patrol and this can cause more insecurity. We know that you have been having insecurity on that road and you can solve that.

That is my prayer, to the concerned ministry. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in July when the road was being commissioned, we were told that they were waiting for the law before they establish the road tolls. We made the law long ago; this House finished the law but still there are no road tolls. 

Ministry of Works and Transport, who is in charge of the lights on the highway?
 
3.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we would like to request that the Minister of Works and Transport, answers that question on Thursday when we will be answering the rest of the questions.

THE SPEAKER: Concerning the road tolls?

MR BAHATI: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: What about the lighting? Who is in charge of the lights from Entebbe to Kampala?

MR BAHATI: It is still the Ministry of Works and Transport.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, next Thursday, the Minister of Works and Transport should answer reasons for failure to establish the road tolls and explain the lighting on the Entebbe-Kampala Express Highway.    

3.18
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I rise on very urgent matter concerning Gulu Municipality and the surrounding areas. The issue pertains to power outages. Sometime back, I rose on this Floor and the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, assured us that while Karuma is being worked on and as Aswa Dam is also being completed; in the meantime, the power supply from Owen Falls Dam would still be meeting the demands that we need in Gulu, which is only seven megawatts.

However, to date, if you go to Gulu, you will find that it is only supplied once a week. Gulu District is very bright during the day and very dark during the night; this is not good. We are expected to become a city. How can we demonstrate that Gulu is going to become a city when we cannot supply power for 24 hours? 

Please, I would like the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to assure us; as the upcoming new city in Africa, Gulu must lead by demonstrating that because it has three supply lines of Owen Falls Dam, Karuma and Aswa. In the meantime, Owen Falls Dam should generate power 24 hours in a week – (Interruption)  

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleague, for giving way. The issue of power for the greater north region should interest this House. We have passed loans here together with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, and the finance ministry; unless they have a different agenda than what this Parliament has for the people of the greater north. We passed a loan of around USD 100 million for extending power from Kole through Gulu, Olwiyo, Packwach up to Arua. That was three years ago. 

I would like to report here that as West Nile Parliamentary Caucus, we engaged ministry of energy to give us an update on where they have reached with this money that Parliament had passed. They promised that by May this year, the contractor would be on ground. As we talk, even when we call the person the ministry had designated for us to be in touch with for updates, he does not pick our phone calls. 

There is something fishy happening in the ministry which I think is to sabotage the economic developments in the region because you cannot do anything. West Nile, from the time it was created, or became part of Uganda, has never had grid power. WENRECo brought generators when they were there. Their contract is about to expire and there is no proper communication on the strategy that Government is laying to deliver the people of West Nile from this electricity challenge. 

What Gulu is suffering from is the last mile infrastructure. Gulu is on 33KV which is the last mile. Therefore, when there is a problem in Lira, automatically, Gulu up to Kitgum and Moyo which are connected on that particular grid will go off. 

There really is need for us as Parliament to demand from ministry of energy to account for the resources that this Parliament has appropriated for the last three years to show cause as to why the greater north is not given adequate electricity. Thank you. 

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, hon. Lyandro. When we have this power outage, we are trying to tell business communities to demonstrate because a lot of people have gone out of business because of power outage. The Gulu community is going to demonstrate if this energy minister cannot assure us of power. There is going to be the biggest demonstration in Gulu. Thank you. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, is it a coincidence that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development has three ministers and none of them is here? Or is it God’s incidence? If it is God’s incidence, it means that maybe they are dead or one of them has a problem. A very core sector ministry and there is no single minister! 

This matter of Northern Uganda and West Nile has been a matter in this Parliament for long. When shall we ever be seen as representing our people? Where are the ministers of energy? 

MR AKENA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter raised by my honourable colleague is not limited to Gulu. Over the last weekend, beginning on Friday up to Sunday evening, basically the whole of Northern Uganda was off the grid. This happens quite frequently that we get blackouts for many days. This is a chronic problem that has been repeating itself time and again. So much so that this weekend, the lack of power also affected water because National Water uses the same power to pump the water so we had no water within Lira municipality and I am sure Gulu was also affected. That line also crosses into Apac and Kiryandongo. It is a much bigger problem which the minister of energy really needs to address. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of failure to give power to West Nile is a national scandal. We have discussed it many times and made many demands here. Commitments have been made but it seems no one is really interested. Intermittent power supply in Gulu and Lira: it has also been here many times. The ministers are not here. 

3.26
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I came and found that some ministers are not around. The minister of planning requested that they answer tomorrow. What I am going to say is my personal information on this issue of lack of power. 

I rang the minister when I was in Adjumani and had no power. Our power comes from Gulu. Before Gulu gets power, we cannot get power. I rang somebody in Gulu who told me that Gulu was in darkness. I, therefore, rang the minister of energy. She said she would check. 

After some 30 minutes, she rang me to say that there is a general checkup from Lira to Gulu and to Adjumani and further. She said that by dawn, the power would be back. By dawn, the power came on briefly and went off again. (Laughter) What I assume is that the line is still under repair. I believe the minister told me the truth. I also believe that I am telling the truth because I am conveying what I was told. 

I appeal to colleagues to take it slow until the power comes back because even if we cry tears, your tears will not turn into power (Interjections) Yes. That is the truth. (Laughter) 

I appeal to you, Madam Speaker, that we move to other subjects. The truth is that until the power is repaired, we will not perform a miracle and turn nothing into power. 

I appeal to colleagues to calm down and accept the fact that there is no power and therefore we will get power as soon as possible. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I appreciate what you have said but I think the Government has an obligation to supply power. Therefore, the minister should come tomorrow and explain the continued outage in Lira and Gulu as well as the failure to supply West Nile. This has been going on for many years.

Honourable members, join me in welcoming a delegation from Puranga Sub-county in Pader District – are you the ones? They are represented by hon. Otto and hon. Oketayot. Welcome. (Applause)

3.31
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning insecurity in the refugee settlement camps – especially Parolinya Refugee Camp – which has spilled over to sub-counties in Moyo District. 

On the 11th of October, a South Sudanese refugee grabbed a gun from a policewoman and thereafter shot and injured ASP Natukunda. He was later airlifted to Kampala for treatment. Insecurity has also spilled over to Lefori Sub-county, especially in Muno Village and Agwere Parish where these refugees go and steal chicken, goats and cows and take them to South Sudan. This has caused a lot of uncertainty and insecurity in my constituency.

Madam Speaker, my prayers are that: 

    1. There should be intensification of the patrol by police and the UPDF.
    2. There should be the setting up of the vigilantes to watch over and stop these thieves.
    3. All refugees must be registered and their status known because some of them are rebels who come and live among the refugees.
    4. There should be general mobilisation, sensitisation and education of the refugees so that they can embrace peace and security. We are hospitable and have welcomed and helped them to settle and they should reciprocate by being law-abiding.

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, there are two ways through which we assess and determine refugee status. The first one is the prima facie understanding of a group of people who are seeking asylum, where we look at them and say that probably because of the pressure in their country, we should admit them and sometimes we admit them in big numbers. 

The second way is individual status determination, where we subject them to individual critical assessment by the refugee eligibility assessment team. In the South Sudan case, for example, in 2013 when the Government of South Sudan nearly collapsed, there was a huge influx of refugees. I have to admit that we employed the first method – the prima facie understanding. What seems to have happened is that in the process, a small group of those who may have even been militia members the other side, joined the genuine asylum seekers and came into our country. 

We have seen, from time to time, episodes of violence from within the camps and attempts to grab weapons from the police personnel who are designated to take care of law and order there.

What we did was, one, to request the Ministry of Internal Affairs to reinforce the police unit, particularly the one manning West Nile as well as Palabek in Acholi. By doing that alone, I am happy to report that we have been able to recover some items that are not meant for refugees but are for executing war. They include uniforms, firearms and bullets. We have continued to screen to discover those who had been militia members the other side. However, the difficulty we are facing, which I have to confess, is that there is nobody to consult from the other side to know the status of some of these asylum seekers before they fled. This is because the state is almost not there in some parts of the provinces that border us.

Yes, it is true that our police officer was disarmed and the suspect was quickly controlled by our law enforcement team. We have a debate now because there were claims that the suspect is mentally disturbed. We are in the process of determining whether his mental status allows him to be taken to Butabika or tried according to the laws of the country.

The assurance I would like to give to the country is that we are on top of the situation, and we will do whatever it takes to ensure that the general refugees are allowed into the country while the infiltrators with criminal intentions are neutralised.

3.38
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise over the rampant arrests of people around Kampala, a case in point being the recent arrests in Katwe and Kibuye. On the 24th of October, the police conducted an operation in Wansanso in Katwe over allegations of theft and criminality in the area. Over 200 people were arrested; some of them were being arrested at the counters in their shops while others were customers. Others were boys below the age of 13. To our surprise, out of the more than 200 people, only 80 people were taken to the court and the whereabouts of the others are unknown.

Madam Speaker, the Minister in charge of Internal Affairs should settle the hearts of the Katwe residents by explaining the whereabouts of the more than 120 people who were never arraigned in courts. The ministry should also restore confidence among the traders in this area because the traders now fear to open their shops thinking that the same operation may come back any time, which has affected their businesses –(Interruption) 

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, hon. Colleague, for giving way and for bringing up this matter.

Madam Speaker, I think we have a problem with either the intelligence network or with the people in the intelligence department. In an ideal society, before an operation is carried out, some intelligence must be gathered.

About two weeks ago, several shopping malls – 

THE SPEAKER: He is talking about traders in Katwe. Minister for Internal Affairs, could you update us next week about the whereabouts of the 120 traders? Hon. Ssewanyana, which court were they taken to?  Was it Makindye? 
	
3.42
MR LAWRENCE BIYIKA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent importance concerning the state of roads and bridges in my constituency.

For the last two weeks, three communities have been cut off from schools, health centres and markets because three bridges have broken down completely leaving the roads in a bad state.

My prayer is that the Ministry of Works and Transport and Uganda National Road Authority should use their emergency response to go and assess the situation of the roads, and the bridges in order for them to do some emergency repair to reconnect my people to the mainland. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Could you identify the bridges and the roads?
 
MR BIYIKA: There are three bridges. Two of the bridges are on Amoda River and the other on Ora River, connecting the parishes of Jopamatho, Ndara, Lendu and Alangi subcounty. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Works and Transport should go and handle the situation in Ora and give us an update on Thursday next week. 

3.43
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national concern.

The rains have continued to drop heavily. Soroti County has not been spared. The rains have created a lot of problems in the constituency. Most homes have been flooded, some have collapsed and the latrines are not usable anymore because they are full of water, which has affected the water sources too.

Some roads in Gweri sub-county in Awaliwali, Aukot, Kamuda and Asuret are cut off. To make matters worse, the food crops, especially cassava is rotting in the gardens because of the logging water although farmers are struggling to uproot them to try to save the situation.

Madam Speaker, since my senior Member of Parliament for Amuria, the Minister of State for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees is in the House, can he tell the House whether he can rescue my people with tarpaulins for drying their food crops because the ground is wet? 

Secondly, there is an increase of malaria because of water logging. I would like to request the Ministry of Health to supply nets to help the people fight malaria. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, you have heard the situation in Soroti County. Minister of Health, there is also malaria outbreak.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, the issue of rain is all over the country. It is in Pader - I travelled to Kamuli via the lake - it is actually everywhere and the gardens are flooded. 

Madam Speaker, I am seeking that you direct the ministry to bring a comprehensive national assessment of the whole country. Otherwise, the issue in Nebbi is the same as it is in most parts of the country. In fact, the minister should tell us when the rains are going to stop. Otherwise, we do not know yet they are becoming a problem to the people. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we went on recess, there was epidemic of hailstorms and schools collapsing around the country. We asked the Government to assess the implication. Now it is raining everywhere and the bridges and roads have gone. In fact, I cannot go home through my usual routes. I have to pass somewhere else.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when can we have a comprehensive assessment of this situation and solutions? Otherwise, members are always raising issues of rains as matters of concern and I cannot stop them because the things are happening every day.

 3.47
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, we shall make a statement about this matter on Thursday next week. 

THE SPEAKER: On the disaster situation in the country. Okay, in the meantime, the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees should supply those areas that have been reported. Honourable Minister of Health, I do not know what you are going to do about the malaria situation. Is it related to disaster?

3.48
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo North County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I rise to request for assistance from Government. Two weeks ago because of the heavy flooding, a boy from my constituency drowned in the river bank. The family and the entire community have been looking for the body but up to now, they have failed to find it. The boy comes from Tuba Parish. 

Madam Speaker, it is time that I request for further assistance from Government to locate this body. Otherwise, we have tried but failed. That is what I wanted to add as the Prime Minister comes with a compressive statement. 

MS AMONG: Madam Speaker, last week, I raised an issue from Bukedea. I am happy to report that the minister went to Bukedea and did some assessment. However, from the time he went to do the assessment, nothing has been done; no food items and no other items have been delivered.

Madam Speaker, just like hon. Nyakecho has said, yesterday, two children from Kamuto sub-county drowned and died but nothing has been done. People are still sleeping in classrooms. There are no blankets and the houses have been put down.

Madam Speaker, the minister asked me to call the commissioner to inform him to deliver the food but not even one kilogramme of rice has been delivered to Bukedea to date. 

3.59
MS JUDITH FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Madam Speaker, I would like to find out from the minister, as we wait for the report on Thursday next week – we have been reporting cases of disaster in this country to the House but sometimes no action is taken though in some instances, a little bit of action is taken. 

Madam Speaker, this House gives money to the ministry. This House plans and budgets for disaster preparedness. This means that the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness has to prepare for such disasters and not react to them. When disasters come, they should be ready for action.

Madam Speaker, I have reported disasters in the areas of Modege, Lukwangole in Patongo sub-county, Latin Ling, Barotiba in Omot sub-county, Lokole sub-county and some areas of Adilang, among others. Unfortunately, we have not received the required attention. At this point in time, we need tarpaulin for people to use because in some areas, mattresses get soaked in water.

When you give them tarpaulin, at least they are able to use them to stop the water from soaking their mattresses. Madam Speaker, this needs serious action and I thank you for giving me this opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we may have to write down – Otherwise, I will have to allow the whole House to speak about their issues.

3.52
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I remember that during the last session, we appropriated funds for disaster preparedness for all the schools and health centres that were affected by the rains.

I raised, on the Floor of Parliament, an issue of national importance about Amaler Health Centre II and I was referred to the ministry. When I went there, they told me that the money had been appropriated but my health centre has not been allocated money. 

It is very difficult for people in Karamoja to go and deliver in a hospital or health centre but when they go there and find no roof, it is another disaster.

Two weeks ago, a woman died in my constituency. She was the wife to the LCI chairman. She was pregnant and was trying to cross the river. Previously, I also raised the issue of a woman who lost her four month old baby but nothing has been done.

People in Nakapiripirit are suffering. I talked about the road last week but today, I do not see the Minister of Works here to give us a response on the issue of the roads. As we speak, people are still stuck and sleeping by the roads. We need an emergency response for the whole country and especially Nakapiripirit District. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think the major response is going to be done. 
	
3.53
MR JOSEPH KOLUO (NRM, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This issue of excessive rain is countrywide but in my constituency of Toroma, it has brought a different type of mosquito that does not respect mosquito nets.

The nets that we received are old now and they have large holes. Up to now, my body still has mosquito bites. I think that Government should come up with a plan to supply mosquito nets for the people of Toroma.
	
3.54
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you. You will recall that while we were passing the Budget, we put a lot of money in the contingency fund. I thought that, that money was meant to address such disasters.
I do not know when we ever use this money. Don’t you think it is high time that we put our feet down and demanded for a percentage of this contingency fund to go back to our districts to cater for issues like disasters? 

To buy iron sheets for schools, you have to run to a minister. For a kilogramme of sugar, salt or saucepans, you have to run to a minister. Can’t we decentralise this fund so that districts can cater for these emergencies when they come? 

Regarding our roads, as we speak, I cannot move from Isingiro Kikagati to Kabuyanda because the small swampy area has over flooded. Just this week alone, I have spent about Shs 2.6 million from my own meagre resources trying to create a passage for people to use as an emergency measure.
	
It is high time that we took this contingency fund to the districts to work on these roads, at least as an emergency. I recall at one time when all sector budgets were cut to cater for when all our roads were completely cut off. This is something that we can do as soon as possible. It is not beyond our means and power to do. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you would like to alter the operation of the contingency fund, you should come with a specific motion here so that we can put it on the Order Paper, debate it and take a decision. 

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES)	(Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It has been a while since we have been talking about the upsurge of malaria cases in the country, and we made a comprehensive statement to this House regarding what we were doing as the Ministry of Health.

Allow me to assure honourable members that our health facilities are well-equipped with medication to deal with cases at facility level. We have also been trying to speak to the public and telling them what to do; especially ensuring that homesteads are clean and that there are no breeding sites for these mosquitoes.

Regarding mosquito nets, allow me to inform this House that this month, the Ministry of Health is beginning to receive mosquito nets and we shall be distributing them to all the districts. We will let you know when we are ready but it will be soon. Thank you.

3.58
MR DONONZIO KAHONDA (NRM, Ruhinda County, Mitooma): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. During the Financial Year 2017/2018, Government of Uganda facilitated sub-country councillors with honoraria allowances amounting to Shs 228,000 per councillor, in appreciation of their services.

Fourteen councillors out of a total of 49 councillors from Kabira sub-county missed their allowances. In Kashenshero, 19 councillors missed their allowances and in Kiyanga sub-county, 16 councillors missed their allowances.

In an attempt to have them paid, the Chief Administrative Officer of Mitooma District wrote several letters to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Local Government and many other reminders but to date, no positive response has been given.

What is surprising is that when the Chief Finance Officer of Mitooma District followed the matter with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, she was told that the matter ended with the Financial Year 2017/2018 and therefore, no claims should be made.

My prayer is that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in consultation with the Ministry of Local Government should consider the claim of these councillors who missed their honoraria.

Secondly, the Ministry of Local Government should also explain to Ugandans, especially the people of Mitooma, why the 49 councillors were never paid their honoraria. I beg to lay on the Table the relevant documents including the claim that includes a list of councillors that missed their allowances. I beg to lay the receipts of the sub counties that received, among others.

THE SPEAKER: Have you written it down and given one to the minister? It would have been better to give the minister a copy. Okay you lay; the minister will get another copy.

MR KAHONDA: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the correspondences regarding the 49 councillors of Mitooma District that missed the honoraria allowances in the Financial Year 2017/2018. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that letter will be transmitted to the Minister of Local Government and copied to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, to explain the circumstances surrounding the non-payment of those allowances.

Honourable members, there were issues we wanted to address earlier and I now would like to address item 3(d) on the Order Paper.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE NATIONAL TEACHER POLICY

4.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The country has overtime been grappling with a number of issues affecting the teaching profession.  Consequently, with support from UNESCO, the Government of Uganda with six other countries including Lesotho, Mali, Burkina Faso, Niger, Burundi, and Guinea undertook a comprehensive study on teacher issues in Sub-Saharan Africa. 
The report for Uganda  highlighted several issues affecting the education sector that directly relate to teachers namely: lack of a comprehensive policy and legal framework to manage the teaching profession, poor quality of teacher training, lack of teacher professionalism, lack of motivation, among others. In this regard, the study recommended development of a comprehensive national teacher policy to address these issues.

I beg to lay a copy of the study report at the Table.

Government accepted the recommendations and embarked on the process of developing the National Teacher Policy. The Ministry of Education and Sports then undertook a Regulatory Impact Assessment which comprehensively analysed teachers’ issues in Uganda and this justified further the development of the National Teacher Policy. These two reports informed the development of the draft National Teacher Policy, which was comprehensively consulted on. From the consultations, there was overwhelming support for the Teachers’ Policy.

The specific objectives of the National Teacher Policy are to: streamline teacher management for better productivity, discipline, retention and motivation; strengthen pre-service and in-service teacher training so as to enhance competences to effectively deliver quality learning outcomes and leadership at all levels of the education cycle; standardise teacher development, qualifications and practice across all levels, and to streamline the practice across all levels of education.

Madam Speaker, the key priorities of the National Teachers’ policy are; establishment of the National Teachers’ Council by an Act of Parliament to regulate the teaching profession; establishment of the Uganda National Institute of Teacher Education to manage and guarantee quality assurance for the profession; development and Implementation of the Standards for Teaching, Institutional Leadership and Teacher Qualification Framework and mainstreaming cross cutting issues into teacher training, utilisation and teacher practices. 

The National Teacher Policy was approved by all the organs of the Education and Sports Sector Working Groups and was later presented to Cabinet for approval in line with Article 111(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. Cabinet approved the National Teacher policy for Uganda on the 1 April 2019. 

The detailed policy implementation standards and guidelines were developed and the policy was officially launched by the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament on behalf of His Excellency the President on 5 October 2019 at the World Teachers’ Day celebrations held in Kamuli District. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the policy.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members for some time there have been concerns of the absence of the National Teachers’ Policy. However, it is now available for circulation and internalisation. Thank you.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, Following the launch of the National Teachers’ Policy, several issues came up in the media and need clarification. Key among these issues is the requirement of all teachers to have university degrees.

Madam Speaker, in order to appreciate the need to standardize the teaching profession, let me to highlight the historical evolution of the teaching profession in Uganda. 

Teacher training in Uganda started with grade one teachers then known as vernacular teachers. There was no defined entry qualification then and the entrants were identified by the missionaries from the communities and trained to teach basically reading, writing, and arithmetic. In 1954, grade one teachers’ training was phased out and introduced grade II with entry requirement of Primary Leaving Certificate and four years training. The best candidates were the ones admitted to teacher training and were also subjected to selection interview to test their attitudes.

In 1983, Government phased out training of grade II teachers and introduced grade III; elevated the entry requirements to Uganda Certificate of Education and revised the training duration to two years. Grade II teachers were encouraged to upgrade to grade III.

Since then, for 36 years the entry level of training grade III teachers has remained the same. However, the low entry level and the short duration of training have been cited by several research findings as some of the reasons for the poor quality of teachers we have in Uganda today.

The training of Grade V teachers’ for secondary schools started in 1965 with entry requirement being S6 certificate initially with grades as low as subsidiary passes. In 1980, Government sought to improve the quality of students admitted and the entry requirement was elevated to principal passes. For 39 years, since then the entry requirements and duration of training have remained the same. 

Why a degree in education for all teachers?

Madam Speaker, elevating the minimum entry level into the teacher profession to a bachelor’s degree in education will help Government to achieve the following: 

    1. To improve the quality of entrants into the teaching profession. 

	Evidence from best education systems around the world reveals that the most important factors in determining how well children learn is the quality of teachers. The best systems draw their teachers from among the best graduates and train them rigorously and effectively, focusing on best classroom practices. Countries with best education systems include Ireland, Singapore, Japan, Switzerland, UK, and USA; these consider degrees for the profession. Ghana and Nigeria are excellent examples for our region. All these countries admit best students to teacher training and the minimum qualification is a degree or /and a Master’s Degree for some of them. With the literacy level of our country and the development agenda the country is pursuing, we need 2lst century teachers with the right aptitude and attitude to train 21st century learners. The quality of entrants into the teaching profession now needs upgrade.

    2. To improve the status of the teaching profession.

	As role models, teachers need to have a status. A teacher with low qualifications and low self-esteem cannot command respect in a society that is more educated than the teacher is. Teachers used to be the brightest people in a society and they were opinion leaders - they commanded respect. A degree status will bring back that confidence and respect for a teacher and improve the image of the profession. 

	By having degrees, governed by processional code of conduct, and regulated by a professional body, the teachers' professional conscience will be managed and the lost glory of the teaching profession will be restored.

    3. To improve the quality of teaching skills as well as upgrade content knowledge. 

	The level of content and delivery skills provided at degree level is much higher and therefore teachers will be more empowered. Higher level pedagogical skills will require a trainee with a high level of aptitude to grasp and practice the skills. This will benefit our learners and of course, it will motivate the teachers. Teachers with a degree are more confident in both exposure and skill and are more motivated to teach especially coupled with a fact that they will have both status and a much better pay. This will also help to harmonize the status of teachers across all levels of education. 

    4.  To minimise the grading of teachers according to levels; this breeds superiority/inferiority complex among teachers. 

A degree status for all will level their professional status. It will especially motivate the current grade III and grade V teachers who feel lower in status yet they are all very important as teachers regarding the level they teach.

    5. It will improve the employability of grade V teachers in secondary schools. 

A recent tracer study by the Ministry of Education which was carried out in 2019, indicated that the demand for grade V teachers in public secondary schools has declined –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Point of procedure.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We know hon. Muyingo as a Minister for Higher Education and he is good at it. However, we have the overall minister in that ministry. Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that the Minister for Education and Sports, herself as the full minister comes in Parliament and present to us so that she tells us what she really wants to achieve in this exercise of re-grading teachers from primary to university –(Interjection)- Okay, from kindergarten where I never went to university. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that the full minister who knows everything not higher education comes here and helps us?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my difficulty is slightly different because I do not know whether the minister wants us to discuss that statement because the issues you are touching will attract a debate.

I do not know whether you actually uploaded the statement for the members. I do not have it myself. Therefore, you know, the more you talk, I get more worried that people will want to discuss.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, this statement was uploaded long ago and it is on your iPads.

THE SPEAKER: Is it there?

DR MUYINGO: Yes, you have it.

THE SPEAKER: But, I think the members want to know- where is the senior minister?

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, the senior minister is attending to other equally important state duties.

THE SPEAKER: Present, maybe there will be a debate.

DR MUYINGO: 6. Of course, this will also help to harmonise salaries of teachers across all levels of education. 

Today, salaries are paid to teachers according to the levels at which they teach regardless of qualification. Many primary school teachers have upgraded up to degree levels but are still paid grade III teacher salaries and this has greatly demotivated them.

7. 	Standardising qualifications and salaries will keep all teachers motivated to do us a good job, Madam Speaker.

8. 	It also helps to improve the maturity of teachers at primary school level. 

	Currently, most teachers graduate at the age of 18 and are too young to exhibit the maturity required to nurture the children at primary school level. The move is also intended to improve the level of maturity required for teachers as parents.

Transitional period

Madam Speaker, a transitional period of l0 years has been provided for the current teachers to upgrade. Within this period, those who do not upgrade will remain within the current salary structure, and after l0 years, they will be phased out.

Who is responsible for the funding? Speaker, let meassure Parliament that Government will continue funding the training of teachers. Therefore, all the practicing teachers will upgrade through in-service programmes.

What is my prayer, Madam Speaker? My prayer is that Parliament supports the implementation of the National Teachers’ Policy and fast-track the approval of the National Teacher Act to give a legal framework as prescribed by this policy. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Has the National Teachers’ Act been presented here? The one you want us to fast-track, has it been read?

DR MUYINGO: Not yet.

THE SPEAKER: So, we cannot fast-track it, because it is not here.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, we are working on the Bill. It will soon be presented to Cabinet first before it comes here.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have a few comments. Hon. Asamo. Yes, point of procedure, hon. Kizige.

MR KIZIGE: Madam Speaker, the honourable minister has just been presenting highlights of the teachers’ policy and it is being presented in Parliament for the first time. I think it would be procedurally right for honourable colleagues to go and look at the policy, read it –(Interjection)- those are highlights, it is not the policy. That would put us in the position to debate effectively. Otherwise, to debate without reading the policy is quite a challenge.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know, what I had understood originally was that the minister was coming to lay the policy and then he started submitting; then I got worried that members would get interested in debating and yet they have not read the entire policy. Can we appoint a date to discuss the policy? Can we amend it even if we discuss it? Is there anything we can change as Parliament?

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, the reason why I had to make this presentation- the purpose was to lay on Table the policy and to make the members aware that there is a policy.

THE SPEAKER: Now what is the purpose of the debate? What are we going to resolve?

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, on procedural issues, which you are guiding us on, the minister, could not resist the temptation to explain the policy. However, actually, we know our mandate as Parliament, we do not debate policies; we legislate. I think the minister is putting us on notice that there is a Bill coming and we should get ready. I believe he just wanted to give us a little more explanation. However, Parliament cannot be seen to be debating policies; we legislate. Since there is a Bill coming – That is actually the right way; Government develops a policy, which transits into an Act of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, as you guided, we could hold our fire. He has “tickled” us and I hope the Bill will come soon, while our fire is still on. In the meantime, as hon. Kizige rightly said, we could internalise it. What has come out clearly is the qualification of teachers. However, I believe there are more things in the National Teachers Policy that would enable us. It is not something we can do haphazardly. We are all products of teachers and if we are to do it, Madam Speaker, we have to do it right. Thank you. 

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural issue. It is true that as Parliament, it would not be right for us to discuss policy and the minister has come to inform us of this policy. 

Nevertheless, Madam Speaker, we would like to seek your guidance because this education policy has far reaching consequences. Just last week, I participated in a meeting where there was a discussion on imaginal leadership and the Minister of Education and Sports was in attendance. In that meeting, it was very clear that one of the reasons we have a system in Uganda - in terms of employment - which is not fit to tackle the issues of the 21st century is because of lack of certain competencies and skills. Things like innovation and critical thinking are not within our education system. This policy does not bring those very important skills into the system. 

When should Parliament come in to resolve this matter? These are very fundamental issues for Uganda and it might be difficult to discuss the policy now. How can we, as Parliament, either through the Committee on Education and Sports or on the Floor here, try to handle this matter? It is very critical for Uganda. It might not be through the law, but how do we really come up with a situation that can assist this country to move forward because it is very fundamental? 

MR WILFRED NIWAGABA: Thank you, honourable member. Madam Speaker, there is a problem in this country where Government comes up with a policy and starts implementing it without a legal provision. (Applause) One of the recent cases we are handling is the Sugar Bill, where they came up with the policy of zoning. They started effecting and implementing it without an enabling law. There is also a danger that we are being hoodwinked - a policy has been laid on the Table and they will start implementing it and they will never even come up with a law. 

My view - and I would like the Members to support me - is that we should say that the policy has been received but it should not be implemented until they come up with a law. So, if they start implementing it, we shall have a basis of holding them accountable.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the fact that the policy has been laid on the Table does not mean it is now of universal application; so we do not expect the ministry to implement it. We also expect you to bring the law. We expect the Members to read the policy together with the law, when it comes, to see whether they are moving together. Thank you for the information. It is not for you to use. 

MR BARYAYANGA: Madam Speaker, I have been thinking ours was about laying the policy on the Table but there is something that we need to tackle as a country, other than what he has told us about teachers, which is the curriculum.

I believe that we should look at the curriculum much sooner than the policy of the teachers because it is wanting. People finish school and there are no jobs. How does the policy connect with the curriculum so that our children finish school and can either be self-employed or something of the sort? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it seems you are trying to discuss the policy, yet it was not on the Order Paper. It is not up for discussion, please. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the minister presented a policy but also started debate on that policy by giving the statement he gave, which actually provoked many of us. Now that we have decided that we are not going to implement whatever he has presented, I think that is a good start. 

However, my concern is that we must address the challenges that the teachers are facing holistically. It is not the professionalism that we are concerned about; it is the unfair remuneration for the professional work that these people are doing. When that law comes, can it address the problems of teachers holistically? That is my concern, Madam Speaker. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on that one, you are free to bring a motion here so that we discuss the areas which you find difficult for the teachers, even ahead of the policy. Bring a motion and this House will listen to it. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. My prayer is that the Ministry of Education and Sports provides us with a detailed evaluation of all the policies they have put in place. I am basically interested in the policy on feeding Universal Primary Education (UPE) children. I am sure the minister eats every day; he has lunch and takes breakfast. If we could get that kind of evaluation, we shall determine this. 

However, I would like to put this on record: teachers are educated and they have their degrees. However, as you have ruled, Madam Speaker, we shall wait and tackle that matter. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR KATUSABE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling on that. I rise on a procedural point on a different matter. Yesterday, we almost lost our own, a leader and somebody I hold in high esteem. He is somebody that has used all of his time to right the wrongs and make Uganda a better country for all of us to live in. 

A point of reference, Madam Speaker, is the violent crackdown of a peaceful assembly at Namboole –

THE SPEAKER: I have allowed the Leader of the Opposition to present a paper; she is going to speak on that issue and I have already given her authority. Where is the minister in charge of youth and children affairs? 

4.29
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): Madam Speaker, I am standing in for the Minister of State for Youth and Children Affairs. I beg your indulgence, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Go head, Minister. Item No. 3 (c). 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON GOVERNMENT’S COMPREHENSIVE PLAN TO ADDRESS YOUTH UNEMPLOYMENT IN THE COUNTRY

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, the Minister of State for Youth and Children Affairs was feeling unwell and she had to leave, unfortunately. She asked me to beg for your indulgence that I stand in for her. 

I would like to draw your attention to a letter addressed to the Rt Hon. Speaker from the minister, making reference to this subject of youth unemployment and the plan to address it. 

Some information about this subject has been given on the Floor of Parliament before. However, at the same time, Cabinet directed the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to come out with a comprehensive plan. Since the directive was given, the ministry has completed consultations and harmonisation with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the National Planning Authority and the Uganda Investment Authority. As it is the practice, she will re-engage Cabinet by close of November 2019.

Therefore, the minister is begging the indulgence of the Speaker that she informs Parliament about this plan after Cabinet has discussed it comprehensively. This is a modest and humble request to you, Madam Speaker, to stay discussions on this matter. We would like to reassure your office that the ministry will bring the plan as soon as Cabinet has been apprised of it.

Madam Speaker, I beg to request.      

THE SPEAKER: Well, I have not seen that letter; I hope that it reaches me. However, the issue of youth unemployment is very critical. Last week, we informed the youth that we would have this debate when they were here. They had travelled from different parts of the country to come and listen to the comprehensive plan on employment. I would like the Cabinet to treat it with urgency. We think that end of November is far because this request was made to you in July and this is November. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I guess the reason the minister stepped out and left my good friend, hon. Muruli Mukasa, was because of the facts. We used to have the Youth Livelihood Programme in the ministry. It was implemented and we kept on appropriating money. Cabinet approved the second phase after assessing its impact. When it came to last year’s budget, we did not give them money and their budget was slashed. As a result, that has also increased on the problem.

I expected the minister to speak to the same. I have information to the extent that there was a review of the Youth Livelihood Programme and they had even recommended increasing the budget for funding that activity.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Mwiru, we had a debate on some issues and the House asked the minister to bring a comprehensive plan to address unemployment. It is not just the funding but unemployment of the young people at large. That is what we really wanted her to address because that fund is limited.

MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This issue of unemployment has hit our youth very much. When you move throughout the countryside, you will realise that a majority of them now keep around towns gambling in betting houses. 

I have also noted something that is probably frustrating our youth who would get an opportunity to work overseas. Last week, I helped someone to process papers to go work. This guy studied engineering in Abu Dhabi and performed very well. The university invited him for a job and so, I had to help him to process all his papers through Interpol and Internal Security Organisation (ISO). However, the commissioner is not giving clearance. He claims that the Joint Intelligence Council is still doing some work, yet we got done through ISO and Interpol long ago. This man is about to lose the job. I think there is a problem with clearances. We need to make it easier for our people to get employment. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Those are now individual cases. Minister, the end of the month is too far. This was from July and we are about to go for Christmas. 

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, I think since most of the work has been done, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development could come back here in two weeks’ time.

THE SPEAKER: The matter should reflect again on the Order Paper after a fortnight. Can I now invite the Leader of the Opposition to make a statement before we go back to the responses.

4.37
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I stand in accordance with rule 52 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to make a statement, especially in regard to what happened yesterday. 

I have noted with deep concern yesterday’s action by Uganda Police Force who used excessive force against Opposition leaders and supporters who had legally planned to hold a meeting in Namboole. There is no doubt that the police are determined to harm Opposition leaders in Uganda.

At all times, the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) has tried to comply with the law by writing to the police notifying them of intended meetings. However, the police have always opted to keep quiet, giving no reply until the last minute when they issue press statements stopping the meetings.

On Monday, 14 October 2019, the Member of Parliament for Kira Municipality wrote to the police leadership informing them of an intended FDC meeting to be held at Namboole on 4 November 2019. The police never replied to the notification. The police’s silence can be referred to as a planned move to allow FDC leaders come out and be harmed, their target being Dr Kiiza Besigye, one of our party leaders. The communication to the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs and the Assistant Inspector General of Police, Mr Asuman Mugenyi, as early as 30 October 2019 did not yield anything. 

The FDC meeting had attracted leaders from across the country to discuss pertinent matters regarding their party. It was shocking to be told on Monday morning that our meeting could not take place and no genuine reason was given whatsoever to the organisers. 

Shocking scenes later emerged from Namboole where police and the military used live ammunition, poisonous teargas and excessive force to disperse Dr Kiiza Besigye and party delegates who were heading to Namboole. Innocent pupils of St Mary’s Primary School, Bweyogerere were tear-gassed while sitting their Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE). 

There is a war going on between the state and the citizens of Uganda that is causing political unrest and intolerance against dissenting voices. This brutality is applied to all Ugandans irrespective of their political affiliation. Examples include journalists who were arrested while trying to deliver a petition to the Inspector General of Police on 4 November 2019. These journalists were protesting the continued violation of their rights by Uganda Police Force. Many journalists were tortured and some of their clothes torn. 

The matter of mistreatment of fishermen by the armed forces has been before this Parliament. Illegal eviction of Ugandans on land, coupled with destruction of their property by the police, is an everyday occurrence. What happened to Makerere University students is still fresh in our minds. What should Ugandans do in the search for democracy? 

Registered political parties are denied the opportunity to operate freely. There is already a roadmap issued by the Electoral Commission where elections will start in March next year. Many Ugandans were arrested all over the city yesterday and they are still in police custody with police denying them access to their relatives. 

Dr Besigye’s rights are violated every day and his property destroyed. His health is at risk every time he is targeted and sprayed with dangerous chemicals. 

This state-engineered brutality with impunity remains a cause for concern. Perpetrators of political violence are rarely held to account. This goes against the tenets of open and free political participation, which Uganda subscribes to as a democracy. We are back to the dark days of the Amin era. 

We struggle for peace and a democratic process while our counterparts believe in terror, brutality, maiming and killing innocent Ugandans gathered peacefully for a legitimate meeting. 

We demand the following:

    1. Unconditional release of all Ugandans arrested yesterday in the fracas that was on Bweyogerere-Jinja Road; 
    2. Government commitment to allow all registered political parties and other Ugandans free political space to do consultation with their people; 
    3. The Minister of Internal Affairs to take responsibility for human rights abuses by Uganda Police Force and resign;
    4. Government to compensate all Ugandans whose properties were destroyed or lost due to yesterday’s fracas; 
    5. All those police officers who were involved be held personally liable, arrested and prosecuted before courts of law. 

I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Leader of the Opposition in Parliament. 

4.45
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Thank you, Leader of the Opposition, for your valuable submission. 

Injustice anywhere is injustice everywhere. An attack on one of us is an attack on all of us. Leadership is about identifying a problem and providing a solution before it becomes a crisis. Legally, there is only one option to obtain power - you compete for power. Democracy is about getting to the population and sharing your vision. If our leaders cannot be given the opportunity to interact with Ugandans and share the vision and the plan they have for the country, what else can they do? 

There is one fundamental question that awaits this Parliament: what did you do? This country is taking a dangerous path and the sooner we wake up, the better. Madam Speaker, we are honoured that you are a leader in this great country and you care about Uganda very much. I ask that you provide leadership when there is still something available to save. The times we are headed to are dark times. The question will come back to you and me: what did you do? 

We should not make a mockery of democracy. You are not doing me a favour to –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Use one minute to conclude.

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, the presidency in this country has been criminalised. It has become a crime to compete for the office of the President. Every qualified Ugandan should be given room and space to compete. We should decide if we are ready for democracy; if we are not, we better determine and define the democracy that we need. You either allow our leaders to share their vision with the population or we say we are not a democratic country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.49
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Article 69 of the Constitution, which I would prefer to read verbatim, says, 

“(1) The people of Uganda shall have the right to choose and adopt a political system of their choice through free and fair elections or referenda.

(2) The political systems referred to in clause (1) of this Article shall include-
    (a) the movement political system;
    (b) the multiparty political system; and
    (c) any other democratic and representative political system.” 

Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance as the President of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference (CPC). Ugandans in a referendum decided that we adopt the multiparty system. Political parties were registered – the National Resistance Movement (NRM), Uganda People’s Congress (UPC), the Democratic Party (DP), Justice Forum (JEEMA), the Conservative Party (CP), the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) and others. As Members of Parliament, we get paid through the parliamentary system even though we represent political parties. However, we have a situation where outside there it is as if there is no multi-partyism. Outside there, it is different business from what is taking place in this House. 

Is the multiparty system functional? As FDC, we have even received money – the component that Government gives political parties according to the percentage of representation in the House. All the Opposition parties have received money for mobilisation, thanks to this Parliament. However, Madam Speaker, when you write a letter to the District Police Commanders (DPCs), they tell you, “This is a sensitive matter. We are waiting for orders from above.” When the date for your function arrives, the DPC says, “Please, help me; I have not received any communication.” They do not even tell you that the meeting is not allowed. 

The pictures we are seeing on social media of the police spraying a whole water canister on Dr Kiiza Besigye, which could have killed him, are terrible. We have seen pictures of police spraying and breaking the windscreen of his vehicle. We need answers from Government. If multi-partyism is not functional, let us go back to the movement system.

Madam Speaker, we need answers on what we should do to hold public rallies. We need to know the procedures to follow and offices to take the letters to or whether we should continue being funded. Thank you very much.

5.53
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have said it here and I would like to repeat that injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere. Today it is Dr Besigye and tomorrow it is you and I. That is point number one. 

When we were making this law, I was on the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. We agreed that we needed a regulatory framework as citizens. Of course, today people propose that we should have the Public Order Management Act repealed. The question is: what is the regulatory framework going to be if I write to the IGP, suffer the pain and labour of delivering that letter to Naguru, and the only response I receive is on the day of my function - teargas and bullets?

Colleagues, one day I received visitors from my constituency in my House and because they were more than five – to be specific I received 13 visitors – I was attacked by the DPC, leading a convoy with four patrol vehicles. The reason for the attack was that I had not informed the police that I was receiving visitors in my house. My reaction was to lock the gate and imprison both of us – the DPC, who was an unwanted visitor, and I.

Madam Speaker, you may treat this as a simple matter but tell me what I am supposed to do. If we comply with the law and somebody seeking to enforce the law does not comply with the law, are we supposed to use spears and pangas? Why should those children suffer while doing their PLE? It is simply because we have a reckless police officer who does not respond to a simple letter. 

The law gives police the mandate to discuss with the organisers about the venue, timing and date but they simply keep quiet. The reason is that we have the Inspector General of Police, Deputy Inspector General of Police and police officers who have turned political. When we go there, they tell us that they do not want to get involved in our politics. 

Their work is to protect everyone, including politicians. Do we commit an offence by being politicians opposing this Government? Are we inherently criminal because we are in the Opposition? I think this House needs to take a bold step. We are the ones appropriating money for these people to buy teargas. Maybe we should channel the money to salaries and not give them money to buy teargas.

5.56
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I think this is the tenth or hundredth time we are speaking about the same issue. You presided over the enactment of the Public Order Management Act (POMA). Under POMA, the police are supposed to stop a gathering on only thee conditions: One, if it will obstruct traffic; two, if the venue had earlier been booked; and three, for crowd control.

What the police use to go against our law is that they never respond in writing. The law says they must respond to you in writing within 24 hours, giving reasons for their objections and they should invite you for a meeting to discuss an alternative venue or date. The law does not give them powers to prohibit. This issue is very critical that at one time I petitioned the Constitutional Court over these very powers and I won the case. It is after that case that they enacted the Public Order Management Act.

The Supreme Court pronounced itself on the case, saying that the police do not have powers to prohibit but they only have powers to regulate. By every extent, they have abused the letter of the law. 

What is left for Ugandans? In March, the election cycle will start. The Electoral Commission has given out an electoral calendar. We are political parties interested in taking over government and we want to compete and lose fairly and squarely. We do not fear to lose, but this is in a way a process of rigging an election. You are stopping people from organising and mobilising and in a way you want voters to vote on the basis of ignorance. An ignorant voter is very dangerous to the security of the country. 

We know what the establishment is doing. The President is busy meeting every person in this country, of course using taxpayers’ money. We have seen him with Full Figure, Buchaman and others. We do not care; all we demand for is that much as you have all the powers of incumbency, give us an opportunity, weak as we are, to freely go and –(Member timed out.)

4.59
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, on the matter of the so-called permission from the police, there is another big challenge. When you write to the police notifying them of an event and you deliver the letter to Naguru, they do not stamp it to acknowledge receipt. What happens is that they make you to sign in a book. Now, when people are asking whether you have notified police, you have no evidence.

As is the practice elsewhere, when you deliver a document, they are supposed to stamp on the document. Madam Speaker, police does not have a stamp for receipt of documents anywhere and this has become a very big challenge.

The second issue is that when these people are arrested, ostensibly –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: I would like to thank my colleague. The police actually had that stamp that they used to append but they withdrew it.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, the challenge with that is, even if you wanted to take police to court over their actions, the issue of evidence becomes extremely difficult.

What happens to Dr Besigye and the others is that when police arrests these people and they are taken to various police cells, they are not produced before courts of law. They are not even charged. If they are charged, no police officer comes to court to give evidence. I have represented all these people - the Dr Besigye’s and the Muwanga Kivumbi’s. We always tell them, “You are very quick to arrest people but very slow to come to court to give evidence”.

Madam Speaker, at the end, what is happening is persecution rather than prosecution. Therefore, we need to help the police especially at the level of the DPCs. These DPCs will not make any decision unless they get communication from above. I think Government needs to clarify the roles of the DPCs when it comes to an assembly. Do they have the final authority? Do they have to call the Inspector General of Police to make a decision? 

Madam Speaker, some of these people are our friends. We even speak to and engage them. They tell us that there are no decisions they can make unless the IGP or the Deputy IGP has given instructions. In command and structure, especially when we are dealing with human rights and freedoms, the issue of subjecting freedoms to the whims and machinations of a few people - If this House does not pronounce itself on that matter, today it is us, tomorrow it is someone else.

5.02
MR PAUL MWIRU	(FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to condemn the violation of human rights in this country.

The rights we talk about are inherent; they accrue to us by virtue of being born. That is why the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda has a preamble dedicated to our history as a country. As a result, we have a full chapter in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda that talks about rights.

Madam Speaker, the state has a duty to facilitate the enjoyment of those rights. What we are seeing today is a violation of those rights. My worry is that today you may be in command and abuse the law, and you can actually do anything because you are in command; however, tomorrow the humble gentleman, Col (Rtd) Besigye who was handled that way, could be the commander-in–chief. I keep wondering what will happen if someone behaved that way.

The reason we have a preamble in our Constitution is to help us remember our history - where we came from. The Uganda we want is the future of our country. My good friend, Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali will bear witness because he knows where we have come from. I hope you remember. Madam Speaker, the people of our generation do not want to think about tomorrow when an individual can be made to account for what he or she did in the past. Countries are not built like that. I would like to, therefore, call upon this House to pronounce itself on the issue of human rights violation.

Madam Speaker, if someone has committed an offence, can we see the records where they were tried and convicted? I am a victim of state violence. When we were in Arua, we ended our campaigns early and went to a hotel. I did not imagine that the state, which was supposed to protect me, could come for me at a hotel. 

Madam Speaker, we have kept quiet about that. We were tried but the state abandoned the charges against us. The last time we were in court, we were committed to High Court. They said, “We shall call you”. Our case was adjourned sine die after committing us. We insisted and asked for the date on which we should report, they said “we have put that one away”. I asked myself what type of trial that was. 

Madam Speaker, what we want to see from whoever is in charge of these prosecutions is that if anyone has committed an offense - I am not saying that we should not respect the police - the police –(Member timed out.)

5.05
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA	(Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I remember when the President was swearing-in at the beginning of this term, he stated clearly that his mission will be twofold - to make sure that there is no opposition by 2021 and to bring the country to a middle income status.

Unfortunately, the way the two individuals - the President and the Deputy IGP, because I know for a fact that the IGP is not in charge - are conducting the business of finishing off the Opposition is not only creating much more opposition which is becoming more informal, but they are scaring away the cherished investors. The scenes we see in Makerere University, on the roads and everywhere, which bring out this kind of brutality, do not favour anybody including the two key individuals, who want to die in power. 

It is very pathetic that most of us who have read history do not want to know where this country has come from and where it is going. The beauty is that the international community, particularly where most of them have been running to for aid and medical cover, is shrinking in terms of space. The other beauty is that we are beginning to see men and women who do not fear bullets and teargas. The day people start giving up their lives, whether you have teargas or bullets, is the day we are bringing much more chaos in this country.

Terrorism like that by the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) developed because of this kind of repression. We are going to start identifying the individuals who are used in the operations. However, ultimately, I know that the central command comes from the President and then it is brought down to the Deputy IGP who also commands the DPCs. We will start identifying the individuals and take them to courts, some of which are presided over by cadres, but ultimately, they will pay. 

Madam Speaker, we would not like to reach a situation where the country runs into flames simply because particular individuals want power at all costs. It really hurts to see our fellow Ugandans being tortured and brutalised simply because you do not want people to express their opinions –(Member timed out.)

5.08
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko):  I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing us to debate this matter on the Floor of Parliament. You recall that I was the first person to take on this pink substance and the person who commanded it was the late Assistant IGP Kaweesi. 

Madam Speaker, we are operating in a multiparty system. I am a secretary-general of a party; mobilisation or recruitment is not done in this House but out there. It is not done in a boardroom. It is very painful that you allowed a multiparty system but you are the same leader blocking it. It does not make sense. You come here, we appropriate money and we share it amongst parties to go carry out their functions. However, as for you, you carry out your functions using state resources and you do not allow us to function. It is very painful. Even the Bible and the Koran do not permit this. 

If Ndugu Rugunda was here, I would have again told him that he is only good at saying “Ndugu”. We were tasked here as secretaries-general of parties in the House together with the police, people in the Prime Minister’s office, and hon. Rukutana who was representing the Attorney-General, to go and work on mechanisms – At that time, it had also been bad like now. We were asked to find out what measures we should apply. We worked and came up with regulations to operationalise the political organisations Act. However, they have never come here. It came out clearly in that meeting that the police are only informed.  There were clear indications that even in a hotel, a private or public place, police had no authority.

However, what is happening is very painful. They are doing it because the middle income status promise of 2020 has collapsed. You recall that President Museveni said that there would be a car produced in Uganda by 2018 but there is no car yet. Now he has discovered that defeating the Opposition is not easy, so he wants to use force. 

Madam Speaker, we want you to help us as the President of CPC and a very good Speaker. Can’t you tell your friends that there is a problem in this country which needs to be addressed? As you are seated, they say –(Interruption)– I am a secretary-general, Madam Speaker. In our rules, it says that this side will be for the Opposition and that side will be for Government and you have obeyed this –(Interjection)– The Independents are part of us; in fact, they are independent of each other. Madam Speaker, you have done this as the rules say. However, why haven’t you allowed the multiparty system to function? If they do not want a multiparty system as per the Constitution, we ask them to come out and say that they do not want it. 

When we were moving from a one-party system to a multiparty system, Ocheger, who carried the dove, was brought around - Hon. Butime, you recall him. Where is he now? He is the Ambassador in charge of West Africa. We have discovered many things. We had told the House here that the multiparty system should be brought without even going for a referendum to waste money. President Museveni was the one saying, “we need a multiparty system; tubejjeko”, meaning “let them go”. We have now gone, why are you following us? Give us space to operate so that we compete for power as other people have done.

In 1980, I was in senior 2 and I followed the campaigns seriously. I am going to give you two examples and I conclude. President Museveni by then was a Uganda Patriotic Movement (UPM) candidate. He came to Mbale with Kivejinja. We were the only small kids who brought him bananas to eat at Cricket Grounds. When he was also standing as an MP, one man called Kutesa won and he got only seven votes in his area, like his name. Everybody said he would never be a president, but he is now the President.

When we were making amendments to the Constitution, there was a friend of mine called hon. Dan Kyewalabye who used to sit that side. He said, “We do not want Independents in this Constitution.” I stood up and told him, “Dan, you are not sure; these parties are not so good now. They will rig you and you will need some space.” Indeed, when he went to Kiboga and contested, he lost, but he stood again as an Independent. If you meet Dan Kyewalabye today in town, his situation is very bad. (Member timed out)

5.14
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kitagwenda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I saw the video and saw for myself what happened in Kireka, especially while Dr Besigye was being sprayed with that water. I put myself in the shoes of two people - Dr Besigye after seeing the video and the officers enforcing the law. 

One time, as I was going to my constituency, around Kyengera the traffic police stopped me. I did not know that they were stopping me. So, inadvertently, I drove on until Masaka when other traffic police stopped me. When they stopped me, they told me that I had been stopped by police but I did not stop and that was why they arrested me. I was embarrassed as a Member of Parliament because there was no reason as to why traffic police would stop me and I do not stop. 

I asked myself, “Why don’t senior Ugandans comply with legal orders?” If the police instructed you to stop a rally, it is unfair but as a senior citizen, maybe it makes more meaning that you keep away from the scene so that it does not become as glaringly bad as it was.

When I put myself in the shoes of the enforcing officers, I again asked the same question - If I were them, why would I spray water on an individual as if with an intention to finish him off? This is because the water hit Dr Besigye and he fell on the car; he stood up again defiantly – like he normally does – but they sent more water, it hit him and he fell again.

The Minister of Internal Affairs might need to check this a bit. We might have young people in the police who are overzealous in execution of their duties and they end up putting the Government’s name in disrepute. You can apply force to effect an arrest but you should apply it reasonably. What I saw was extreme force –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: I would like to thank my young brother, hon. Abbas Agaba, for agreeing to clarify on this, and I have been following him closely. Would you clarify on what you call “complying with a legal order from the police” when the police have kept quiet on receiving your letter and when they are not making reference to any law? What would constitute their order into a lawful order if it is not hinged on any piece of legislation?

MR AGABA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. The clarity on lawfulness and legality of the orders of the police may be better clarified by the Minister of Internal Affairs. As a Member of Parliament, like I said, the police stopped me on the road and I did not know they were stopping me, so inadvertently, I passed them. When they stopped me in Masaka, I stopped because the police knew why they wanted to talk to me and then they informed me what they wanted to talk to me about. I take that as lawful.

However, maybe it is necessary for the Minister of Internal Affairs to look through the way our young men and women in uniform are enforcing arrests. Sometimes they have applied excessive force that even when you are just watching, you feel there is another motive in the enforcement of the order. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.19
MR ASHRAF OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I feel very concerned because Ugandans have allowed democracy to function in this country by giving freedom to political parties to exist. In my view, if the law regarding assembly is short of some issues, let us revisit it. I am saying this because if we all subscribe to the same Constitution of Uganda, then there must be some respect for leaders in the Opposition. I was particularly concerned by the way police handled Dr Kiiza Besigye. That man is a political leader; the officers ought to have given him respect as a senior citizen of Uganda. That was my first concern.

Secondly, if we feel that nothing should be done, maybe there should be no assemblies. Let us try to tell Ugandans that nobody is allowed to assemble now until we reach the time of elections. Let us be clear to all political parties. Otherwise, if others are allowed to operate, then we must respect their rights during that kind of operation. 

The police is the Uganda Police Force and it is for all of us. They must act professionally when handling people. That is my appeal and prayer. If there is anything to do, these are Ugandans and they must also be respected like any other Ugandans. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.20
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. If you read the Public Order Management Act, even in the principle, it says, “The underlying principle of managing public order is to regulate exercise of freedom to assemble and to demonstrate together with others peacefully and unarmed and to petition in accordance with Articles 29 (1) (d) and 43 of the Constitution.”

When you go down to Part II of the Act, it is on regulation of public meetings. At that time when we debated this law, we asked, “Do meetings of registered political parties fall within this Act?” I remember hon. Fred Ruhindi was here and he said, “No, they will not fall under this Act.” 

We then proceeded and constructed section 4, which is on the meaning of “public meeting”. We clearly said, in section 4 (2), thus: “A public meeting does not include - (a) a meeting convened and held exclusively for a lawful purpose of any public body…” We then proceeded to define a public body and we said, in section 4(4), “For the purpose of subsection (2), a public body includes Government or any department of Government, a local government, a body established by the Constitution or an Act of Parliament, a registered political party or political organisation or a registered trade union.”

Therefore, if we go by this, would it not be procedurally right to write to the police and remind them that first of all, registered political parties fall within the meaning of a public body and we said that in section 4 (2) (a) that a public meeting will include any meeting convened for a lawful purpose of any public body. A public body includes registered political parties; why should the police interfere with meetings, which are allowed by this law? 

Secondly, do they have the power to prohibit? They have power to regulate. Would it not be procedurally right - I do not know whether the Minister of internal Affairs is here - to write to the police and remind them that they are overstepping their boundaries? They are supposed to act within the confines -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: We shall handle that. However, in addition, those parties are not just registered; they are funded from the Consolidated Fund.
 
5.24
Ms JANEPHER NANTUME EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to add to what other people have said. The root cause of all these injustices happening to the Opposition is the coming into force of a multiparty system. When I look at such scenarios – (Interjections) - I would like to speak reality here, other than being a hypocrite. 

Madam Speaker, just because we started operating under a multiparty system, parties are pulling to their sides. First of all, the NRM will want to remain in government as a ruling party yet at the same time, the Opposition are also fighting to take over government and rule. Therefore, what happens in such circumstances? You will find that sometimes, even when the Opposition says a right thing, the NRM will not allow it. Also, in the NRM if something right is said, the Opposition will keep on opposing it. Therefore, we have not reached a common goal. 

In most cases, people are part of the NRM or Opposition not because they have it deep inside their hearts; some people here are NRM but at night they are in the Opposition –(Interjection)– Yes! I said that I am going to speak facts. Some people are in the Opposition during day but at night they are NRM. Therefore, with this kind of hypocrisy, even when meetings are held, you will find somebody trying to say that these people have applied for this and the other, they want to have their party meeting here but they are violating - (Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. According to the Constitution, one belongs to a party willingly; they are not forced. Like the Bible says, when one pronounces that they going to follow Jesus, we take them to be that. There is no yardstick anywhere that measures the heart and to what extent one believes in Jesus. When I sit this side, I am one hundred per cent NRM; when you sit the other side, you are in the Opposition.

Is the honourable colleague in order to say that some people say they are NRM when deep in their hearts they do not belong to NRM? Is the honourable member in order to imagine that there are some who are not? Is she in order to judge somebody who willingly joined the party?

THE SPEAKER: She can substantiate.

MS NANTUME EGUNYU: Madam Speaker, the English say that actions speak louder than words. It is not just merely saying that you are in the NRM or the Opposition but your actions can tell where you belong.

I told you that the multiparty system created a gap within us. Even if we say that police officers are taking sides, naturally within a person, a civil servant of any kind, even if they do not belong to any party, they still belong somewhere inside them. Therefore, at the end of the day, while we have had scenarios where the DPCs in certain districts take sides with the Opposition and punish some NRM supporters, there are circumstances where a DPC will side with NRM and punish people in the Opposition. It is just because it is difficult to rule out the fact that someone’s heart belongs somewhere even if they are civil servants. 

Madam Speaker, on that same point, we need to do something. As human beings, let us think through this. If the Government of Uganda employs you and it is the same Government that pays you, when you get an order from above that such and such a thing must not happen, because somebody knows that the livelihood of his family is from the Government of Uganda, he will try to meander around, even if he has to violate the Constitution. At the end of the day, people’s rights will be violated.

In conclusion, as the Chairperson of Committee on Human Rights, I have come to learn that while you want your rights to be observed, make sure that you also observe the rights of others. Secondly, as you want your rights to be observed, follow the Constitution of Uganda.

5.30
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This matter affects all political parties because this is a House of representatives and we need to speak for those people out there and for ourselves.

Madam Speaker, I was not here when you were enacting that law but we respect it. However, I think the Government fell short of what they wanted embedded in that law because it was not put there. The Government ought to follow the law and respect other parties in the Opposition because these Opposition political parties draw money from the Consolidated Fund. How can they utilise this money when you curtail them from operating? We need to restrain the Ministry of Internal Affairs from suppressing the rights of the Opposition because it is the Government that allowed the Opposition to exist. 

Madam Speaker, in 2012, I came to your office with a team of councillors from Kanungu when commissioners of this Parliament had spoken about the late Nebanda. We had come to rescue our colleague, hon. Baryomunsi. On 28 December, I organised a welcome party for hon. Baryomunsi in Kanungu District. We went together with you to Jinja Road Police Station and then to court and stood surety for him. By that time, he was still speaking for the people. (Laughter) When we organised the welcome party for him, he was an NRM member and a commissioner of this Parliament. I remember that my colleague, who was standing behind me, was shot in the leg. He was a supporter of hon. Baryomunsi. 

Therefore, it is not only the Opposition. On 5 October, they came to my constituency to launch a campaign for somebody to stand against me because I did not “touch” the Constitution. The police should be there to protect Ugandans. They should know that the law does not segregate.

Finally, why should we support these Opposition parties? Why should we support the Inter Party Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD) when we are categorically restraining them from operating? How can we run relays when you are tying my legs and yet you want me to compete with you? Let us be civil and modern in applying this law. Otherwise, it is punching holes in our operations, especially for the mighty party that I belong to, which has brought democracy in the country.

5.33
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Patriotism has no borders. We teach patriotism in our schools and if we are to become patriotic, we have to make sure that the Opposition and ruling party politicians are well catered for and their treatment should be befitting of a politician. Seeing Dr Kiiza Besigye being treated like that - being bent over by the force of the water - (Interjection) - Yes, the water was pushing against him and he was bending forward. The force of the water was so much that Dr Besigye could not withstand it. That means that someone can get injured in their spinal cord or even die. In such circumstances, if someone dies yet he is one of the most popular opposition leaders, what happens to the integrity of this country?

We are promoting tourism so that we can get more foreign exchange to make sure that we survive as a country. There is no way you can attract tourists when there is chaos in the country. That came in addition to what was happening in Makerere University. What do you think the Makerere University students and other university students are learning from the circumstances in this country? They are learning from what is happening and they are becoming hard-core fighters. We have to make sure that we practice empathy so that we teach our young children to respect others.

Madam Speaker, hon. Kaberuka said that it does not only happen to the Opposition –(Member timed out)

5.37
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I personally appreciate and indeed all Ugandans appreciate that we have a multiparty dispensation well embedded in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. However, its contextual applicability on ground is very contentious. I am worried about the precedents that we are setting. 

I usually want to liken these situations to a flowing stream; whatever you apply to the water upstream will be received downstream. If we are the generation that is preparing something good for the generations to come - our children and grandchildren - is this the environment that we would want our children to live in? We are now teaching people that when you disagree with someone and if you feel stronger than them physically, you can beat them, frustrate them, pull them here and there. This is very dangerous.

We need to be an example. Actually, you cannot teach patriotism in schools; it is a practical lesson. You cannot teach people to like something that you hate. Therefore, if we love Uganda, we must make sure that we practice what can display that.

Yesterday, I was coming from my constituency. I stay on that side of town where the fracas was and I was almost caught up in that scuffle. I just told my driver to make sure that he disappears. I do not know how he disappeared. I watched what was happening. This is very dangerous. 

I am a member of the NRM but I would not want us to set a bad example. If we have bad elements in our forces that are trying to carry out such activities to discredit the Government, then we need to be careful. We have young, energetic and patriotic people who can serve in these positions. 

I would like to tell Ugandans that we need to learn to tolerate and listen to each other. We can have amicable and non-violent ways to solve our misunderstandings, other than flexing fists. We are setting a wrong example. If you dare fight at home in the presence of your children, you will see what your children will do tomorrow. That is why we are going to find a problem tomorrow. The whole country will be plunged into anarchy because we have trained the countryside people that they must fight whoever they feel has angered them, as long as they feel strong. As Ugandans, I think we have to see which kind of country and environment we would want our children to live in tomorrow. I thank you. 

5.40
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo North County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was in Tororo when this happened and I did not have the opportunity to watch it. However, following the debate and also given what is happening in the country, I would like to say something. First of all, you all know I am an NRM-leaning Independent. I would like to say that in actual sense, the Opposition legitimises NRM’s stay in power. The NRM party would not be the NRM it is today in terms of respect internationally if the international people were not seeing that there is some semblance of opposition in this country. 

I personally come from a marginalised society in Tororo, so I know what it means to be marginalised. One time, when I was practising my political activism in Tororo, I was earmarked for arrest. Just because I am a very sharp woman –(Interjections)– Yes, I am telling you – 

THE SPEAKER: Order!

MS NYAKECHO: There were actually five or six trucks of the police and army combined. I was supposed to be arrested simply because I agitate for my people. They looked for me in my home in Kajarau Village but I was not there. They looked for me in the hotel I normally stay in, up to the ceiling board and under the beds. So I know what it means, Madam Speaker. My only crime was standing up for my people on this issue of Tororo, which you know about. 

I would like to beg and request for the indulgence of this Government. Let us learn to stay together. The fact that we moved away from the movement system to the multiparty dispensation meant that we were ready and willing to tolerate each other. It also meant that you have to give room for dissenting voices to also stand and speak for what they believe in. It did not mean that you are going to practice intolerance to those who dissent from your views. 

I would like to appreciate and commend His Excellency the President because I see him pulling the Opposition to his side. However, the people under him - these small people who say, “order from above” - misbehave a lot. I would like to request the Minister of Internal Affairs to please – (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite the Prime Minister.

5.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is true that in 2012, I was travelling to my constituency via Fort Portal and I received a call when I was in Mubende that I was going to be arrested –(Interjection)– Yes, the bridge to Kanungu had collapsed, so we were passing through that route. 

A few kilometres to Fort Portal, I found a roadblock and the police stopped me. I was in a parliamentary vehicle and I stopped. They told me that I was under arrest, to which I complied. Of course, I had the capacity to cause a scene if I had wanted to but as a law abiding Ugandan, I understood that this was a lawful order from the police and so I complied. I was placed under arrest and the rest was processed through God. I defeated Government through God. 

It is not true that when I was being received in Kanungu, somebody was shot. At least, I am not aware of that. The point I just wanted to illustrate –(Interjection)– Yes, nobody was shot. Unless the name of the person is produced -(Interruption) 

MR KABERUKA: Madam Speaker, I am constrained to raise a point of order against my brother. However, I must because this is the second time this has happened. There was a time I talked about the petition we had presented to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, where he had made that presentation on our behalf to the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development on the iron ore in Kanungu. The one who presented the petition on our behalf said, on the microphone here, that he had never seen such a petition. 

This time round, he has again denied that somebody was shot in Rugyeyo and this culminated into a meeting with the President. Surely, I would – 

THE SPEAKER: Who is the person that was shot? 

MR KABERUKA: The person that was shot was called Karyejirira from Rugyeyo. Madam Speaker, a boda boda rider, his neighbour, was also crippled. He has denied everything. Everything was good. 

Madam Speaker, is it a practise in this House that when you seat on the Front Bench, you cease to speak the truth? (Laughter) Is it in order for the minister to deny the reality? This is the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, do you know of the man who was shot? Were you aware that someone was shot?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The so called Karyejirira or boda boda from Rugyeyo - Rugyeyo sub-county is where I come from. I can categorically state without fear of contradiction that no such person exists. (Laughter) Nobody was shot dead. No boda boda was shot in that incident. These are just mere fabrications, lies and falsehoods, which I receive with a lot of contempt and disregard. I am also not aware of the petition he is referring to. 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, the commands of civility, dictates of common sense and the rules of this House require us to treat everyone with decorum. By my brother, Dr Chris Baryomunsi, receiving information and debate from another colleague of this House with contempt and expressly mentioning the words, “with contempt”, is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think both Members used a certain level of unparliamentary language. Please conclude. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to categorically state that I do not take alcohol and when I arrived in Kanungu, I was sober. There was nobody that was shot. If Parliament is interested, it can investigate this matter. 
	
It is also not correct to just use the platform of Parliament to state falsehoods on this Floor. 

Madam Speaker, the point I was making is that as political actors, we must also exercise discipline and respect the police. My understanding is that if a police officer in uniform stops you, courtesy demands that you should respect the police officer. You may not agree with the reason he is stopping you but if you try to resist, the police officers are usually obliged to make sure that they effect the arrest. 

Yesterday, I did not see what happened but I suspect that maybe Dr Kizza Besigye could have resisted the orders of the police –(Interruption)

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The House is debating about the brutality of the forces; the police and the army. Unanimously, the House is saying, can’t they handle people humanely? See the Makerere issue, see the fisheries issue, see the Opposition issue and see the Parliament issue. Can’t we be humane? 

What I would like to put across is that the brutality that was meted on Dr Kizza Besigye and the journalists where they broke the windows of the car and smashed it and sprayed pepper on somebody; how would you submit to such a person, however good you are? Is he in order to say or assume that people should also be humble to the police when we are lamenting that the police is doing a disservice to this country and they needed to be in order? 

THE SPEAKER: I did not watch what happened. Maybe someone can tell us what happened. Did it happen? What caused the breaking and the water cannon?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, I do not condone brutal force by the police. The point I was making is that when the police stops you, it is also courteous enough on our side as political actors – (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, my good colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that when Dr Chris Baryomunsi was a Member of the Opposition, he was arrested and taken to Jinja Road Police Station. I went with hon. Andrew Baryayanga to visit him in incarceration. We told him that people were demonstrating in Kanungu because of his arrest and they shot at them. You cried like a baby –(Laughter)– you really cried and I have never seen a man cry like that. 

I just wanted to remind you that this world is round; people were shot dead because of you and please, do not talk because you are that side. I just wanted to remind you how you cried and I will never forget that thing; to see a tall huge man crying like that. (Laughter) 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, for the humour. It is not true that people were shot dead and that he came and I cried. Despite the interruptions, the point I was making is that police should do its work professionally but as political actors, we must learn to respect the police. I do not in any way condone the action of police using brutal force.

The second point I would like to make is that we have created a lot of adversarial politics in Uganda – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When Dr Baryomunsi was a commissioner, I was then the Leader of the Opposition and by virtue of my office, I was a commissioner. I also went to see Dr Baryomunsi at Jinja Road Police Station. 

He has even denied me as a friend, you can imagine! That explains that he can deny everything. Before you came in, I was telling Dr Lyomoki that this man cried like a baby at Jinja Road Police Station. When a big man cries, it is very bad –(Laughter)

Therefore, is Dr Baryomunsi in order to deny, knowing very well that crying is normal. By the way, crying is normal; you can cry when you are happy and when you are in pain. When we went there, you had both. Is he in order to deny that he did not cry, yet we saw him crying? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was not with you when you went to the police station and I cannot rule on that. Please, conclude.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Today, you have had a field day on me. For the record, he did not visit me. Yes, he did not. Therefore, the issue of crying does not arise because he does not have extrasensory ability to see somebody when he is not physically there. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I think we have created a lot of adversarial politics in Uganda, especially after allowing multipartism to take part. I agree with the comments made that we must tolerate each other as political parties because political parties are built on ideologies and the ideologies may be different. However, we must see how we can accommodate each other and create political space for each and every person.

Therefore, I also call upon the FDC because sometimes, you take a defiant approach. We have created different platforms including Inter Party Organisation for Development (IPOD), where political parties represented in this House have a forum where such issues can also be deliberated on. Let us use the different platforms including the IPOD where Dr Kizza Besigye is a member and is supposed to be chairing; to use such platforms and discuss issues so that the various political parties can be in harmony. 

However, if it requires – maybe the Attorney-General can give us an interpretation of the Act and in case the police is not interpreting it then it can be advised. We need to work in harmony with various political parties. This kind of beleaguerous and brutal force should not be there. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.57
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I of course, regret although I did not see Dr Besigye falling and I did not see the entire exercise. However, we are also aware that Dr Besigye is an Opposition diehard. Whatever happens, he sticks to his guns of course at a cost. The more you stick to your guns, the more you have it. 

I would like to say that in addition to what you are going to direct, I also direct the Minister of Internal Affairs to come on Thursday and explain the circumstances that led to the use of water instead of teargas. (Laughter)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, again, the conventions of African civility do not permit me to be rude to Gen. Moses Ali by virtue of his age, experience and service right from the Amin Government through to this Government. I have respect for such people who are able to steer through several governments, operating on different scales. 

The debate on the Floor is about brutality of the police. It is about facts of what exactly happened and, thirdly, about legality. I appreciate the second comment, which was a directive by the Prime Minister to the minister to bring facts on the Floor of the House. However, by justifying brutality of teargas, I am sure he just missed out the word “bullets” because it is the language that was mostly used when he was still youthful in the 1970s. (Interjection)

My crying friend, the minister –(Laughter)– is reminding me to be respectful. I am obliged. 

Is the Prime Minister, therefore, in order to justify a different form of brutality before we even receive facts through the minister that he is ordering to bring us facts?

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I do not know whether you were looking for an alternative means of picking between teargas and water because that is what you are proposing. We are asking ourselves; was it necessary? Is that what should be done? That is what we were asking. 

GEN. (RTD) ALI: If my colleagues understand my English properly, I am actually sympathising with the situation. The policeman had several alternatives on site. It is said that the police is too use reasonable force. 

I am, therefore, asking the minister to explain why – if we are not going to sympathise with this police officer – why did he decide to use water instead of – (Laughter). That is what I said. Why? He did not use teargas; so we cannot say he used teargas. He used water instead. It is still wrong though. 

Allow me to finish because the more you keep talking, the more mistakes I might make - (Interjections) - it does not matter that I was in Luzira. I remember everybody and you will be the next. (Laughter)  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, when the whites were leaving South Africa and apartheid was going down, they asked the minister of internal affairs what he wanted them to do for his ministry. He said that they need to make the prisons better, build them well, clean them and provide toilets and other amenities. They told him that he was mad but he said, “We are all potentially prisoners.” 

I have no problem with you telling me that I will be a prisoner. What I would like to say is that we know the General very well. When he was in Luzira with Kazoora – they used to carry him because his stomach would sag on the floor and he could not manage to stay straight. We had to use some Bagisu to help him to survive. Having got that experience – (Interjections) - he might have gone there wrongly. 

To be a General, you must have a heart. You do not have to be very bad-hearted but should have a heart of kindness. The force police used would have been the same energy they would have used to guard the meeting to continue but they used it to disperse the meeting instead. 

Is the General in order to come here to threaten people, including Nandala-Mafabi who cannot be threatened? Is he in order to threaten us? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not think it was a threat. I understand it to mean that everybody here has the potential to go to Luzira. I do not think he was threatening you. He was just saying that all of us are eligible. Please conclude. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: It is indeed true. I actually sympathise with him. Who knows? What will stop him from being next? Nothing will stop you from going to Luzira sooner or later. 

I would like to tell a small story – (Interjections) - I do not wish people dead. I was in Luzira with Muwanga. I actually asked Muwanga whether when he was a minister he refused to approve the buying of mattresses for some of the prisoners and he did not deny. 

The truth is that Luzira is not for specific people; it is for all. If you are a politician, you do not rule out going there. 

The day I was acquitted in High Court, I came straight here and I warned these colleagues that everybody is a potential prisoner. Going back to my directive, the Minister of Internal Affairs is directed to come and explain what happened to Dr Kizza Besigye, the policeman using water instead of teargas notwithstanding. 

Madam Speaker, I sympathize but Dr Besigye is also - in fact, he was saying the car was broken into. That was 10 years ago and he is still talking about it. His case should be about the use of water. 

THE SPEAKER: I think the minister will tell us.

MS AOL: Madam Speaker, I would like to make some clarification that the pepper spraying was done after the breaking of the windscreen. For this water, which was sprayed onto Dr Besigye, if there were no people inside his car, it could have taken him off and he could have died. The good thing is that there were people inside his car to hold his leg to stop the water from taking him. 

This is what we are telling you. We are all Ugandans. This is just a political difference. We need to be tolerant to each other. Today, it is Dr Kizza Besigye and tomorrow it will be someone else. When we were discussing the Public Order Management Bill here, the former Prime Minister dismissed whatever we said as corridor whispers. He tasted it when he decided to contest. Let there be space for all of us. What we are crying for is space and nothing else.

On 25th October, hon. Gen. Otaffiire and his group were in Gulu and they were able to use public grounds – Boma Grounds – which we can never use because we are in the Opposition. What is that? Must we come and cry before you people here when you brutalise us in the Opposition? Must we pick up arms and fight? We want to quarrel; we want to abuse; we want to fight but -

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude, Prime Minister.

GEN. (RTD) ALI: Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude that God should protect Uganda. This country suffered for 40 years since 1966 – let me tell you a brief story. Since 1966 - (Interjection) - it does not matter, I am still here. (Laughter) From 1966 to 2005 – those are 40 years of this kind of problems. Let us be tolerant. Therefore, it is worth directing the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and explain the circumstances. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Prime Minister. We note and acknowledge the directive to the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and answer about this incident but I think people need to know whether there is multipartism in this country and whether it should be practiced. In 2005, I am one of those who did not want us to leave the Movement System but because there were many who said, “Let us go”, I said okay, let us go. 

We agreed to go multipartism and parties were registered – I think there are 38 in this country, as of the last election and five of them are here. They are funded by Government; I do not know to do what. Is it for them to sit in their offices or to just wear a flag? I think they are given money to organise themselves. Now that the timetables are out, Prime Minister, are the parties allowed to canvass or meet? The country wants to know as we head to the start of the elections.

Prime Minister, we want a commitment from the Government that multipartism is alive in this country and parties are allowed to operate. Tell us how they should operate. If they cannot meet or hold a rally, maybe we should withdraw the funds so that people remain in their homes.

GEN. (RTD) ALI: Madam Speaker, the status quo remains – (Interjection) - the status quo is that this country is ruled under multipartism. It was the choice of the people in 1976 when there was a referendum.

THE SPEAKER: It was 2005.

GEN (RTD) ALI: 2005? Okay. (Laughter) Yes, I am bound to forget – (Interjection) - I must worry because I may give wrong statistics. I am glad the Speaker has corrected me. 

Madam Speaker, the status quo has not changed. The country is on course, these problems notwithstanding –(Interjection)– the problems are what we have been discussing the entire evening. If you do not know the problems - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us go to Item No. 7. The Chairperson Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs had something to say.

6.16
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Speaker, I had asked hon. Alex Byarugaba to do it on my behalf when I was delayed and I would like him to continue with the instruction to raise the matter on my behalf.

6.16
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Madam Speaker, I rise under rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda to ask this House for extra time to consider the following succession–related Bills tabled on 14 August 2019, which were supposed to have been reported on by 17 October 2019:

    a) The Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) (Amendment) Bill, 2019;
    b) The Administrator-General (Amendment) Bill, 2019;
    c) The Estates of Missing Persons (Management) (Amendment) Bill, 2019;
    d) The Probate (Resealing) (Amendment) Bill, 2019;
    e) The Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2019; and
    f) The Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2018 – a Private Member’s Bill.

Madam Speaker, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs seeks for an extra 25 days to be able to complete this work.  

The Electoral Reforms Bills 

On 19 September, this House granted the committee an additional 25 days to conclude these Bills. However, the House was sent on recess and Members requested to use the recess to touch base with their constituents, like every one of us did during the recess.

Madam Speaker, we are at the tail end of the process. We, therefore, request for an additional 20 days to be able to conclude on the Electoral Reforms Bills. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, are those 20 or 25 working days? Do they include the weekends?

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Speaker, these are 20 working days. You all know that during weekends, just like any one of you, we also would like to touch base with our constituents.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee. To begin with, the first laws are very important. As you have directed, Madam Speaker, Members should take this information to the countryside. The administration of estates is a serious matter and that is why people are having problems. All these succession Bills are very important.

Since the committee has requested for 20 working days, I would like to say that for these Bills to be successfully amended, we should give the committee more time to go to the countryside. To begin with, the 25 working days are few. If the committee is going to the districts, I think they will need about 40 working days to work on these laws very well. These are the laws that people are using to cheat widows and orphans.

Secondly, I have here the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Act, which we handled in 2010. That was when we amended section (5) of the principal Act. It says, “The secretary shall hold the office for a term of five years, renewable once.”

Madam Speaker, five years multiplied by two is 10 years. According to this law, the current Secretary of the Electoral Commission is in office illegally. In fact, he is the one pushing for these amendments. (Laughter) The Secretary has been there since 2001 and he has become a fixture in the Electoral Commission.

Madam Speaker, we would like to plead with you that these electoral reforms need a lot of time. Look at the old laws we have; have they really been implemented? I have only given an example of one but some of the Articles have never been operationalised to date. 

Therefore, I would like to propose that we give this committee enough time to work on the succession Bills so that we get better electoral reforms in order to have a better election in 2021.

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Speaker, I think this was a very good submission from my honourable colleague, the Chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts. We are only asking for these extra days well knowing that we are a time barred.

From that considered view and the fact that we need to come out with something that is smooth and good for everyone, like he has said, for the good and smooth running of this country, we do not decline the 40 working days. We promise that we will try our utmost to ensure that we bring you a very smooth law; something that you will all live to say, “Yes, I think this is a committee that has taken time to come up with good work.”

Madam Speaker, we have carried out fantastic consultations around the country and I can assure you that we will bring a very good report within those days, as proposed by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. We can consult more, should need arise. Thank you.

MR OBOTH: I am afraid that we are constrained regarding the electoral reforms. We should have reported the other day because it is affecting the calendar and the roadmap. Therefore, whereas we might be excited about the generosity of 40 working days for the succession laws, I think we are comfortable with the 20 days for the electoral reforms since we have done the consultations and we were almost concluding. 

Madam Speaker, we were actually considering drafting the report but as you know, the political parties came and added an afterthought. The Uganda Parliamentary Women's Association (UWOPA) is also yet to submit. We are waiting for a few entities as we do not want to leave anyone behind. Otherwise, if the 20 working days are granted, beginning today, we shall be able to - 

Regarding going for consultations, that move has financial implications. We would be glad that through your Chair, you provide the guidance. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chair, I think the electoral reforms are urgent and you should expeditiously handle them. If we give you 40 days, it will take us into the Third Meeting and that will mean you will report on the succession reforms in February.

I am just alerting you that we are moving into the Third Meeting, which is the Budget session and we will have to balance the boat with both our needs.

Honourable members, if there is no objection, the extension is granted for the electoral reforms and the succession related laws. We shall deal with the issue of financing. Thank you. Let us go to the next item.

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Speaker, earlier on you read item four and the minister in charge of that item was out of this House. I have looked across and I see the minister is around. I would like to beg your indulgence whether that item can be recalled. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Are you rising on that matter?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, last week on Thursday, when talking about Njeru Stock Farm, you said that you would give guidance today. I have brought another file to deal with the matter because I am an interested party. Have you changed your mind? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No. What happened is that yesterday, the complainants brought me three kilogrammes of files regarding that issue, which I have not yet read. I want to first read them but I will give my ruling before the end of the week.

MR NANDALA-AMAFABI: Madam Speaker, can I bring my file as well? I also have five kilogrammes of files here. 

THE SPEAKER: I will put it on the Order Paper and you can bring them. Item 3(b).

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE REPORT OF THE VERIFICATION TEAM TO LONDON, UNITED KINGDOM, TO RESOLVE THE BOUNDARY DISPUTE BETWEEN TORORO COUNTY AND WEST BUDAMA COUNTY

6.28
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Madam Speaker, on 4 October 2019, the Clerk to Parliament communicated your directive to me, which was made during the 42nd Sitting of the First Meeting of the 4th Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda held on 3 October 2019. 

You directed then that I should prepare a presentation for Parliament on the report of the team that was assigned by H.E. the President to verify the map related to the boundary dispute between Tororo and West Budama. 

The directive further required me to present the report on 28th October, 2019. I previously communicated on the Floor of Parliament that I had already submitted the report to His Excellency the President, who had assigned the team to travel to London. 

When I received your directive, I presented the matter during the Cabinet meeting which was held on Tuesday 22nd September, 2019 at State House, Entebbe chaired by H.E. the President.

The matter was discussed substantively and Cabinet, under Minute 405 (CT 2019), took a decision which I submitted to you, Madam Speaker, through a letter dated 22 October 2019. In that Cabinet extract, H.E. the President advised that the presentation of the report on 28 October 2019 on the Floor of Parliament should be deferred to offer him time to handle the matter to its logical conclusion with the two communities, to avoid possible escalation of the issues at hand. 

He pledged to communicate the position directly to you, Madam Speaker, and to the two parties. In the circumstances, I request the House to receive the information and we wait for H.E the President in his pledge to handle the matter with the two communities and thereafter, I shall present the report on the Floor. I thank you.

MS NYAKECHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank the minister for her communication. I also would like to thank the President because he has done his best although it us who are a little stubborn. Even those who know the truth about what the map says still would like to resist it and that is why there is all this dragging.

However, I would like to beg the indulgence of the minister, given her communication and the Cabinet meeting. She said that the President said that he would call the two groups and also given that fact that -

When I lost my brother; on Saturday, he called me and gave me some detail about how he intends to handle this matter. I would like to request the minister; if she could spearhead the meeting and we get a date for this meeting and probably report back to this House, that would be of help to us instead of keeping us waiting.

Secondly, I would like to lay this map that I have; it is a photocopy of the actual map that we got from London. We paid for it such that just in case - as we wait, at least this Parliament should have some record on this Floor. I beg your indulgence, thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, it would be laid after the minister has presented her report but now it is hanging. Hold on to it, when the minister reports you can lay it.

MS NYAKECHO: That is okay but my first request is that we get an actual date maybe within a week or so such that we prepare to meet His Excellency and put this issue to rest.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the communication but I have some clarification I need on this matter. 

The minister said - and I get worried because hon. Nyakecho said that she was communicating directly with the President and they are even discussing bilaterally how this matter is going to be concluded -(Interruption)- but that was what you said.

MS NYAKECHO: I did not, I would like to correct the information that hon. Okoth Othieno was trying to put across that I was in direct communication; I said that I received a phone call to console me when I lost my brother. That does not mean that I am in communication; so set that record straight, honourable.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude, we have other work.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Maybe sometimes - I do not know whether my niece – anyway, it gives me a lot of discomfort given that this matter was extensively discussed in Cabinet.

However, I need clarification from the minister on this matter. In Cabinet, the Teso Group had somebody to speak for them - (Interjections) - listen (Interruption)

MR ECWERU: Madam Speaker, I listened very attentively to what my colleague the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development presented to this House and I rise to confirm that in the House, it was the Minister of Lands who led the discussion and in Cabinet, we do not have spokespersons of tribes.

Is my colleague in order to insinuate that a tribal discussion took place in Cabinet and that the Iteso spoke because I am an Etesot as you know and one of the leaders of Teso but my leadership of Teso remains in Teso; when I am here, I am a national leader and Cabinet is not a tribal organisation. Is the colleague in order to bring tribal sentiments here?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the ministers of Cabinet are not here; none of these Members attended other than a few of you. So, I do not think that we should quote the details of what was in the Cabinet.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude and we go to hon. Opendi and then finally Vero -

MR OTHIENO: Madam Speaker, the information I have is that among the delegation that went to London included a minister for Teso Affairs. I imagine the minister went there in her capacity to protect the interests of Teso. Otherwise I need to be corrected-(Interruption)

MS NAYAKECHO: Point of order…

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the mission went to London two years ago and there was no dispute about the composition. Do not raise the issue of composition of that delegation now. They went and came back. We just want the report.

MR OTHIENO: Most obliged. The second issue I would like to raise here is that I represent the biggest constituency in Tororo and –(Interruption)

MS OPENDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am a Member of Parliament for Tororo District. I have the biggest constituency and therefore, I wonder what hon. Othieno is saying when he represents seven sub counties and I have over 23. What does he mean that he has the biggest constituency? 

Is he, therefore, in order to give false information that he has the biggest constituency when I am present in this House with the biggest constituency? May be he is referring to the biggest amongst the men. He should clarify; but is he in order to say he has the biggest when he does not? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think he was talking about the biggest among the small ones. (Laughter) 

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Speaker for that wise ruling. My constituency borders with Tororo County represented by hon. Nyakecho. I have traversed that constituency and I am very well versed with what is taking place in my constituency.

The only time I had boundary dispute was with Butaleja - and my colleague is there - and it was resolved. That is the only dispute I am aware of. I have spoken to hon. Yeri and he is also here and I inquired whether he has disputes in his constituency and he tells me no –(Interjection)– Why don’t you listen to me?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what you are discussing is not before this House, please. It is not even on the Order Paper. Let us go to item seven.

6.41
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I really appreciate the indulgence that you have given to this matter. We would also like to thank the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. This is one of the most popular matters in the communities for those who come from Tororo. I am sure they are either glued or listening right now to what is going on.

I am persuaded that the procedural issue that the honourable Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development raised that this matter be handled first between the two communities is in order. I had said here earlier that the matter was still presidential but when it comes back here, we shall get all the time.

I request that - you can now see the members of Parliament from Tororo having mixed issues about what the real issues are. We shall request for time and we speak then others join in. However, I beg that the debate comes to an end as we wait for the minister to tell us when the President will be calling the two communities so that this matter is brought to an end. Thank you.

RESPONSE BY MINISTER TO ISSUES RAISED BY HON. DAVID ABALA ON THE DESTRUCTION OF OVER 40 GRASS-THATCHED HUTS AND BUILDINGS AT ORISAI PRIMARY SCHOOL BY HAILSTORMS

6.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, I would like to handle both the 40 grass thatched houses and Rubirizi. We have responded accordingly at least with humanitarian intervention in the two areas. 

What we have done for Rubirizi and what we have suggested to the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is to respond with planting materials come next planting season. However, for humanitarian intervention in form of food, we have delivered.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Item 7(d). Oh, have you responded to both and supplied in both areas?

MR ECWERU: Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister of Energy and Minerals and he was here.

MR SSENYONGA: Madam Speaker, the procedural matter I would like to raise concerns the Minister for Energy and Minerals. We have come here with issues on several times but even today, when you ordered her to appear tomorrow, you told her to come and tell us about power shortage in a few areas. However, we have serious concerns about the same minister.

Madam Speaker, is it not procedurally right that you order her to come with a full list of all questions that we have submitted on the Floor concerning the same ministry, tomorrow? Today she is not here; even the 32 sub counties - because we got money and it is almost two years ago but there is no survey that was done in 2018 as early as April. Today, there is not even a contractor and there is nothing taking place yet we are paying interest.

Secondly, the Government also came up with a policy of giving power to people without poles. However, when you go to Umeme, there are no meters and many more. Therefore, all those are demands that we would like to know from the honourable minister. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Energy and Minerals should come and respond. However, as I had indicated earlier in my communication, all the remaining questions must be answered by Thursday. And starting this week, I will submit a weekly report to the President to show which ministries have failed to answer over time. 

There are ministries that have continuously been absent from this House. It seems they are not part of us. For those who do not answer by the end of the week, their names will be with the President including the questions that they have failed to answer.

RESPONSE BY MINISTER TO ISSUES RAISED BY HON. CISSY NAMUJJU ON THE INCREASING INFANT AND MATERNAL MORTALITY AT MASAKA REGIONAL REFERRAL HOSPITAL

6.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 2nd October, hon. Cissy Namujju raised a matter of concern regarding the increasing infant and maternal mortality at Masaka Regional Referral Hospital.

Madam Speaker, as a ministry, we would like to acknowledge that although maternal mortality in Uganda has reduced from 438 per 100,000 live births in 2011 to the current 336 per 100,000 live births, we still note that this is high. In light of the above, the situation at Masaka Regional Referral Hospital is as follows; I visited the facility personally about two weeks ago and interfaced with the management team.

Madam Speaker, the referral hospital serves the greater Masaka region, which consists of Masaka, Rakai, Ssembabule, Lyantonde, Kalungu, Bukomansimbi, Kalangala, Lwengo and Kyotera, but also serves the districts of Gomba and Mpigi. 

The region has three district hospitals of Lyantonde, Rakai and Kalisizo and 10 health centres IV. All these health facilities refer patients to Masaka Regional Referral Hospital, some of the patients simply walk in without referrals, and of course, this poses a bit of a challenge.

Madam Speaker, regarding the maternal deaths in the regional referral hospital, we noted that the maternity serves the entire region and this is of course characterised by high numbers of mothers turning up for delivery at the facility. 

According to the annual health sector performance report that we just reviewed about a month ago, Masaka Hospital conducted more deliveries and registered more out-patient department (OPD) attendances than any other regional referral hospital in the entire country. These high numbers require matching numbers of human, material and financial resources to this facility.

Madam Speaker, I will not go into details but for your information, I attached a table showing the deliveries and the deaths at this facility. If you look at the table, although the deaths have been occurring, the numbers have been slightly declining. For instance, if I take from 2016/2017, we had 47 maternal deaths but in 2017/2018, they dropped to 27 and in 2018/2019, dropped to 38.

Madam Speaker, the major causes for these maternal deaths are of eclampsia, which is high blood pressure in pregnancy, postpartum hemorrhage that you all know about. We have some cases of HIV, abortion, sepsis and others like total spinal anesthesia, malaria and anaemia.

However, I would like to state that there was an increased number of deliveries at this hospital. If you look at the year 2012/2013, they only had 2,282. However, the deliveries in 2018/2019 shot up to 10,354 while the total number of deaths, as I reported, has been declining.

Madam Speaker, our observation is that up to 80 per cent of the maternal deaths at this facility are referrals from the lower units and private health facilities. 

We have a challenge that sometimes there are delays in referring mothers to the regional referral hospital and by the time they are sent to this facility, it is almost impossible to save some of their lives. Some of the factors are the late referrals. We have also realised that the results from our recent regional support supervision indicate that most health centre IVs are non-functional as far as emergency obstetrical care services are concerned.

They have medical officers and senior medical officers but some simply do not want to carry out the caesarian sections and simply refer the cases to Masaka and by the time the mothers find transport to get to the facility, it is a bit of a challenge.

The health centres performed less than 10 emergency caesarian sections in the last six months. Well-performing health centres around the country are supposed to perform between 15-25 caesarian sections. That shows that there is a bit of a challenge at the lower health facilities and there is really need for the district leaders to improve on the supervision of these health facilities.

From the support teams that carried out these investigations, they noted gross absenteeism of medical officers, most evidenced in Kyazanga Health Centre IV, Lwengo Health Centre IV and Kiwangala Health Centre IV, all in Lwengo District.

Therefore, the honourable member was right to raise the issue of mothers dying, especially from Lwengo but you can see that the problem is because of the non-functionality of the lower health facilities. Therefore, we need to improve on the supervision and I hope, Madam Speaker, that with the increased payment of these medical officers, we should ensure that they actually produce results.

Madam speaker, the other issues are just information. On overcrowding, as I said, the facility serves the entire region and people are just referring patients to it. 

However, as Government, allow me to state that there is an ongoing maternity complex building. I visited it and it is almost at 90 per cent complete and we hope that it will be commissioned soon. We also hope that we shall be able to receive additional funding so that we can recruit adequate staff at this facility because that also is a challenge. The few staff that are there cannot effectively handle the huge numbers.

Madam Speaker and Members, while Masaka Regional Referral Hospital may appear to have skyrocketing maternal and neonatal deaths, data shows that these deaths have reduced over the years. The deaths are also a reflection of the very high number of deliveries conducted at the hospital with maximum efficiency despite very limited space and a fixed staffing structure.

The current expansion of the maternal and neonatal facilities at the hospital shows marked improvement in specialist remuneration and the planned support to improvement of emergency obstetric services at the districts aimed to reduce maternal and neonatal mortality.

Madam Speaker, our health teams will continue to follow up these cases to ensure there are no maternal and neonatal deaths due to preventable causes. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable Minister. Can you also go to the one of Mparo – the second and the third questions?

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the same date – 2 October 2019, hon. Kamusiime Caroline, MP Rukiga District raised issues regarding the infrastructure at Mparo Health Centre IV located in Rukiga District and the need for targeted intervention by the Ministry to improve on the infrastructure.

I did pledge to visit the facility personally to assess its state. However, this was not possible because I was informed by my director clinical services that the commissioners had just paid a visit to the facility. Therefore, it was not proper for me to go there. I was given this report and just to inform you, 
it is true that Mparo Health Centre IV has very old structures that actually need improvement.

Madam Speaker, we noted that the facility serves neighbouring districts of Ntungamo (especially Rubare), Rukungiri (Kisizi), Rubanda and Kabale (Ndorwa East) continue to seek treatment at this facility. The facility is supposed to supervise lower health facilities. We noted that there is lack of critical human resources to man the health facility.

They do not have a senior medical officer, anaesthetic officer, anaesthetic attendant, theatre nurses, anaesthetic assistant, dispensers, askari, and a health facility inventory management officer. The district informed us that they were in the process of recruiting the above officers.

The acting District Health Officer is the only substantive medical officer for Mparo health facility and this poses a big challenge because you cannot run administrative issues while managing hospital facilities.

However, we would like to appreciate this medical officer because he has been multi-tasking to ensure caesarian sections are done to save lives as well as work tirelessly to perform both responsibilities.

Madam Speaker, regarding the infrastructure that the member specifically raised, we presented to this House a comprehensive report on the state of health. Just like other health facilities in the country, Mparo Health Centre IV needs rehabilitation and infrastructural improvement. They have 10 buildings that are housing 25 staff out of the 42. The maternity has cracks that has already been assessed by the district engineer and requires to be fixed. 

The theatre also needs improvements to have better windows and doors. The space is limited and the maternity laboratory and stores. All these, Madam Speaker, require funding. The facility, however, does not receive, like other Health Centre IVs, PHC development funds. 

However, Madam Speaker, allow me to pledge that now that we have handled some of the hospitals, like Kaberamaido, we are going to look into the budget of the next financial year to see if we can start the infrastructural improvement at this health facility. 

Madam Speaker, I beg that the Member allows us to work with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to start sending some money, beginning next financial year so that, slowly, they can make the infrastructural improvement in this facility. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can you come to item 7 (s)? 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, permit me one second to thank the minister for being thorough and responsive to Parliament, unlike many of her colleagues.   

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF HEALTH TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO ON THE ALLEGATIONS THAT HEALTH FACILITIES ACROSS THE COUNTRY SOLD DONATED BLOOD TO UNSUSPECTING PATIENTS

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, they are happy with you. Can you please come and answer the third question so that we can release you from our Order Paper?

6.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Madam Speaker, the third issue was on selling of blood in the private health facilities. We are still investigating the matter because you know that this is something that is being practised underhand.

Therefore, we are still trying to do some undercover work. Please allow me to report by the end of this month. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, minister. 

7.00
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I totally agree with my grandfather on the sensitivity of the Ministry of Health. They have been very responsive to our concerns. They have always answered them and at least, they try, one minister at a time, to be in Parliament to listen to our debates. I think we need to record this appreciation.

I would also like to inform the minister that sometime back, your ministry gave a statement to the House concerning distribution of free sanitary pads to our girls in schools. I have an official statement, which was done in response to my question. 

Later on, a junior minister made a statement that was covered by the media to say that there is no possibility in the near future that sanitary pads can be made available to girls in schools. I thought there was some contradiction. I have the records but this is not the time for us to do it. 

However, I would like to appreciate that you are always responsive and I pray that the Minister of Health, in conjunction with the Ministry of the Presidency, collaborate and make sure that the issue of sanitary pads is also dealt with. May God bless you! 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think it was the Ministry of Health - I think you are addressing the Ministry of Education and Sports. I do not think the health ministry has ever offered or undertaken to address the issue of sanitary pads. It was the Ministry of Education and Sports. 

7.02
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): In the same spirit of respecting the services of the minister, because it seems she is going to perform, I would like to remind –

THE SPEAKER: No, it is not that she is going to perform but she performs. 

MR KAMUSIIME: She is going to perform more. Madam Speaker, I would also like to put it to her attention that there was a programme to distribute ambulances. I think the challenge the mothers are facing is because there is delayed referral. Sometimes, this happens because they are looking for money to transfer the mothers. 

I think we should help this country to spearhead the distribution of ambulances so that mothers can easily access hospitals. 

7.03
MR BERNARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Madam Speaker, before the minister responds – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this question was specific but now it is becoming a general debate.

MR ATIKU: Madam Speaker, the issues to do with health are very important to us. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, they are but now where will we stop? Everybody will want to – 

MR ATIKU: We have a responsible minister here; so, we should utilise her when she is – 

THE SPEAKER: That is not fair. 

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me record my appreciation. It is indeed true that the honourable Minister of State for Health – if I had the powers, I would have probably made her the Cabinet minister because she has gone an extra mile to investigate some of the allegations brought to this House. 

She has also indeed recorded incidences where the medical officers or nurses are minting money from patients. We had this case in Naguru, which was recorded on camera. Therefore, we commend her because that is what we need. The ministers must be on ground to be able to listen to the challenges the voters go through. 

Having said that, Madam Speaker, I would like to add my voice to what Atat Cecilia raised; the issue of sanitary pads for our girls in schools. We have condoms distributed all over – even in this Parliament. These are procured. If we can procure condoms for free distribution, why is it so difficult for us to also procure sanitary pads, which would help to retain our girls in school?

I think there is a point there. During the last general elections, one of the presidential candidates, who happened to actually win the elections, made a pledge all over the country even on national television that in this term of office, he was going to distribute free sanitary pads. Since that time to date, ministers have come out to tell the public that the President never meant it and so many other things. 

I think the President made a pledge; a recorded promise in both print and on TV. We demand that that pledge is made good before the next general elections. 

Otherwise, there will be no adolescent girls voting for NRM or that particular candidate, when the pledge that was made in the last general election is not fulfilled. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether there is anyone to answer that. It should be the Minister for the Presidency.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural issue. I come from Tororo and our own is being acknowledged and recognised for a good job. I would like to take this opportunity, on behalf of the people of Tororo, to thank the Members who have acknowledged. It is on very few occasions that a minister is acknowledged and recognised, especially by Members like hon. Sseggona. We have to really thank her and we acknowledge her on behalf of the people of Tororo. Thank you very much. 

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. DAVID ABALA ON THE NON-PAYMENT OF GRATUITY AND PENSION TO RETIRED STAFF OF NGORA DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT

7.07
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You will recall that on Tuesday, 1 October 2019, on the Floor of this august House, hon. David Abala, Member of Parliament, Ngora County, raised a concern of non-payment of gratuity and pension to retired staff of Ngora District Local Government. The Ministry of Public Service was directed to update the House on the status of gratuity and pension arrears that are due to retired staff.

Whereas the Ministry of Public Service has the mandate of ensuring proper management of salaries and pensions, the payment of salaries and pensions for all Government workers was decentralised to the responsible Votes effective 1 July 2015. Ngora District is, therefore, responsible for payment of gratuity and pensions to its retired civil servants.

Reports from Ngora District however indicate the following: 

    1. There are 82 pensioners on payroll earning their pension every month. 

    2. There are l6 pensioners who have accessed the pension payroll but are yet to receive their gratuity because of limited budget. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has been notified of this funding gap and a supplementary budget to cater for their gratuity and domestic arrears has been sought. 

    3. There are 24 pension files that were reverted from the Ministry of Public Service to the district upon full decentralisation of pension processing and the processing of pensions and gratuity to the respective pensioners is on-going.

    4.  Ngora District was fully decentralised effective August 2019 and so far, four files have been successfully processed and paid at the Vote. 

The Chief Administrative Officer, Ngora has committed that the district will continue to process pensions and gratuity of the retired staff within the available funds and that both the current and the previous pensioners shall be paid upon receipt of funds from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Madam Speaker, it continues to be a challenge for Votes to access adequate funds to clear all gratuity arrears. Despite these challenges, my ministry undertook a pension census validation exercise to ensure that the National Pension Database is reconciled with the Ministry of Public Service validated biometric database to ensure the integrity of Government pension records.

During the pension census exercise, the ministry matched and continues to match the particulars of the public officers on the Government payroll with the National Identification Register that is the National ID database in pursuance of the directive of the Auditor-General to have a clean payroll.

Madam Speaker, the area that needs intervention urgently is to put in place a mechanism that allows automatic transition from the active payroll to the pension payroll to expedite the processing of pension and gratuity. I am glad to say that the ministry is in advanced stages of acquiring the Human Capital Management System, which will address this particular challenge. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Minister of Public Service.  There is no other question for you on the list. The other ministers are not here.

RESPONSE BY MINISTER TO A QUESTION RAISED BY HON. FRED TURYAMUHWEZA ON THE DELAYED COMPENSATION OF PERSONS AFFECTED BY THE RUKUNGIRI-KANUNGU ROAD PROJECT AND THEIR INTENTIONS TO DISRUPT THE PROJECT, AND UNDERSTAFFING AT THE RUKUNGIRI ZONAL OFFICE OF THE MINISTRY OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, we are responding to questions. Please –(Mr Katusabe rose_) - Why don’t you allow us to – We have called a question.

7.12
MR GODFREY KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Madam Speaker, this is something dear. He is my elder brother so this will be friendly. I am just standing here on behalf of those dying pensioners. They are on their deathbeds just counting days and I have found quite a lot of these in my community, where either a wife or husband to a dying pensioner is saying, “My husband or my wife or my son or my daughter cannot afford the medical bills.”

I wondering whether the ministry, led by a distinguished citizen, can put a provision in the immediate term to cater for dying pensioners because I go through a lot of torture and torment seeing somebody who, by virtue of medical reports, has been told that they have a few days to live but is still struggling to see that his pension issues are sorted.

Madam Speaker, would it not be procedurally right for the ministry to cater for those who do not have time to wait longer? Much appreciated, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I do not know whether you are in position to answer. 

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, indeed the issue that my colleague has raised is very critical and calls for a lot of critical concern and sympathy. However, in these matters, everything depends on money being released by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development so that it can be accessed by the pensioner.

Nonetheless, this is an issue, which we are going to take up and discuss in the ministry and see how we can move to alleviate the plight of our retired public servants who are in dire need of medical attention. We shall discuss it and see how to move and maybe come back here and report.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of State for Lands, Housing and Urban Development (Housing), do you have a response to question (U)?

7.14	
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My senior minister was here and I am not sure whether she had the report. However, I would like to undertake that we shall bring a written response on Thursday this week. 

Furthermore, I would like to comment on the first part of the question about the delayed compensation of persons affected by the Rukungiri-Kanungu road project. The compensation is processed through Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) under the Ministry of Works and Transport.

As the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, our duty is to assess the values but the actual compensation is done by the Uganda National Roads Authority. However, we are going to liaise with UNRA under the Ministry of Works and Transport and bring a comprehensive response on Thursday; both on the part of compensation and also the understaffing at the Ministry’s Zonal Office in Rukungiri which is a new office that has been established and we are trying to staff it. We shall come up with a report on Thursday. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Any other ministers here that are on the list? Okay. Honourable members, we thank you for the work done today. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 7.17 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 6 November 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 

