


Thursday, 30 November 2017

Parliament met at 2.19 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this special sitting, the purpose of which is already known to you. I think I will make a small introduction of the people who have come to be part of this ceremony when the body is in the Chamber. 

(Entrance of the late Deputy Chief Justice Leticia Eulalia Mary Mukasa- Kikonyogo)

National Anthem

East African Anthem

Laying of wreaths

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DEPUTY CHIEF JUSTICE EMERITUS, EULALIA MARY MUKASA- KIKONYOGO

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, before you move that motion, let me recognise in the distinguished strangers’ gallery this afternoon, members from the Judiciary, who have come to be part of this tribute motion. 

In the VIP gallery, we have hon. Deputy Chief Justice, Alfonse Chigamoy Owiny-Dollo; Justice of the Supreme Court, Lady Justice Dr Esther Kisakye; we have Judge of the High Court, hon. Justice Percy Tuhaise; Deputy Registrar in charge of Research, Dr Gladys Nakibuule; the Deputy Registrar (Private Legal Secretary) to the Deputy Chief Justice, Mr Philip Odoki; Deputy Registrar (Mediation and PRO Judiciary), Mr Vincent Mugabo; Deputy Registrar (Commercial Court), Olive Kazaarwe Mukwaya; Deputy Registrar (Inspectorate), Madam Agnes Konge; and Acting Deputy Registrar (Mediation), Ms Joyce Kavuma. They are here to pay respect to the former Deputy Chief Justice, Leticia Kikonyogo who has left us.

On the technical bench behind me, I have the family including the widower, the late Kikonyogo’s sisters, a brother and the rest of the family. I also have hon. Henry Kyemba.

2.33
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): This is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to hon. Lady Justice Leticia Eulalia Mary Mukasa Kikonyogo for her dedicated service to the nation, moved under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS Parliament learnt of the death of the late hon. Lady Justice Leticia Eulalia Mary Mukasa Kikonyogo, which occurred on Thursday, 23 November 2Ol7;

AWARE that hon. Lady Justice Leticia Eulalia Mary Mukasa Kikonyogo at the time of her demise was retired from public service having been the first woman to ascend to several high profile positions especially within the Judiciary where she served for almost 40 years;

FURTHER AWARE that hon. Lady Justice Kikonyogo was the first woman in Uganda to be appointed to the following positions: Magistrate Grade I from 1971-1973, Chief Magistrate between 1973 and 1986, High Court Judge in 1986, Justice of the Supreme Court of Uganda in 1997, and Deputy Chief Justice/Head of Court of Appeal/President of the Constitutional Court of Uganda in February 2001;

RECOGNISING that hon. Lady Justice Leticia Kikonyogo served in various capacities at the international level; she was President of International Association of Women Judges, Regional Director for Africa and President of the National Association of Women Judges, executive member of the African Network for Prevention and Protection Against Child Abuse and Neglect, member of the International Society for Prevention of Child Abuse and Neglect and was nominated to the Committee on Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women;

COGNISANT that her dedicated service extended to serving God in the Roman Catholic Church, led to her appointment as a Papal Dame by Pope Benedict XVI thereby becoming one of the first ever women papal knights in the history of the Catholic Church in Africa;

APPRECIATING that hon. Lady Justice Leticia Kikonyogo dedicated her life to the delivery of justice and the development of Uganda in her service to her country and therefore, deserves the recognition of the Parliament and the State;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by the Parliament as follows:

    1. That Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and the people of Uganda at large for the irreplaceable loss of a distinguished daughter of the country.

    2. That the Parliament takes cognisance of the dedicated service and contribution that hon. Lady Justice Leticia Eulalia Mary Mukasa Kikonyogo has in the course of her illustrious life rendered to the people of Uganda as a former Deputy Chief Justice. 

    3. That we pray to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved and grant hon. Lady Justice Leticia Eulalia Mary Mukasa Kikonyogo eternal rest.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Member of Parliament for Runkungiri Municipality, Member for Kiboga District, Member for Agago, Member for Sheema, and the Member for Makindye-Ssabagabo Constituency. Would you like to speak to your motion?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, this is the justification for the resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Deputy Chief Justice Emeritus Lady Leticia Mary Mukasa Kikonyogo.

As a country, we yet again grieve the sudden loss of a distinguished and iconic figure whose achievements continue to inspire many females in the male-dominated legal arena in our country. Hon. Lady Justice Leticia Eulalia Mary Mukasa Kikonyogo has been extremely intelligent, strong-willed, hardworking and with strong Christian values. 

Hon. Lady Justice Kikonyogo died of a heart attack on 23 November 2017 in Mulago Medical School. Born on 2 September 1940, hon. Kikonyogo started her education at Busuubizi Girls’ Primary School in 1948 and completed her primary school education in 1952. She, thereafter, joined Trinity College, Nabbingo for her Ordinary Level education from 1953 to 1958. After achieving excellent grades, she was admitted to King’s College Buddo where she did her Advanced Level education from 1959 to 1961. She was admitted to Makerere College University where she pursued a Bachelor of Arts degree from 1962 to 1963.

From 1964 to 1966, she pursued further studies in Social Anthropology from Somerville College, Oxford University. She then attended the Inner Temple and Council of Legal Education in London from 1967 to 1968, where she pursued a Bar Course and subsequently graduated as a Barrister at Law. 

Mr Speaker, hon. Lady Justice Kikonyogo is a former Deputy Chief Justice of the Republic of Uganda who has made a historic contribution to our country as a refined academician, human rights activist and an impeccable personality. 

Hon. Kikonyogo served Uganda with integrity and dedication, thereby making many wonderful achievements that have benefited Uganda ever since she joined the Judiciary in the 1971. Her contributions have been phenomenal in Uganda, Africa and the world at large.  She was the first person to publish on domestic violence, which earned her accolades nationally and internationally.
The country has lost an accomplished woman lawyer with the highest sense of justice, a spiritual mother, farmer, an academician and an activist in the pursuit of women emancipation, children’s rights and dispensation of justice. Despite all the titles she held, she dedicated her life to championing the rule of law, good governance, outstanding leadership and service delivery in Uganda and beyond. She indeed lived her life selflessly in order to serve the people of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, hon. Kikonyogo had an immense contribution in the country in several portfolios. She was, among others, lecturer at the Institute of Public Administration from 1968 to 1969 and State Attorney in the Department of Public Prosecution from 1969 to 1971, where she won several recognitions and became a trendsetter. For example, she was the;

    a) First woman Magistrate Grade I in 1971
    b) First woman Chief Magistrate, in 1973
    c) First woman High Court Judge in 1986
    d) First woman Justice of the Supreme Court of Uganda in 1997

After all these achievements in her career, she attained the second highest rank in the Judiciary where she served as the Deputy Chief Justice and Head of the Court of Appeal/President of the Constitutional Court of Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, hon. Kikonyogo had an extremely remarkable history, which earned her membership in several organisations and associations, some of which were; 
    a) Member of the Uganda Association of Women Lawyers.
    b) Member of the International Federation of Women Lawyers, where she was the Regional Vice-President of the International Federation of Women Lawyers for African region.
    c) Member of the International Association of Women Judges and International Director for Uganda, Treasurer and member of the Executive Council.
    d) In 2002, she was elected Vice-President of the International Association of Women Judges.
    e) Regional Director for Africa and President of the National Association of Women Judges.

In 2013, His Holiness Pope Benedict XVI appointed and decorated hon. Leticia Kikonyogo as the First Papal Dame in the history of the Catholic Church in Africa.

As Government, we sincerely extend our deep-felt condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and all the people of Uganda for this great loss. For God and my country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Honourable members, in the VIP gallery, we have Lady Justice Jane Kiggundu of the Family Division of the High Court. She is here to be part of the proceedings. (Applause) We also have hon. Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere, former minister. Thank you for coming. (Applause)

2.47
THE DEPUTY OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Roland Mugume): Mr Speaker, I rise to second the motion for Parliament to pay tribute to the late Deputy Chief Justice Emeritus Eulalia Mary Mukasa-Kikonyogo, a mother, a gallant woman and a servant of this country.

Allow me to thank honourable members plus those in the gallery for coming to witness the send-off of a heroine. On a special note, I would like to thank the Government for according the late Deputy Chief Justice Kikonyogo a state recognition and burial. I would like to remind all of us that she deserves it as a senior citizen of this country. In this regard – this is for the Prime Minister to listen – therefore, we implore the Government to come up with a clear policy on who should be accorded a state funeral so as to honour citizens who have made an outstanding contribution to the development of this country.

On behalf of the Opposition, we extend our condolences to the family of the deceased, especially the husband, Mr Joseph Kyagulanyi Kikonyogo, the Judiciary and the people of Uganda.  Mzee, it is a very difficult moment but we pray that the Lord will comfort and strengthen you. May he fill the gap where your dear wife has been and give you peace.

Mr Speaker, this House mourns because we have lost a resource where many of our young judicial officers would tap from her expertise as a senior judicial member. On the other hand, we celebrate her life because of the great contribution she made to this country. She was a dedicated and patient servant who worked for the Judiciary for over 30 years, rising from a level of Magistrate Grade 1 to Deputy Chief Justice. She was recently recognised by the National Association of Women Judges for her excellent service. 

Deputy Chief Justice Kikonyogo was a human rights defender especially on the side of the women. She was a founder member of the National Association of Women Judges in Uganda in 1993, with the aim of enforcing women’s rights and increasing women’s access to the legal system.

She was an advocate for the rule of law and independence of the Judiciary. In 2007, after the Black Mambas attack, on the High Court, she chaired a committee that sought the independence of the Judiciary and upholding of the rule of law. To-date, what she fought for has not been implemented. Of recent, we witnessed a brutal re-arrest of Kawesi’s murder suspects by some security organs after being released by court.  Government should respect decisions of courts of law and uphold the rule of law.  

Yesterday, I saw the minister defending these soldiers who are always arresting our people. There is no problem in arresting them but they should be identified; they should put on their tags and uniforms so that you know that my person has been arrested and is somewhere. These people dress like ordinary citizens and do not wear their tags and uniforms. Mr Speaker, these people should be identified because they are executing Government’s activity.

Mr Speaker, it is shocking and ashaming to note that Deputy Chief Justice Leticia Kikonyogo died before receiving her retirement benefits. The Chief Justice, hon. Bart Katureebe while presiding over a special event to honour the late Deputy Chief Justice Emeritus Kikonyogo at the High Court grounds in Kampala, expressed his concern over failure of the Government to pay the retirement benefits for the late Justice Kikonyogo. He said that the President had ordered that her benefits be paid. However, it is surprising that up to now, that promise was never fulfilled and yet, it was her entitlement. One question I would like to put across to this august House is; if the Deputy Chief Justice Leticia could not get her benefits even with the order of the President, then what will happen to an ordinary Ugandan?

Currently, state attorneys and court prosecutors are on strike over low pay. Deputy Chief Justice Kikonyogo must have died with a lot of pain seeing that the Government was not addressing the issue of remuneration for the court prosecutors and state attorneys.
Mr Speaker, as we pay tribute to Deputy Chief Justice Kikonyogo, we would like to implore the Government to expeditiously handle issues of employee’s remuneration and retirement benefits. This would motivate judicial officers to administer justice. There is no way the country will prosper when one of the arms of Government is operating under unsatisfactory conditions.

As we honour the Deputy Chief Justice Kikonyogo, let us work for the rule of law, respect for human rights and improved working conditions of Government employees, so as to attain prosperity and sustainable development. May her soul rest in eternal peace. For God and my country.

Second seconder of the motion for Independents, please. 

2.55
MR EDWARD OTTO	(Independent, Agago County, Agago): Mr Speaker, the bereaved family, the Judiciary, members of the legal fraternity and the general public, I rise to second this motion.

It is indeed a sad day. I remember quite well as a young law student in Makerere University when the deceased was the Deputy Chief Justice; she stood out as a serious human rights defender. 

As it was clearly stated here, if you look at her profile, first of all, what she chose to do as barrister at law in London and to come back and work for the system here at that time, speaks a lot about the kind of personality we are dealing with. She came from a humble background; from a school that is not well known, to Trinity College Nabbingo and eventually to King’s College Buddo. Her rise as was clearly stated in the Judiciary ranks and different leadership positions at an international level; when you look at all that, you see a pioneer and a champion. That makes me sad today because we have lost a role model for not only young people who are aspiring into the legal profession but even within the bench. Her personality sets a good example.

Mr Speaker, Uganda has lost a strong personality. Having been a Member of Parliament for Agago County where the current Deputy Chief Justice comes from and having got that opportunity, I can tell the feelings of the people. This is a great loss to the legal fraternity and specifically, to the bereaved family. It is going to be very difficult to replace such a strong personality. 

Mr Speaker, it is no longer time to lament. As Members of Parliament, it is our mandate to ensure the promise the President made is implemented. We should stop lamenting over this matter. The benefits of retired judges need to be fast-tracked. 

It is also time we fast-tracked the process of the Health Insurance Bill and the benefits. I imagine, given her condition, how much it cost her without the health insurance to fight the illness. Without the law, the President’s words are merely recommendations. It becomes very difficult - we are all partners in this.

To the bereaved family, God gives and God takes away. Let us take it to the Lord in prayer. Given the time constraints, I will not go into all the details. This is indeed a great loss and I pray that her soul rests in peace. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, the mover and the seconders of this motion. Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament: 

    i) To pay tribute to hon. Lady Justice Leticia Eulalia Mary Mukasa Kikonyogo for her dedicated service to the nation and that Parliament, particularly and specifically, resolves to collectively convey its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and the people of Uganda at large for the irreplaceable loss of a distinguished daughter of this country. 

    ii) To take cognisance of the dedicated service and contribution that hon. Lady Justice Leticia Eulalia Mary Mukasa Kikonyogo has, in the course of her illustrious life, rendered to the people of Uganda as a former Deputy Chief Justice; 

    iii) For us to collectively pray to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved family and grant hon. Lady Justice Leticia Eulalia Mary Mukasa Kikonyogo eternal rest.

That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now. Honourable members, I have a request from the Judiciary that we should rise at about 4 O’clock. However, that limits us too much because it is already 3 O’clock. We will see how we can accommodate our interests and the interest of the Judiciary in finding a workable arrangement for this tribute. I will start with the Attorney-General.

3.02
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I, on behalf of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, rise to support the motion moved by the First Deputy Prime Minister to pay tribute to this gallant daughter of Uganda who served her country with dedication and commitment. 

To the family, I say it is a sad moment because I appreciate what it means when you lose such an important family member who was dear to you all. As a country and in particular, the legal fraternity, it is a great loss. 

In church, I told the mourners that any practising advocate who ever appeared before the Lady Justice Kikonyogo would testify to her humane way of handling any matter before her and deciding the cases judiciously. 

I told the church that my first appearance before her was when I was a young advocate who used to beat about the bush, did not know how to proceed and actually feared appearing before judges. 

However, because of her motherly nature, she counselled and led me to appreciate what I had to do as a lawyer. I had a matter before her and having read through the pleadings, she thought there were some steps I had omitted even when I had a good case. In the interest of justice, she guided me on what to do. 

Ordinarily, another judge would have maybe dismissed my case. She, however, told me it was a good case but if I made pleadings that way, the court would have no alternative but to dismiss it. She advised me to withdraw the case, go back, prepare fresh pleadings and file afresh. That was what I did.

When I reappeared before another judge, I won the case. Had it not been for her motherly outlook, she would have dismissed the case and my clients would have lost.

It is not only that but also in all her endeavours and professional work, she acted motherly and firmly. I am not aware of any of her judgments that were ever overturned on appeal. She appreciated the law; she knew what she was doing and how to balance the interest of justice. 

Therefore, needless to point out, she loved her country, served it professionally and worked in some difficult times. I know she has been an inspiration to many young lawyers especially the female ones and also the female magistrates and judges. It is a big loss.

However, as we all know, whoever came to this earth, will one time have to be recalled by the creator. The only thing we can do is to thank God for the gift of her life and everything He enabled her to achieve.

Having said that, I would like to put the record straight on a report that appeared in the media today attributed to what the Chief Justice said. It was reported that the Chief Justice lamented that the hon. Deputy Chief Justice Emeritus died before receiving her retirement benefits. That impression is not correct. When I was coming here, the Chief Justice called me and cleared the air. 

First of all, he said that it is not exactly what he said. He said he was talking about the benefits proposed under the Administration of the Judiciary Bill. It is true that the President made some commitment that the retirement benefits for judges were going to be improved. We got a directive to work out a law that provides for the improved retirement benefits of judges. That law is called the Administration of the Judiciary Bill but is yet to be passed. 

However, as for the retirement benefits provided for under the law, I know that the retired Lady Justice Kikonyogo was receiving her due retirement benefits as stipulated in the existing law.

The Chief Justice asked me to clarify this matter so that the public would know that what he was referring to is an undertaking that has not yet been incorporated into law. As for the legally provided for benefits, the Justice was receiving her due benefits.

In that explanation, I would like to join other people and say that for all she did, she deserves to have her soul rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Learned Attorney- General, now that you are here on that subject, where is the Bill?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, the Bill is pending.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it a Bill.

MR RUKUTANA: Yes, there is a Bill pending consultations between the Government and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It is at its advanced stages and sooner than later, that Bill will be before this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Learned Attorney-General, let me remind you that this House had granted the member for Dokolo County leave to present a Private Member’s Bill on that and you requested the House that you can discuss with hon. Felix Okot Ogong and have this matter brought. This House has been waiting all this time.

MR RUKUTANA: Well, I regret the delay but it is for a good reason because we had to consult widely and look at the resource envelop and balance everything so that when eventually we come up with provisions, they are sustainable and enforceable. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we also have hon. Peter Claver Mutuuza, the former Member of Parliament for Mawokota. We used to call him the “national cake”. In his maiden speech, he made a strong appeal for equal distribution of the national cake and he became known as the “national cake”. Can I have hon. Nzoghu?

3.12
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I bring condolences from Rwenzori and Kasese in particular to the family of the late Deputy Chief Justice Kikonyogo.

When the black mambas raided court, the people of Kasese had given excellent support to the person who was surrounded and arrested by the black mambas and when they heard the voice of the late, people in Kasese gave her the maximum and due respect for standing firm and saying what had been done wrong by Government.

Therefore, I would like to register the condolences from the people of Kasese and particularly note that the woman who has died had a strong character and was a firm judge.

Mr Speaker, Lady Justice Kikonyogo is not among the category of the so called cadre judges. She rose and served on merit and her rulings and judgments were on merit. That is why I am clearly standing here to thank her for what she did.

You can manoeuvre on other aspects but you cannot manoeuvre on nature. Why am I saying that? The news that we heard yesterday over the radio in the voice of the Chief Justice – he said the benefits of the late had not been paid and he was very clear.

What I expected from the Attorney-General was to tell us the day, month and year when you are going to pay her benefits. Not meandering and telling us that the Chief Justice was giving you information that this is what he meant and yet he communicated in his own voice what we heard.

Therefore, Gen. Moses Ali, as a representative of Government, you tell us today when you are going to pay the benefits of the late without meandering and speculating.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we only have hon. Moses Ali in this House. If you want to refer to him, you can refer to him as hon. Moses Ali.

MR NZOGHU: I said Rt Hon. Moses Ali. Mr Speaker, the President who gave the directive has been around for quite long, for more than 30 years and President Museveni is cognisant of the laws that govern this country. I know that he can rarely speculate on giving a directive on anything that does not exist in law. Therefore, I would like to ask the Government to tell us whether the President can give a directive based on a non-existing law. It is not possible and I have not seen President Museveni doing that. However, for this one, I am hearing from the Attorney-General that the President was making a directive on a non-existing law. That is not true.

Finally it would be fair and in the interest of justice for the family of the late to know if what the Attorney-General is saying is true - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we come back to the tribute now? I think that matter has been discussed. 

MR NZOGHU: Yes, Mr Speaker. This is between us Ugandans that are appreciating the work done by the late and we are simply saying she deserves her entitlements.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have already said that. Go to the tribute.

MR NZOGHU: I want to ask God to rest her soul in eternal peace.

3.17
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Mr Speaker, I take this opportunity to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Deputy Chief Justice. 

I support that motion because this is a lady who was dedicated to her work; a woman of intellect, integrity and simplicity. I met her at that point where she was simple and down to earth.

When I was working in Arua, some years ago, she had just assumed her office as Deputy Chief Justice and she led a team of lady justices to West Nile. I remember Justices Elizabeth Jane Alvizda, Faith Mwondha and Stella Arach were there to advocate and sensitise women on violence. When they came to Arua, we did not know how to handle her since she was from such a high office and we were young women then. However, she was simple and she freely interacted with the women. I remember they carried a team of drama people to showcase legal issues that affect women and could be used by women to empower themselves as well as understand the law. 

She talked to us and the fellow lady justices about their families and how supportive their husbands were. She also told us how their husbands and sons took them to the airport before they could fly to Arua Airfield. In my opinion, that was a great lesson that many families could learn from if we are to fight domestic violence or any violence at all. It is basic and it is at the family level. 

As politicians, this also teaches us to be close to our family and children. It reminds me of one of our colleagues in the former Parliament who came to Parliament feeling very guilty because he did not respond to his son appropriately. The son had greeted him by saying “Good morning dad”, and instead of responding to the greeting he asked, “Money for what?” I think we are so tuned to asking for support or help and many times, it just surrounds money. This gentleman felt really bad. Therefore, I really remember the late for that simplicity.

I have also learnt that she has been an honorary member of Kajjansi Rotary Club where I fellowship. In that club, people remember her for her kindness and giving support regardless of who you are. The people who visited her home said she was a very clean and neat woman. Her life always had a touch of class; you would see it in her hair, make-up and dressing. She always looked smart. When you went to her house, you would find it very neat. That is what I have heard from my colleagues at the Rotary Club and from other circles. 

The Leader of Government Business said her life inspired the women in a male-dominated society. I remember at one time in this Government, we have had a lady Vice-President, Deputy Chief Justice and Deputy Speaker and as women of this country, we thought we were growing. However, these days when I look around, I think we shall need to put more effort into bringing women into critical positions in Government. I would like to thank you for this opportunity. May her soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in the VIP Gallery we also have the former Minister of State for Regional Cooperation and former Member for Bugabula County in Kamuli District, hon. Asuman Kiyingi. He is here to pay his respects.

3.23
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I can say that today is my maiden speech because since 27 September 2017, I have not been in the House. I would like to thank everyone for praying for me, including you, because I have come back safe and alive - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought you were going to say, “…to start wearing red again”. (Laughter) 

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, that is the beauty and some of the things that death can bring to us - we find things to laugh about. When I came back from India, I found people back in the UPC days, wearing red and black, so I have started looking for my old clothes. Therefore, when you see me out of fashion, do not be surprised. 

Mr Speaker, I stand here to mourn our dear sister, friend, wife to our friend, and one of the people who worked so hard for this country. When you see a woman who has lived to the age of our sister, Deputy Chief Justice Leticia Kikonyogo, you wonder how many lives she has touched. Those are issues that we tend to forget. 

Everybody that has stood up here has talked about her legal achievements. However, you are forgetting that this daughter of Mr Mukasa from Mityana, who stood out in education, went out at that time when it was so difficult to board a plane to go to the UK and studied to become a distinguished daughter of Uganda. It is something to remember; something we the women should never forget. This is one thing which touches my heart. 

Mr Speaker, this lady distinguished herself as a lawyer, graduated from magistrate grade 1, to chief magistrate and judge, before becoming a justice of the High Court. However, when you look at her education credentials, you find that fundamentally, she is a social scientist and an anthropologist. She just decided to do law as one of those additional courses in life. To me, this was a distinguished lady with exceptional intellectual ability and she just decided to hide herself as somebody who was so simple in her own world. However, she was a great woman. 

Mr Speaker, today people are talking about the Black Mambas. However, they have forgotten that this lady did not only spearhead an association of lawyers and judges in order to bring in women lawyers and judges in Uganda, but she also linked up these women with international organisations that are also struggling in the same direction. Therefore, when we talk about women emancipation, we should never forget the contribution of such women. 

I get extremely upset that sometimes we talk about small things and yet God has made women with golden hearts and hands. If you look at Mzee Kikonyogo’s home, you will find that even the relatives of Kikonyogo were touched by this lady’s contribution. Also, Ugandan women and the lives of all women across the world were touched by this lady’s contribution to society.

When I decided to come and talk about her, I did not know what to speak and what not to speak. However, allow me, Mr Speaker, to say two things about her. People are praising her for this Black Mambas issue. It is unique that in a government like ours, where the military still plays a big role - I do not want to call it a military government but the military still plays a big role - they choose to invade the court in order to interrupt the normal function of the Judiciary in dispensing justice and a woman stands up to close the courts. Where were the men? (Laughter) I have been asking myself where these men are. 

When things get tough, tough women stand up. Therefore, my sister, Leticia, stood up and said, “Look, you cannot come and abuse me in my office.” She decided to close the courts and the judges went into some kind of slowdown strike. You know, for them they are dignified; they are not like politicians. However, they were able to make a very big statement and that statement was made because a lady judge stood up and said, “This is my right.” She was a human rights activist. We need to congratulate her for that.

Whatever happened after that is not my business. One thing we also forget, for those of us who have been around - I remember when my dear friend, Prof. Akiiki Mujaju, was complaining so much about the passing of the Referendum Act, 1995; of course, it was not properly passed as required by law and as per the Rules of Procedure of Parliament because of lack of quorum.

There are some people who want to do things their way because they are in power. It so happened that the courts said, “This is also ours; we are also in power”. Therefore, the courts decided that that law was not properly passed and it was expunged. This is something we need to congratulate our sister for. Really, it needed courage to stand up and oppose the very Government that put you in office and call them to order. My sister did it. Therefore, those of you women, who are still left, I do not know how many of you have got the courage to stand up like she did or we are just here to praise her and then go into our hiding places.

Mr Speaker, I want to remember my sister with that. I want to remember my sister for having stood up to help the women when we were stuck with the issue of the omnibus law - what they called the Domestic Relations Bill. She is one of those who advised me and a few other people to put the law into different sections and drive them as pieces of legislation because it was badly packaged and marketed and there was no way we were going to succeed. I have remained grateful to this lady for having guided us. Today women are doing very well in making sure that we move logically towards our goal of fully emancipating the women.

Finally, on behalf of the people of Dokolo and on my own behalf, I would like to send my condolences to the family of the Deputy Chief Justice who has just gone. You have left us a name and a footprint in the legal fraternity, in the politics of Uganda and in the life of every girl child in Uganda. We will always pray for your family because we know where you are - you are already in heaven and your story speaks for its self. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to beg that there should be something written about Justice Kikonyogo so that the young people can learn from that. This is because I think she lived an amazing, rich life and we all need to advise people to follow in her footsteps. May God bless you all. Thank you.

3.34
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I rise to support the motion. I would like to appreciate the Government for coming up with a comprehensive motion that pays befitting tribute to our beloved, hon. Lady Justice Leticia Kikonyogo.

She indeed offered very distinguished service to this nation, rising through the ranks to become the Deputy Chief Justice of this nation and as we have heard, leaving a string of achievements behind her. As Ugandans and women, we are proud of her. She was dedicated, meticulous in her work but at the same time friendly, always wearing that charming and reassuring smile on her face.

It has been said that she was an ardent human rights defender, especially for the rights of women and children. She dispensed justice without fear or favour. She only feared the Lord and so she served with the highest degree of integrity. We stand to learn a lot from her.

She initiated the association of women lawyers, which is commendable. We know that all of us can sometimes be lonely in the offices that we hold but when we get together, we then can form a formidable force, sharpen and encourage one another.

I heard calls for a national insurance scheme. I think this is a befitting time to urge Government to ensure that that scheme comes into being to assist Ugandans with issues of health. We understand that the Ministry of Health lacks just a mere Shs 3 billion so as to gain preparedness for this scheme. We would urge that the ministry initiates a request for a supplementary budget, which would be granted by Government, so that we are prepared to start by the beginning of the next financial year.

To the family of the late Leticia and to all of us, I would like to say that we are all visitors in this world. None of us knows the hour or the time and so it becomes very important how we live our lives on this earth. I would like to say that you should be encouraged by the fact that she lived a full life, she offered dedicated service and we dearly cherished and loved her. One would want to think and imagine at this time how it would be for them. Therefore, we should always be mindful of how we live.

I would like comfort you; indeed, the Lord gives and takes away, but we are proud that Leticia used the number of years the Lord gave her on this earth to offer dedicated service, to help people and love people. That is all that we are required to do. May the Lord rest her soul in eternal peace and bless us all. God bless you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let me recognise – in the VIP gallery – hon. Kevina Taaka, the former Member for Busia Municipality. She is here with us. (Applause)

3.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Mr Speaker, I stand to support the motion to mourn and celebrate the life of a great lady, a responsible and caring mother and a mentor to many of us. I stand to mourn this great lady who supported the education of many Ugandans who were financially handicapped.

Mr Speaker, the mover of the motion told us that the lady before us was a lady of many firsts. He said she was the first woman magistrate, first woman chief magistrate, first woman to be appointed as a High Court judge, first woman Deputy Chief Justice and so forth. All these point to one thing: Lady Justice Kikonyogo broke the ceiling that sometimes – with due respect to my sisters – our sisters only lament about. This shows that whether you are a lady or man, once you are determined and you have the right qualifications, you can make it to the top. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to propose that everything be done by Government and all of us to keep that fire, which Leticia started, burning. We can do it by ensuring that she is immortalised. We can do it by setting up a special scholarship scheme or a mentorship programme to prepare people for responsible leadership or issues of law, or we can have public lectures regularly and have all these named in memory of this great lady.

Mr Speaker, there are two lessons I picked from this lady and this is what made me stand up here today. One is her humility. This lady held very high offices in the land but she remained humble and approachable. She was a friend to almost everybody, including the young. 

I remember I had an opportunity to share a moment with when she was still working; she described to us how police officers would sometimes salute her husband or her male juniors just because they thought that a lady could not be of that status. However, she never complained and did not accuse any of those errant police officers. She was just making fun of it. It reminds me of the time I was still in that small office of mine. Some of you would come to our offices and if one made a mistake of not addressing you as “honourable”, with a lot of anger you would remind us and ask, “Who is this one who does not understand who I am?” This was not Leticia. 

I think this is attributed to another very important lesson I picked from Leticia. Her qualifications and status did not divorce her from her faith and did not keep her away from her God. I have a feeling that this greatly contributed to her integrity and how she managed to survive in such sensitive offices for long. This had a lot to do with her background. Leticia was a very prayerful lady and she never missed mass. She was a very strong Catholic. She was a very strong believer – a lady of God. Like it was in the Judiciary where she climbed up to the top, even in the Catholic Church she got all the honours, including what the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister stated.

Mr Speaker, I would like to join those who have thanked the late for the many good lessons she has left behind. I pray that something is done to keep that fire burning. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

3.44
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand on behalf of the people of Mbale to convey our sincere condolences to Joseph Kikonyogo, the family and relatives.

Mr Speaker, I stand to pay tribute to a great lady and a lady of substance. When you look at the history of the achievements of the late Leticia Kikonyogo, you notice that this was a very intelligent person. The late Leticia Kikonyogo fought for human rights. She fought for democracy. She fought to stop violence against women. She fought for the education of the girl child. She inspired many girls and women, and today I see many women judges seated up there. She was a great woman. This is a lady who rose through the ranks and became the Deputy Chief Justice of Uganda – the first woman Deputy Chief Justice. She was not a cadre justice, but she rose through the ranks because of her education and performance.

Mr Speaker, I had the opportunity to interact with Lady Justice Kikonyogo, who is laying here, when she came to Rome where I was working. I hosted her for dinner at my residence and we went through a number of issues concerning Uganda. At that time I was trying to build in Mbale and it was very difficult to get roofing tiles. Her husband, Joseph, was the Managing Director of Uganda Clays. She took a phone and called Joseph and said, “Please, I want you to assist a diplomat here to get tiles” and I got the tiles. Whenever I am in my house in Mbale I have never forgotten Leticia and Joseph Kikonyogo; they became friends. I visited them. She was a very simple, friendly and down-to-earth person. Nobody would tell that this is a lady of the Supreme Court. She was a wonderful person.

Today, Lady Justice Kikonyogo leaves a legacy. She leaves a name and goes without any black spot indicating that she received this or that envelope. She did her job diligently as a judge. Today you hear many stories. We have heard about the black mambas that invaded the High Court and she stood up because of her legal profession and said that this was wrong. Today you see people who have been freed but as they get out of the courts, they are immediately arrested. 

To Government, health insurance is a very important thing. Today there are some cases which can be handled but people are not even able to visit a hospital because they lack health insurance. We have been asking Government when they are going to give health insurance to Ugandans. We see some small countries in the region whose people have got health insurance. What are you doing for the people of Uganda so that they can afford to go to hospitals? Many people are dying behind there and they cannot even afford to go to the hospitals. It hurts us. 

Many have also gone without getting their dues. When you hear that a great person like the late Kikonyogo was not paid her allowances, this is very unfair to her and to the people who have served Uganda diligently but go without any recognition from Government. However, I would like to thank the Government for according her an official send-off. 

I ask the Almighty God to give Joseph and the family energy to push on and may the Almighty God give Leticia a peaceful rest. Thank you very much.

3.49
MR EMMANUEL SSEMPALA (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I convey condolences from Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality to Joseph and the family. 

I got to know Leticia and I had the opportunity to serve with her when I was a member of the Parents’ Association of Kabojja and Savio Schools (PAKASA). At the time Leticia served, I used to sit together with Joseph on the same committee and I remember very well, she brought her experience from the Judiciary to the committee. On several occasions, we would discuss issues and she would patiently wait, then at an opportune time, she would come in with the right judgement and in most cases, the issue was rested. It is no wonder that these two schools rose to the highest echelon in the education sector and they are still there today.

In addition to the above, I respected Leticia for her humility. She would crake very wise jokes but unlike most of us, she would not even laugh. Everyone enjoyed her jokes and she would appreciate this later. 

I sincerely convey my condolences to Joseph and the family. I pray that the Almighty God strengthens you as you go through all this. From the time I spent with you and her, I know very well the bond and the relationship you had with her. May God rest her soul in eternal peace.

3.52
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kiboga, I would like to convey my condolences to the family of late Justice Kikonyogo, to her fraternities, the judges and all the people in the legal profession. Above all, I would like to convey my condolences to the people of Mityana because Kiboga was previously part of Mityana.

Mr Speaker, I knew Lady Justice Kikonyogo very well. I hosted her a few times in London as a speaker at a number of events concerning gender and children activities in the NGO world.  However, the point I would like to raise in the context of her work as a judge is that judges work under very difficult circumstances. I believe there is intimidation, especially concerning work that relates to corruption, and I think sometimes they find themselves trapped in those circumstances.

Mr Speaker, there is a report that was issued last year after a study that surveyed perceptions about judges in 35 countries. Sixty-five per cent of the people interviewed said most of the judges were corrupt and 11 per cent said all of them are corrupt. This survey was conducted across 35 African countries. 

In 2015, Ghana made headlines when journalists published footage of judges taking bribes and others asking for sex so that they can sway judgements. Recently, the Chief Justice of Swaziland was removed from his position very disgracefully. Even from your own Chair, Mr Speaker, we have had some judges being described as “stupid” or as giving “stupid orders”. However, it is with pleasure that we pay tribute to the late Justice Kikonyogo. Under these very difficult circumstances, she survived and retired honourably without any blemish on her character that we know of. She diligently helped to sort out the innocent from the guilty. She also worked with honesty and very religiously, and she was even acknowledged by the Pope.

Mr Speaker, this is a challenge to all of us. If you are a minister, a Member of Parliament or a judge, when your time comes what will people remember about you? Is it stupid court orders? What will it be?

Finally, I would like to accept the explanation that the Deputy Attorney-General has given, that it was not money owed to her that was not paid. However, the challenge we have now with the Public Service is lack of responsiveness. The beneficiaries of public services are seen as beggars and not as tax payers who are actually paying the salaries of those in public offices. There is lack of customer focus. Hopefully, when you mention that it was not money owed but it was just because of the reforms going on, this should trigger our thinking about the way our public services are being delivered and the need to provide responsive services, which is happening around the world. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had said that we might be able to negotiate for slightly more time beyond 4.00 p.m. but I have just received a message that I should stop at 4.00 p.m. I already had on my list the members for Kinkizi West, Gomba, Buhweju, Bugweri, Bushenyi – who is out - Bukonjo West, Nakaseke North - Gender has spoken; there is no issue of gender here now. I think we have tried to balance. 

Honourable members, I have to stop now because they said I should stop. It is with great pain, honourable members, because you are already on my list – I thought hon. Katuntu was from Bugweri and I mentioned that, or he has already changed constituencies? (Laughter) Honourable member, we are not going to extend this. I know you should have said something and I know the member for Gomba should have said something because she worked with the late justice. However, I need to respect the wish of the family and the people going to process the proceedings immediately we leave here. Therefore, I ask that we close here. 

I know I should have extended the time but many requests have come in. Let me respect that. I apologise that I did not limit the time but I also thought that people should speak freely so that they can articulate the issues that they know about hon. Kikonyogo. However, time is out; let us close.

I will now put the question to the motion. Honourable members, the question that I now put for your vote is for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the honourable Lady Justice Leticia Eulalia Mary Mukasa Kikonyogo for the dedicated service to the nation and specifically – 

That Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and the people of Uganda at large for the irreplaceable loss of a distinguished daughter of the country; 

That Parliament takes cognisance of the dedicated service and contribution that honourable Lady Justice Leticia Eulalia Mary Mukasa Kikonyogo has, in the course of her illustrious life, rendered to the people of Uganda as a former Deputy Chief Justice; and 

That we pray to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved family and grant the honourable Lady Justice Leticia Eulalia Mary Mukasa Kikonyogo eternal rest.

That is the motion I now put for your vote. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

East African Community Anthem

National Anthem

(Exit of the late Lady Justice Leticia Eulalia Mary Mukasa Kikonyogo)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much for the time you have made to speak on this tribute motion. I think it comes out very clearly that there is value in pioneering. The person who has just left this Chamber has been a pioneer in many things. When you pioneer, you break new ground and you inspire people to do exactly the same. Things that are unknown and people think cannot be done, when you do them it inspires people to do them too.

The second lesson we have picked from here is legacy. What kind of legacy has she left? What kind of legacy will we leave? That is the question you go out with. Having spoken here and listened to the speeches, let us go and ask ourselves what legacy we shall leave as people chosen by God at this material time to be in this House. How shall we be remembered, alive or passed? God bless you all. 

This special sitting is adjourned.

(The House rose at 4.06 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 

