Thursday, 20 November 2014

Parliament at 2.10 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. We have two Bills that we need to finish today; so there is not much communication from the chair. Thank you.

2.12
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before I move a matter of public concern, it may also interest you to know that the people whose voices I was supposed to represent have been denied entry to Parliament. I hope the matter will be appropriately investigated.

Mr Speaker, recently Kampala has undergone a very terrible happening. On Sunday, KCCA intercepted one Madinah Namutebi at the Container Village in Kampala near Owino Market. She was harassed because she was selling oranges and was arrested and detained at Central Police Station. She is a mother of a child aged two years. 

On Monday after spending a night in the cells, she was taken to court at KCCA; because her child was very young and still breastfeeding, her relatives took the boy to his mother seeking access to breast milk. It was difficult even after thorough explanation before the authorities. In the scuffle to attempt to persuade the officials of KCCA to let Ssemaganda Junior access the breast milk, the KCCA vehicle crushed the boy in a very terrific atmosphere.

The relatives tried to persuade KCCA to provide an ambulance, which would take the boy to Mulago Hospital but it was difficult and they refused. They took the boy on a boda-boda and as they arrived at Mulago Hospital, the boy was pronounced dead.

Mr Speaker, as we celebrate the day of the child, this happening is a source of anger because as we speak - in fact the vehicle, which crushed the boy, was LG 0428/01. As I said, the aggrieved party transferred the child to the hospital and he was pronounced dead on arrival.

Mr Speaker, the Members of Parliament of Kampala are greatly terrified by what happened because for a very long time, Member after Member in Kampala has been talking about the circumstances in which ordinary people are harassed by KCCA with maximum brutality. The Members of Parliament for Kampala, therefore, in the strongest terms possible, condemn what happened to Ssemaganda. The mother was denied global rights to breastfeed her child and that is a crime beyond explanation.

Nobody has an explanation befitting a denial of a child of that age accessibility to breastfeeding, which is a natural phenomenon of feeding. I therefore demand the following: That the officers responsible for what happened; for that level of brutality, should be brought to book. Knowing that speaker after speaker in recent -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, I just want you to help us. What do you want the record to reflect? How did this death occur? Was it a deliberate thing that the child was knocked and died? What happened? You seem to have just gone over it without explaining.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This happened in the course of KCCA staff trying to chase people from various places of work, including the place I quoted in Owino where this young lady of 21 years was selling -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I am talking about the death of the child.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, honourable colleague for giving way. Mr Speaker, the information I want to give is that even before the baby was knocked dead, KCCA had denied it the right to breastfeed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is stated already. The question we need the record to reflect is, how did this happen?

MR KASIBANTE: Yes, that is what I am coming to, Mr Speaker. Even before the vehicle knocked the child, he was almost dying of hunger. He could even have been dead because of lack of milk. Thank you very much.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, in conclusion the child refused any food given to him by the grandmother and he was crying profusely throughout the day.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, was this child running on the road when it was knocked? Can you tell -

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, the child Ssemaganda run to his mother on seeing her at the court where she was. After being denied access to his mother, the relatives tried to take him away but he run back and that is how the KCCA vehicle knocked him. He was taken to the hospital by a boda-boda.

Mr Speaker, since this is a matter of public concern, I would like the minister concerned to reserve his response prematurely. In conclusion, what am I asking for? I am proposing that the occurrence of this is unexplainable by Human Rights standards vis-à-vis Article 1 of the Constitution. Power belongs to the people. If we are venders, we still command power belonging to us. We must be appropriately treated with respect and dignity.

In conclusion, knowing that this is not the first occasion where we have got an exhibit of KCCA routinely harassing our people, I propose that there be a select committee to investigate the circumstances of KCCA brutality, which has gone beyond the normal lines of understanding. 

2.20
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The question of death of a human being; a Ugandan citizen, is a very complex matter and I would like, on behalf of Government, to extend our condolences to the family of the deceased. Our Minister in charge of Kampala Capital City Authority has already extended his condolences to the family on behalf of Government but I would like to repeat it here. 

Now a situation of death of a person is not a speculative issue. It is an issue that must be investigated and we have specialised agencies whose job is to investigate cases of this nature. I would like to inform this House that as usual, the Uganda Police has commenced investigations on the death of this child and the Ministry of Internal Affairs will definitely come here early next week and make a statement on this incident so that members of Parliament can, if they wish to discuss, discuss it from a position of information. 

Mr Speaker, the proposal for a select committee is, in my view, premature. Let us wait for the minister to come here and basing on the preliminary report of the Police, make a statement.  We should desist into rushing into condemnation that officer so and so should be held responsible because that is a question of investigation. 

So my advice is that the minister will come, make a statement to this House and this House will be at liberty to deliberate on this matter from an investigated position of information. 

2.23
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, we would take the assurance of the minister at heart but this incident is a trigger of a bigger problem in KCCA and that is the method and the way law enforcement officers carry out their business in KCCA. Actually this was bound to happen and much more is yet to come unless as a country, as a Parliament and as peoples’ representatives, we take keen interest in the law enforcement methods of KCCA. 

This was even reflected in our alternative policy statement. We highlighted the work methods of KCCA because there are concerns. Who are the KCCA enforcement officers? How are they recruited? How are they trained? Who commands them? I happen to have lived in Kampala and having been an activist in this city, I know that most of them are just picked from the streets and in the evening you find them made law enforcement officers of Kampala; and they are high handed in their method of work; day in, day out, they confiscate people’s property. How are they auctioned off? 

When they descend on people, the first thing they do is not to attempt to arrest but to take away merchandise. Every day they take this merchandise to city council but they never auction off those properties. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, we would beg the government to come up with a comprehensive statement on the law enforcement agency of Kampala.  Government must undertake to compensate the family and the mother adequately and immediately. 

Much as investigations are welcome, this is a clear cut issue. I have been reliably informed that of late, they are trying to ensure that the overall commander of law enforcement is a trained police officer and I know the name. But the overall structure needs urgent review otherwise, this was bound to happen and something worse is bound to happen. 

Our prayer in this statement is that Parliament is informed about the entire command and control structure of the law enforcement agencies in Kampala; how they relate to other security agencies; how they are trained and the curriculum they follow.  

We want this Parliament to be assured that the family is going to be adequately compensated. Sad as it may be, that seems to be the only recourse they can take. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will end this matter at this point. The child has died, the case is being investigated and the minister has undertaken before this House that a statement on this death will come. 

A request has also been made for a more comprehensive statement covering the entire operations of the enforcement agencies of KCCA. We will be able to have a debate when the minister makes a statement. For now, we will leave it here. The matter has been received, let us deal with it when the statement from the minister comes and we can handle it at that level.  We expect a statement next week, you said? Yes, next week we expect a statement so let us conclude this matter here.

2.27
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am also raising a matter of national importance. This House went through a rigorous exercise of electing members of the East African Legislative Assembly and as by the Treaty, it was Uganda’s turn to elect the Speaker. We got that chance of getting a Speaker by the names of Hon. Margaret Nantongo Zziwa. 

A lot of issues have unfolded in the East African Parliament including a former Prime Minister, the late Eriya Kategaya having been beaten with flowers in that House after elections. We are still facing problems coming from Uganda as a country with its members causing problems in EALA and among these problems are censuring the Speaker of Parliament. 

Some of us, including me who is privileged to speak Kiswahili, have been listening to BBC and Tanzanian radios in Kiswahili and they are blaming Uganda for all this. 

This week, we were informed that some members were also resigning from their committees. It is very unfortunate that the last Parliament of EALA passed 30 Bills but within a period of two years, this one has only passed three Bills. It is very rare to see the Minister of East African Community Affairs here but my area of interest is to find out what he is doing as the Minister of East African Community Affairs about the indiscipline and the confusion that is taking place in EALA. 

Our President H.E. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni stated at one time that we exported our indiscipline to EALA. May I know from the relevant authorities what is happening in EALA? 

Secondly, what is the position of Government in this matter? Kenya and Tanzania have tried to work on their MPs. Also, what is the cure for this problem so that we do not get more problems? 

Lastly, may I know from the government side as to whether it is NRM that is interested in throwing out their own child from the party, which child we recognise as the Speaker of East Africa? It is very unfortunate to have this kind of behaviour when most states world over are working under unions or organisations that promote trade and other factors. It is very unfortunate that we have not heard anything from the Minister of East African Community Affairs.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any response from the government on this issue of EALA and repeated issues with the Speaker?

2.31
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I listened to half or a quarter of what was said so - Do you want me to stop here? I thought you wanted to hear something.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please proceed.

MR KAJURA: As far as I am concerned- you know as much as we do, because there has not been an official position that Government has taken on the matter. We have been hearing comments, some of them verbal, some of them written but as far as I know, at this stage things are what they have been and the status quo remains – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who are you granting the authority to seek clarification?

MR KAJURA: What I have said is very clear; Government has not taken a position.

MR NGANDA SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. The member who raised the issue about the confusion at EALA put a request to the Minister responsible for the affairs for East African Community Affairs to come and give Parliament a comprehensive statement.

The Prime Minister who presides over Public Service, where equally there are lots of problems, said in his preamble that actually he heard only a quarter the story. For the next so many minutes, he was on the microphone telling us that things are like they are and therefore Government has not taken any interest to sort them out.

The procedural issue I am raising is that the practice in this House has been for the Prime Ministers to make the undertaking that the relevant minister will come and brief Parliament on the matter. Is the honourable Prime Minister therefore proceeding well to tell this Parliament that things are like they are and he has heard only a quarter the story and to him that is the answer befitting of a Government to give to members of Parliament on a very serious matter that affects our diplomatic relations with other nations. Was he proceeding well, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue is that there are these confusions in EALA, what do we do about them? Is there a statement or a position of Government on this issue?

MR KAJURA: Obviously what has been happening has not been exciting. What I would like to suggest that we do is as soon as possible I can leave the House and ask the Minister for East African Community Affairs to respond to this matter and give an informed response.


BILLS
FIRST READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012


2.37
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2014” be read for the First Time. The Bill is accompanied by a Certificate of Financial Implications duly signed by the Ministry of Finance. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That Bill stands committed to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government to handle expeditiously and come back to the House within the time frame provided in the law. The matters contained in this Bill are urgent and they need to be treated as such. The Clerk should extract this minute and communicate to the appropriate committee.


DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO STANDING COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE 
WITH RULE 148 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules under which we proceed leaves the management and designation of members who are from the Independent side of this Parliament to be the responsibility of the Speaker’s Office. The Speaker’s Office has accordingly received a notice in writing from hon. Amodoi Imalingat Silas, MP for Toroma County to be designated on the Committee on Government Assurances.

I accordingly now designate hon. Amodoi Silas Imalingat, MP Toroma County to the Committee on Government Assurances. I put the question to the House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO COMMEMORATE THE 
25 YEARS OF THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION ON THE RIGHT OF A CHILD

2.39
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana North County, Mityana): Mr Speaker, I am moving this motion under Rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure. The motion is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to commemorate the 25 years of the United Nations Convention on the Right of the Child.

“WHEREAS Uganda will join the rest of the world today 20 November 2014 to mark 25 years of the promulgation of the United Nations Convention on the rights of the child;

AND WHEREAS the UNCRC was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly as an international instrument of protection of children’s rights and ensure children achieve their full potential;

AWARE that the adoption of the UNCRC as an international instrument sets a positive climate and framework within which the child’s rights agenda can be promoted within the state parties;

FURTHER aware that the Convention on the Rights of the Child is the most rapidly and widely ratified international human rights treaty in history and acceptance clearly indicates a wide global commitment to advancing children’s rights;

APPREACIATING that Uganda ratified the UNCRC and its optional protocols in 1990 and 2002 respectively and the government of Uganda has undertaken progressive measures to protect and promote children’s rights within the country;

APPRECIATING that the past two decades have seen marked progress in child rights sector most especially in the establishment of policy, legislative and instrumental institutional framework for realisation of child rights and there has been considerable effort by the government of Uganda in realising its obligation to the children by implementing national level programmes both at ministerial level and collaboration with bilateral donors;

CONCERNED that despite this laudable progress, there are still gaps in the realisation of children’s rights in Uganda; resources for adequate and implementation of the policies and programs remain low; majority of children in the country continue to live under bad conditions characterised by high infant mortality rates, high school dropout rates especially of girls that enrol for primary education; increase in cases of child abuse; increase in the number of children living under streets; child physical abuse including corporal punishment and other forms of physical violence against children; child sexual abuse including rape, defilement, sexual harassment and pornography and child trafficking, among others

FURTHER CONCERNED that the National Council of Children (NCC), a semi-autonomous institution mandated by an Act of Parliament of 1996 to inter alia monitor and oversee all Government programmes concerning children in Uganda, has since its birth remained chronically underfunded, understaffed and incapacitated to implement its mandate;

NOTING that the mandate of the Children’s Act Cap 59 goes a long way in facilitating the realisation of the rights of the child;

ACKNOWLEDGING that though there is much to celebrate as we mark 25 years anniversary of the convention from declining infant mortality to rising school enrolment, this historical milestone must also serve as an urgent reminder that must remain to be done to protect and promote the rights of our children in Uganda so that they can be at par with their peers in better parts of the world;

COGNISANT that the world needs new ideas and approaches in order to make the lives of children better and the convention must become a guiding document for every human being in every nation;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that it dedicates this day, the 20 November 2014, to commemorate the 25 years of the United Nations Convention on the Right of the Child through:

    1. Prioritising children’s issues in all agenda, including planning, budgeting, among others.
    2. Putting in place and strengthening the existing legislation to protect the best interests of the child.
    3. Increasing budget allocation to the institutions it has created to ensure monitoring and accountability for the realisation of the child’s right.
    4. Revitalising and strengthening the National Children Council (NCC) by transforming it into a fully-fledged commission with its own premises and human and financial resources.
    5. Increasing and promoting awareness and understanding of children’s rights in all institutions of Government.”Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the members for Moroto County, Iganga district, Bunyoli and Moyo. Okay, do you want to speak to your motion? You have two minutes. 

MR KIWANDA: Mr Speaker, first of all, I want to say that issues of the children are self-explanatory. As we were opening the House, we had another very bad scenario, which happened to one of our children. Globally, Uganda is among the countries, which have the highest incidences of child marriages. I wanted to emphasise that and it is ranked number 11 among African countries. That means that we marry off our children. We actually do not marry wives; we marry children below the age of 18 years. We need to enforce the registration of all births if we are to ascertain the age of marriage.

We also need to strengthen child protection systems by creating a clear coordination mechanism and we need to reinforce our enforcement agencies as far as the age of marriage is concerned. You go to some functions being presided over by big people but marrying off children aged 14 or 16 years. 

Mr Speaker, we still have a very big problem today of malnutrition. In every three Ugandan children, one is a stunted child. The annual cost is estimated to reach about Shs 1.8 trillion if we are to curb this, which is equivalent to about 5.6 per cent of our national GDP. Malnutrition can be reduced if access to adequate food is upheld as a human right. I want to call upon Ugandans out there and even Government to look into this. 

We still have a very big problem today regarding issues to do with the children with disabilities. Their access to school is still a very big problem and some of them cannot even attend classes because of the way we construct our classrooms. 

We need to look into education in Uganda and how we can make sure that even children with disabilities are able to attain education in our schools.

Mr Speaker, I circulated a fact paper and I want to mention a few things. 56 per cent of Ugandan’s population comprises of children under the age of 18 years and that is a very big percentage. Approximately 12 per cent of the children in the country are orphans and a significant number of them have become orphans because of HIV/AIDS. 32 per cent of households have foster children or orphans in their homes.

Finally, Mr Speaker, 0.4 per cent of every 10,000 children born in Uganda are on the streets. 29.6 per cent of children have disabilities mainly on movement, hearing, vision, speech and other related disabilities. 

So I want to call upon members to support this motion and see to it that we improve on the plight of the children of this country in all aspects of health and education so that we bring out a citizen because we know that a child today is actually a senior citizen tomorrow. 

So, I want to call upon all of you as members of Parliament and out there as Ugandans that as we celebrate this day, we should join hands with the rest of the world to make sure that we observe the rights of the children. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Seconder of the motion?

2.52
MR BENSON OBUA-OGWAL (UPC, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to second the motion and I want to thank my colleague, hon. Kiwanda for tabling this very important motion. 

Mr Speaker, a quarter of a century is a long time and looking back, today we need to really assess the gains that we have made in ensuring that the rights of children in Uganda have been protected.

I recall that in 2011 I stood here and on behalf of the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children, I presented a statement to the House, which was basically calling upon Government to ensure that they table the Children’s Act (Amendment) Bill, which would in effect enable us as a country to work in tandem with the United Nations based on the CRC. 

At that time, on behalf of UPSC we remember giving the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development two months to come up with that Bill. To date, that Bill has not yet come and now as we commemorate the CRC today, I would like us to come up clearly and pronounce ourselves and ensure that Government does what it takes to make sure that our children are safe. 

The mover touched briefly on the birth and death registration. It will surprise you to know that the law that we are using to date was an Act, which was made in 1973 and was only slightly amended in 2005. That Act is totally obsolete and yet birth registration is the first right of a child. A child who is not registered has no recognition whatsoever in theory.

And so it is time Government amends this Act and mainstreams birth registration activities in every facet of life because how can we be able to plan for this nation if we do not know the number of children we have vis-à-vis the kind of deaths that are killing children? 

The process of receiving birth certificates is very elaborate and cumbersome. A parent goes through a lot including paying money and travelling long distances because registration is over centralised. This makes it so difficult for parents to obtain proof of registration, which is supposed to be a birth certificate. 

In addition, birth certificates are so diversified. You find there is a short birth certificate and a long birth certificate and yet at some stage in life, these children need to prove their age. 

In courts of law, they need to prove their age in case they are defiled and we have left a lot of room for people to come up with ages of their children just in order to manipulate the law in their favour. 

Mr Speaker, even the age of marriage and the age of recruitment in the army cannot be properly determined. On that note, we are urging all members of this House to come together today with one voice and urge Government to do the right thing.

Permit me now to lay on Table a commitment card, which every member has been given. If you go to your pigeon hole, you will a find a card, which shows that you have been part of this and it is something that you can put on your table and write your name on it to make sure that you are part of this process. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay. And on that note, I beg that all of us support this motion and I thank the mover of this motion. Thank you very much.

2.57
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion and draw the attention of the House that as we celebrate 25 years of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, I just want to share the following concerns.

When we read the preamble of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, it recognises principles in other conventions like the Universal Declaration on Human Rights. These principles include non-discrimination on the basis of any grounds, including disability. 

As we celebrate today, we have been struggling to request Government to get the statistics of children with disabilities in this country but this has not been forthcoming. In the absence of these statistics, we have failed to trace what the different ministries are doing in as far as the children with disabilities are concerned. Such ministries include the Ministry of Education. 

Mr Speaker and members, if you look back in your constituencies, majority of children with disabilities are not taken to school. There are no schools, teachers and scholastic materials. As members of Parliament, we have been struggling to impress upon the Ministry of Education to put a special budget vote to address the needs of children with disabilities but this has failed. On this note, I would like call upon the ministry to bring this budget vote next financial year.

There is also neglect by fathers. Majority of fathers who produce children with disabilities neglect them. They say in their families they do not produce children with disabilities and they neglect them. 

Mr Speaker, you would be surprised regarding the issue of sexual abuse. Even when some girls who suffer from epilepsy fall by the side of the road, some men are not ashamed to rape or defile them. The girls get pregnant and cannot trace the fathers of their children. As a result, these children who are born out of these kinds of practices go without their identity.

As I conclude, the various Articles in the CRC like Article 8 address issues of identity, naming and denial and so we should observe that. Article 18 also talks about the responsibility of raising a child belonging to both the parents but when we have these denials then it is a problem. 

I know the standards within this convention actually demand for member states to use their resources maximally to address human rights of all children without distinction. But as I mentioned before, the issue of education is not yet addressed as far as children with disabilities are concerned. In addition, even health issues, especially the provision of appliances, are also not addressed. When I talk about appliances, the ones I am using are crutches. 

In this country, we do not have a hospital where orthopaedic appliances are produced. I am always confronted by the different members here asking me, Safia, where can I get a wheelchair? Where can I get a crutch? In fact, yesterday I was joking with Frank that you are asking me for a wheelchair but I do not move on a wheelchair, I use crutches. So the problem is big; there is no production of these appliances and these children cannot move from one place to another.

Mr Speaker, I would like to conclude by saying that as we commemorate 25 years of this convention, this was the first UN Convention to recognise persons with disabilities. But as of now, of course, we have our own, the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. I want to call upon Government and all development actors to ensure that these issues I have talked about and many more are addressed. Thank you.

3.02
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion to commemorate the 25th anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of Children. We commemorate this convention so that we can ask Government, NGOs and parents to find out what they have done to the children. What is the status of our children in Uganda and in the whole world? 

This convention has been put in place because they have seen that the rights of children have been violated and up to now, they are being violated. Even in Uganda with our constitution which protects the children as well, children in Uganda are still suffering. 

I would like to talk about violence against children. Some parents beat their children as if they are sacks of cassava. Some break their ribs, others burn them and they are the ones who have produced the children. The children become disabled and some of them die. These parents are the ones who have brought the children on earth and yet they want to kill them. I have seen very many children suffering under the yoke of their own parents. 

When it comes to school, children are given corporal punishment. Some children have become disabled because of beatings from the teachers. Children are not protected; they are suffering. 

When it comes to nutrition, you find that even in homes, the children eat last. The mother and the father sit up while the children eat while sitting on the floor. They are given very small pieces of meat or even bones. They say, the children will eat when they have grown up. When will they reach there if they do not eat well? You deny the children the good food and you are the ones to eat. 

One time we were in Jinja children’s ward. We found a child malnourished but the father and the mother were very fat. That means they were eating all the food. So the children are being starved. In schools, there are no meals for the children. It is not only in Jinja, even in different parts of Uganda and the whole world, people do not care about children. This one is signified by lack of lunch at schools. Many children are going hungry - (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable from Koboko. She was telling us that in Jinja she saw a malnourished child with fat parents and she was wondering how the parents became fat and the child is malnourished. 

I am seeking clarification on how she saw those people because she is not able to see. (Applause) So, can I get that clarification, hon. Margaret?

MS BABA DIRI: Honourable, we are here discussing serious issues of children -(Laughter)– and now you are bringing the issue of seeing. You know that I see better than you at times. (Laughter) 

We are taking the problem of children for granted. Even among those who are elite, their children are languishing at home in the hands of babysitters. You do not know whether they feed the children. Very often, the house girls or house boys drink all the milk and the child drinks water. You see the child growing thinner and thinner. You take the child to the hospital only to realise the child was not eating at all. So our children are suffering in one way or another. Others who are very rich over feed the child and the child becomes obese. That is not normal. So we need to take care of our children properly. 

When it comes to school, as hon. Safia Nalule has mentioned, children with disabilities lack facilities to enable them to study well; they do not have the equipment required. Even now, we do not have a policy for special needs education. The policy was drafted about five years ago and it is still languishing and has not been brought out. Surely if we had this policy out, maybe we would have improved on the children’s education. 

We have laws for persons with disabilities; the Persons with Disabilities Act, which has been amended. But up to now, we are still debating it and it has not come out. We need the laws and even the policy for persons with disabilities to be implemented. 

Our children are suffering and we need to do something for the children. We need the government to allocate enough funds for the children so that they get the education and medical treatment they require. Otherwise, we think we are keeping our children while the children are becoming stunted. 

When it comes to immunisation, many children become blind because they are not taken for immunisation. They become crippled because of polio. So immunisation is very important if we want to see people without disabilities in future. In developed countries, there are very few blind children because they are prevented from becoming blind or from becoming physically handicapped. So it is important for Government to see that enough resources are allocated for children. 

We need the Children’s (Amendment) Bill to be brought here. It has stayed too long on the shelf. Sometimes they say it is with Cabinet, another time it is with the Parliamentary Council or with the ministry and yet it is nowhere. Why should it take long to bring this Bill to be amended?

If we had the Bill here, at least we would be able to sue people who are mistreating children. See those children who are sacrificed left and right; slaughtered like animals. We are not serious about our children. Children are very innocent and dependent. They trust the adults but the adults take their trust for granted.

We need our children to be protected. We need our children to grow. We need to see that the potential of our children is developed so that we see a future generation of people who are educated and who are psychologically and emotionally well brought up.

Regarding the children, we really urge everybody with a child and even those who do not have their own children, to see to it that these children are happy. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.11
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion to commemorate 25 years of UN Convention on the Rights of Children. I am speaking after hon. Baba Diri and I feel challenged about what I am going to say because my point is that as parents, we have lost love for our children. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we are seeing children brutally beaten and killed by their own parents. Two weeks ago, a man – I do not think he is a man - took two of his children, cut one with a panga and strangled the other one. He then went to the Police and said he had killed his own children.

Mr Speaker, what worries me is that in four days you will see this gentleman walking on the streets. Children are being abused. In my own constituency, I see children starving. Their parents send them to go and sell pancakes, sugarcanes and bananas and they are warned not to touch those items. They have to bring home the money and they will never eat out of their sweat.

Child labour is on the rise. Even though we have UPE and USE, there are children who do not go to school and instead they dig in their parents’ gardens. Why is it like this? Maybe we need compulsory primary education and we need to be serious and enforce these laws. Why should a parent who refuses a child to go to school be left free? They should do community service so that they learn that it is important to take care of their children. 

Our parents think that these children are for Government. There is nobody called Government. It is me and you who are Government. In the first place, for whom do we produce these children? They are our own children and we must have responsibility over them. 

What is worrying me of recent is that I have heard and I am still hearing of people trying to amend the Constitution to provide for abortion. It is very sad. Article 22(2) of the Constitution says, “No person has the right to terminate the life of an unborn child” but I hear civil societies, NGOs and some Members of Parliament advocating to terminate the lives of children. In this era where we are commemorating 25 years of the UN Convention and we still think we should kill our children? 

Mr Speaker, I want to warn all members who are advocating for abortion to remember that they are here because they were not terminated and if they had been aborted, they would not be here. They have children because they have not terminated them. I want to call upon the civil societies that much as they have so much money coming in to support these activities, let them do something else to empower children. There are so many children on the streets, many others are starved, raped and they have no rehabilitation. Let us do something in that area instead of promoting abortion.

UNICEF and Save the Children used to do a lot of projects but nowadays they are quiet. I do not know what is happening. Can we rejuvenate the efforts; the work that we used to do in those areas? Most important however is the enforcement. We have so many laws talking about defilement, rape and child neglect but we are not enforcing them. 

Even though we commemorate these 25 years and we are not out there acting, still our children will be abused. They will not be loved. The most important thing to preach to every Ugandan is to bring back the love for children. Let us love our children and other people’s children. 

When I was growing up, the community owned me. Even if I was coming from school and somebody saw me meandering around, they would tell me to go back home and before I reached home, they would have told my mother. But nowadays, try to talk about somebody’s child and they will hammer you. This is unfortunate. The African child is getting wasted and we are not playing our part. So let us enforce the laws that we put in place to protect children. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the gallery this afternoon we have children under the umbrella of Uganda Children Rights NGO Network (UCRNN) led by the Executive Director, Mrs Stella Ayoo Odongo. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them.

We also have in the gallery a team of pastors from Apac District. They are represented by hon. Tonny Ayoo and hon. Lucy Ajok. Please join me in welcoming them, you are all welcome.

Honourable members, now I would like to hear from those who are opposing this motion. (Laughter) Are those who are standing opposing the motion? I want to hear from those who are opposed to the motion. 

3.17
MR MOHAMED KAWUMA (DP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker for the opportunity. As we commemorate the 25 years of the UN Convention of Children’s Rights, we are looking at the rights of the children. What are these rights? The child has a right to live, a right to education and other innate rights.

Our obligation as parents and as Government is to protect and promote these rights. What are we doing as parents and as Government? Of course my colleagues have talked about our obligations and responsibilities as parents but I want to remind Government that we have national children rehabilitation centres. For the case of children that are on the streets, they should be rounded up and taken to these rehabilitation centres. Let us get to these rehabilitation centres and look at their status quo. 

They are not rehabilitated; they are actually ‘deteriorating centres’. The way children in these centres are sleeping and feeding- the homes are leaking. A child has a right to a decent living and these rights are not being protected nor promoted.


Mr Speaker, one of our colleagues moved a Private Member’s Bill to amend the Anti-Corruption Act; to stretch a hand to look at those persons who are abusing the rights of children. Many of our children are orphans for the case of Northern Uganda where there has been war for a long time and the monies have been stolen by people. We want to see the amendment on Table and then passing the law so that we can get those individual persons responsible because when they steal money for hospitals or schools, they are abusing the rights of these children.

Mr Speaker, we have some children that have special needs. In my constituency, there is a school for children who are mentally disabled and it is running on the mercy of well-wishers. My colleague has mentioned that some fathers abandon children who are born mentally disabled or physically handicapped. It is not only fathers but there are also mothers. Last time they reported a case of a mother who took a child with a disability and abandoned this child in a hotel.

So Mr Speaker, there are these institutions that are intended to take care of mentally disabled children. What have we done as Government? So I want to urge Government to step in to protect and promote the rights of these children by ensuring quality education. How much funding are we giving to UPE for example? This is because among the rights of a child is the right to education.

So as we commemorate the 25 years, we want to look at all those persons that have been engaged in corruption scandals and stealing money because these are the real people that are stumping on the rights of children. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I would be the last one to try and bring this debate to an end but we have another motion on this same subject where the member is seeking the authority of this House to bring a Private Member’s Bill to deal with amendments to the Children’s Act, which would help to implement some of these things that we are discussing.

I would therefore, at this time, seek the attention of the House that we need to bring this debate to a close to enable us move to the next one and take a decision. We have two Bills that we need to handle, please bear with me.

So honourable members, I will put the question to this motion. The motion is that this Parliament joins the rest of the world to commemorate 25 years of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE 
A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL – THE CHILDREN (AMMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

3.23
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to join the House in congratulating this Parliament as we commemorate 25 years in marking this special occasion on the rights of the child. 

Mr Speaker, I am moving this motion under Rules 110 and 111. “WHEREAS Article 79 of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for peace, order, development and good governance; 

AND WHEREAS the same Constitution under Article 94 (4) provides that a member of Parliament has the right to move a Private Member’s Bill; 

AWARE that Parliament has enacted the Rules of Procedure pursuant to Article 94 of the Constitution, which also empowers members of Parliament to move a Private Member’s Bill;

FURTHER aware that Uganda has enacted an Act entitled, “The Children Act cap 59” and also ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child in 1990 and its optional protocols in 2002 and Uganda is committed to the full realisation of the rights of the child as enshrined in the convention and its attendant protocols; 

CONCERNED that children still face a lot of challenges in realising their full protection from abuse and exploitation and yet the existing laws of Uganda do not adequately address this especially the weak provision on adoption that has resulted in the unfettered application of guardianship orders to take children out of Uganda;

COGNISANT that the process of amending the Children Act cap 59 commenced in 2004 under the stewardship of the then Minister of State for Children and Youth Affairs, hon. Felix Okot Ogong and has since then passed through four ministers of state and to date, 10 years down the road, this Bill has not been tabled to the House for the First Reading;

EMPHASISING that the absence of a comprehensive law undermines the full realisation of the rights of the child in Uganda and this calls for an urgent need to expedite the tabling of the amendment Bill in order to strengthen the protection and promotion of the rights of the child; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that this august House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled, “The Children (Amendment) Bill, 2014,” a draft of which is hereto attached and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for the First Reading.” I thank you and I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that motion seconded? It is seconded by members from Iganga, Bunyole, Apac, Kasilo and Agago. Would you like to speak to your motion in two minutes?

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker for this opportunity. This motion comes in at a strategic time when a motion has just been concluded here urging various stakeholders to play their role in as far as the rights of children in this country is concerned.

Mr Speaker, I will not take all the two minutes. My work has already been made simpler as different members urge Government to ensure the amendment of the Children’s Act cap 59 and Birth and Death Registration Act as well as enactment of a Birth and Death Registration Policy.

Mr Speaker, in 1996 the Children’s Statute was enacted and in 2000, it was passed in to an Act. Although this was a good initiative in regard to providing a holistic approach for the rights of the child, a number of gaps needed to be filled and the challenges addressed for the Children’s Act to benefit all the categories of children in Uganda.

Concern has also been raised over the omission of issues provided for in the optional protocols that Uganda is party to and other emerging aspects in relation to the child. It is against the above background that efforts are being undertaken by child actors who are in the gallery up here to review the Children’s Act. The process commenced in 2004. However, the process has since stalled. 

As a case for legislation in regard to amendments, I beg to present these four. First is the weak provision on adoption, which has made it easy for many children to be taken out of this country using the avenue of guardianship orders.

Secondly, the current provisions of the Act do not take into account emerging forms of child abuse including child sacrifice, pornography, sex tourism, among others. We have cases, which are before courts of law and of which we have got convictions.

Three, the rights of children belonging to parents in special circumstances including incarcerated parents or refugee parents are not provided for in the current provisions of the Act.

Last but not least, evolving forms of vulnerability among children, including criminally insane children are not envisaged in the current provisions of the Act. I thought I was using an English word. It sounds offensive but the truth is that I meant children who are mentally incapacitated.

Despite the numerous efforts and demands for the expedited need to amend the Children’s Act cap 59, it has been eight years since a request for the review of the law was presented to the Uganda Law Reform Commission. 

All efforts to put pressure on the Executive to present the Bill have been done; prioritisation of Children Act amendments, which members have expressed here. I beg to pray. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Seconder of the motion, member for Bunyole. 

3.30
MR JACOB WANGOLO (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank my colleague.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, can we receive a copy of the draft Bill? 

MR WANGOLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker for your indulgence. I beg to lay on Table the Children (Amendment) Bill, 2014.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture that. That is a requirement of our Rules of Procedure. Thank you.

MR WANGOLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to second the motion moved by my honourable colleague from Ayivu County. We are all aware that children of this country are suffering a lot and nobody is helping them at all. Before we started on the previous motion that we have passed, we all heard from the radios and newspapers about a child who was murdered recently in broad daylight. Nobody will come out even to help the family of this child; nobody will come up to investigate this issue.

We have moved across the country and witnessed pregnant girls aged nine years and the boy responsible is not implicated. This is what is happening in Busoga. We found young girls of ten years of age carrying babies despite the policies being there. If the laws are weak, we need to address this issue.

Therefore, I call upon the law enforcement agencies: the Police, courts of law and the Directorate of Public Prosecution to ensure timely investigations into some of these cases because so many cases are pending at Police. 

Honourable colleagues, we are aware that in our localities especially in the rural constituencies we represent, these issues concerning children are happening. You go to local councils and to the Police but all these issues end there as if we do not have laws.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR WANGOLO: Mr Speaker, we are aware that the Children (Amendment) Bill was proposed in 2005. We have kept on requesting Government to table this Bill in vain. That is why we have taken this decision to move a Private Member’s Bill. This is to help our young generation and save our children. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to propose the question for your debate. The motion is that leave be granted to the member to introduce a Private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled, “The Children (Amendment) Bill, 2014”. That is the motion for your debate and debate commences now. We will have a limited debate on this matter; two minutes each for your contribution.

3.35
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the members who moved this motion seeking approval of Parliament for this very important law to be amended. 

It is evident that there are many gaps in the current law that need to be amended. So many children still study under trees; so many children still write on the ground; so many children still walk bare foot to school; so many girls miss about eighteen days of school every term due to lack of menstrual hygiene management in their schools; so many children in this country are born on hospital floors because there are no hospital beds. Because of all these problems, it is high time we grant these members an opportunity or leave to have provisions in the laws of this country to take care of the roles of parents and Government so that this is understandable by everybody.  Mr Speaker, I would like to request that they be given leave. Thank you very much.




3.36
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I believe today would have been an opportunity for Government to take stock of the achievements that have been made, the challenges that we are facing as far as children are concerned and the programs and plans that we have or Government has to address the challenges therein. 

We have just debated a very important motion regarding children and now we are debating another one about the Private Member’s Bill but there is no line minister yet there are so many in that ministry where the children are supposed to be catered for.  It is important that Government takes issues of children very seriously. 

For a private member to come with a motion to amend a law that affects children and we are told that a draft has been somewhere for many years, I think leaves a lot to be desired. 

I therefore support the Private Member’s Bill to be moved to address the gaps that are in the laws. Hopefully our children will get a fair share. Hon. Wangolo gave examples from Busoga but I want to invite the Children’s Forum to come to Bujenje Constituency where issues of early marriages are very rampart. It is as if Police has gone to sleep. 

However, even parents are to blame. In the few cases I have followed up, later the parents say, honourable, follow it up but for us we have lost interest in that case – (Member timed out.)

3.39
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I support the position of a Private Member’s Bill and I will begin with the fact that despite the Order Paper, no minister from the relevant sector ministry has bothered to come and attend these proceedings –(Interruption)

MRS MUSEVENI: Mr Speaker, I want to give information to my colleague that the honourable Minister for Gender, hon. Karooro who should perhaps have been here this afternoon, travelled to Karuma today to visit a children’s home. I know that because she talked to me about it. I just wanted to give her the information that the senior minister is not in town because she is on duty at a children’s home in Karuma. Thank you.

MS KABAALE: I thank you, honourable for the information but I know you have taken note. 

Mr Speaker, the reason as to why we are seeking leave is that we have been duly informed that the attempt to amend the Children Act came into play in 2004. I think it is more than 10 years now.

In addition, we have not heard any information. Some of the members who were debating here were talking about the aspect of the Bill being in ping pong; in the First Parliamentary Council, in the Cabinet with more drafts and so forth. For your information, honourable members as hon. Obua has said, there was an attempt in 2011 to bring the Bill. These are our children not for other people but still that Bill has failed to come yet the Ministry of Gender has brought some other Bills like that on disability and the elderly and we have passed them. 

Uganda is among the countries where last year through adoption, 7000 children were taken. There was someone who even commented that she was made to sign adoption letters thinking that the child would be coming back every end of year but that failed. Therefore, due to the fact that no amendment has been made in regard to the Children Act and given the fact that some people are keeping children as labourers while others are not taking responsibility regarding their children, we think that if amendments are made in the Children Act, then the lacunas would be solved. Thank you.

3.43
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to support the movers of the Bill. There are so many things that are taking place in this world particularly in this current environment where most of our children are facing various challenges. 

In addition, I believe there are many loopholes in the Act, given the fact that parents have relinquished their responsibilities and children are left to who it may concern. Therefore, I believe it is very important to come up with this Bill to ensure that those gaps are closed so that parents know their responsibilities in terms of maintaining their children. They are just producing the children and leaving them to anyone. That is why you find that even when we are in our constituencies, parents come up and say, I want to give you children. Where do I take them? You took time and trouble to plan and produce the children but you want to give them away.

Furthermore, we know that some Acts have been made with regard to protecting women and that is why we have the local council courts that handle matters of women although we do not have that provision. All these harmful practices happen in the communities and families but we do not have provisions to deal with them in the current Act. Therefore, it is important that we come up with new provisions in the Act so that our children are protected.

Mr Speaker, on issues of equity, we want to make sure that the children of Uganda are equal. When you look at different environments, especially our rural areas where I come from, my children do not have equal opportunities to access education and health. 

More so with regard to issues of HIV/AIDS, I was so shocked when I interacted with a group of young boys who are living with HIV/AIDS. They said that their teachers were teasing them in front of the school and telling them to go away because they are infected with HIV/AIDs. These are some of the things that we should come up with in the Bill –(Member timed out.)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there any response from the government regarding this request from the private member? 

3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I rise to commend efforts in the deliberations to improve the welfare of our children. It is certainly an effort one cannot oppose. 

I want to say one or two things. The Children’s Act, which is in place now, was passed way back, as it has been stated, in 1996. It took a long time to come up with that legislation. A many studies were conducted before that law was passed. Likewise, there has been a lot of work carried out in the reform of the existing legislation and I am sure that the mover of the motion is aware of the efforts that have been undertaken in the Uganda Law Reform Commission. 

Therefore, I would, in supporting this effort, urge the member moving this motion to collaborate with the Ministry of Gender, the Uganda Law Reform Commission and of course the Office of the Attorney-General in coming up with an effective legislation. It is a command under the Constitution that you have got to seek the assistance of the Attorney-General in drafting the legislation. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I therefore support the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to this motion that leave be granted to the member to introduce a Private Member’s Bill on that issue of the amendment of the Children Act. I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Clerk’s office is accordingly directed under our Rules of Procedure to handle the printing and publication of this Bill in the Gazette for expeditious introduction to the House and the Ministers of Finance should accordingly heed to the Speaker’s call of issuing a certificate of financial implications without any unnecessary delay. It is so ordered. (Applause) Next item.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) BILL, 2007

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, you recall that yesterday, we came back to clause 1 in commencement and we had some discussions.

MR OKUPA: Thank you. Mr Chairperson, you know the circumstances under which we delayed passing it yesterday. 
I am disturbed to see members walking out as soon as you moved to the Chair, are Members in order to move out yet this is a very important matter which was yesterday deferred to today. Are they in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, we are about to take an important vote please let us proceed to handle the business in the House and not any other place.

Honourable Members, we recall that yesterday we were trying to review clause 1 which we had initially passed; and there were some discussions that were held like, a brief from the Minister responsible for this to guide the House on how we proceed with this matter.

Clause 1

MR BABA: Mr Chairman, there have been some consultations over clause 1 which we stood over yesterday evening. And the Hon. Kivumbi has made some proposals and our position is that clause 1 should remain as it is and the proposal he wishes to make could be brought under clause 90, dealing with the powers of the Minister to make regulations under which that specific item could be handled. 

And since he discussed the proposals with the Chairperson of the committee and the Chairperson consulted me, I have no problems with that proposal being put under clause 90, on the regulations. I thank you. 

So specifically, I wish to request the House that we maintain clause 1 as earlier adopted and move the amendment by the Hon. Kivumbi to clause 90. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, the implication is that we will not have to take any vote on clause 1 because we had already taken a vote on it. The new amendment being proposed in clause 90 would require re-committal since there is agreement to it we can go on and finish with this business. I hope the draft is ready, let the House resume, we come back and recommit this clause and finish. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Control) Bill, 2007”, and passed it with amendments. I beg to move. 



MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM 
THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted. 

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) BILL, 2007


MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: We agreed that the chairperson moves the motion for the committee. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can as well proceed.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Honourable Speaker, I move that clause 90 be recommitted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, this matter has already been brought to the attention of the House that this clause be recommitted for those purposes that were mentioned. 

(Question put and agreed to.)


BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) BILL, 2007 

Clause 90

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you very much. Mr Chairman, clause 90, we propose an insertion of a sub-clause and change of numbering of clauses. The insertion we propose reads as follows- Mr Chairman, clause 90 has sub-clauses 1, 2 and 3 then sub-clause (2) has a, b,c,d,e,f and g. We want to put an insertion between f and g, that insertion becomes “G” and then the current “G” becomes “H”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In clause 90 (2)

MS NAMUGWANYA: And it reads as follows: “To determine the effective enforcement date for prohibition of growing and dealing in Catha Edulis – (Khat)”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that agreeable Members? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

	MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME
3.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): I beg to move that the report of the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled - I beg to report that clause 90 on recommital has been passed with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House now be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) BILL, 2007


3.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substance Control Bill, 2007” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled “The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Control Bill, 2007 be read the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED: 

“THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES CONTROL ACT, 2007”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations Mr Minister, congratulations Madam Chair and your committee and thank you honourable members for the diligence you have exercised in this matter.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PUBLIC FINANCE BILL, 2012

Clause 7

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 7 do –

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, clause 7 on deviation from charter fiscal objectives in exceptional circumstances. The committee proposes that in sub-clause (2), insert the words “with the approval of Parliament” between the words, “The Minister may”, and “deviate”. Then delete sub-clause (3) and (4). Justification, it would be prudent that since Parliament approval is sought prior to implementing the charter of fiscal responsibility, any deviation shall be made after Parliament’s approval.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members that is the amendment proposed by the committee.

MR OMACH: Chair and colleagues, I accept the proposals. However, following this acceptance there is a consequential amendment to clause 7(1) and I would like to rephrase it as follows: “The Cabinet shall, in making decisions with implications for the public finances, or in determining, formulating and implementing the policies of Government as well as well as  in performing any other functions conferred  on it by  the constitution, this, or any other Act, adhere to the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility principles and  other requirements of this Act”.

The justification is to ensure that Cabinet while making decisions adheres to the principles of fiscal policy.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, those are the two amendments proposed by the chair of the committee and one from the minister.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, clause 7 starts from 7(1). I think if we deal with sub-clause 1, then other amendments like the minister is proposing will fall in line. If clause 7(1) says that the minister may in exceptional circumstances with the approval of cabinet - now we are saying under clause 6, Parliament approves. Here “Cabinet” should be deleted and we put, “Parliament”.

In clause 6, Parliament approves the fiscal charter. So, you cannot divert what we have agreed on. The minister can find a way of handling it - where he says that this is the way the minister will start his process. Mr Chairman, my proposal is that we first deal with clause 7(1) and when we agree on it then we can move to clause 7(2).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, an amendment has been proposed on clause 7(1) -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: To delete “Cabinet” and put “Parliament”. The justification is that under clause 6, the fiscal charter is approved by Parliament. So for you to deviate, you should come and get the approval from the person who gave you the approval in the first instance, and that is Parliament and not Cabinet.

This means that if you do it like this, the minister will deviate anytime without parliamentary approval. We agreed on this; I do not know why the minister is standing up again on this. 

MR OMACH: Chair, all that comes to Parliament has to pass through the cabinet and this clause is meant to guide cabinet when deliberating on issues pertaining to financial implications – (Interjections)- that cabinet should ensure that they adhere to the principles of the charter on fiscal responsibility.

I would like to read it again, “The Cabinet Shall, in making decisions with implications for public finances, or in determining, formulating, and implementing the policies of government as well as in performing any other functions conferred on it by the Constitution, this, or any other Act, adhere to the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility principles and other requirements of this Act. I do not see any harm in that. When you come to what the chair has proposed, he is saying that no deviation will go without Parliament input; so it is consonance.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much. I thought we would, first of all, deal with it as it is and we take on the proposed amendment. Then if the minister wants to create another sub-clause as he has proposed that we dispose of that; otherwise bringing them up together seems to be causing a mix up. In any case, I do not know which one to debate. If I go on for the Cabinet debate although I have not been there but I used to think they have some kind of collective responsibility; I did not know that they appear here as individuals. 

But for now, honourable chairperson, I would like to propose that since this amendment has been proposed by Hon. Nandala, it is very clear that to substitute the word “Cabinet”, which appears in sub-clause 1 with “Parliament”, should be easy. The Minister would not have a problem with that. He says it is ok; he agrees with it in principle. So we would get rid of that and then deal with the minister’s proposal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, are you proposing an insertion after the existing sub-clause (1) or did you want to replace sub-clause 1?

MR KASULE:  Mr Chairman, I am replacing sub-clause 1 so that the responsibility of any deviation is left with Parliament. But in its submission to Parliament, Cabinet is guided by the law which says that you should adhere to the principle of the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility so that it is more binding on Cabinet to ensure that this is adhered to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the Minister proposes to delete the existing sub-clause (1) in the Bill and replace it with what he has just read. So sub-clause (1) at the moment says that, “The minister may, in exceptional circumstance, with the approval of Cabinet deviate from the objectives in the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility”. The Minister proposes to delete that and replace it with, “The Cabinet shall, in making decision with implications to public finances, formulating, and implementing the policies of government, adhere to the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility principles and the other requirements of this Act”. That is what the minister has proposed.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The two clauses you have read for amendments are completely different and the purpose they are supposed to serve are completely different. 

In clause 7 (1), if the amendment is taken on, enjoins government to come back to Parliament before it can deviate from the charter. The amendment by the minister is to the effect that while they are deciding the revenues and public finances, they should be mindful that they have to adhere to the charter. Those are two different things; and for me they are not contradictory. We can have both if the Executive wants to deviates, let it come back to Parliament and we give it the authority. But also, as they decide, they should be mindful that there is this Charter to follow. I support the motion by Hon. Nandala but I also support the amendment by the Honourable minister. I thank you

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, the minister needs to read the heading of clause 7; it is about deviation. The amendment is good but does not flow. I have no problem supporting your amendment but it is not in line with the heading of “Deviation from Objectives of the Charter of fiscal responsibility”. So can you align your amendment - (Interjection) - the heading in clause 7 is about deviation from the objective of the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility? Now, clause 1 - the minister’s proposal does not make reference to the heading of clause 7.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The amendment of the minister is actually presupposing that the Cabinet will not adhere to the fiscal charter and the requirements of the Act and I thought really the role of the Cabinet is to adhere to the Act and therefore, this amendment would be redundant in respect to the committee amendment regarding the approval of Parliament; because he is talking about ensuring that the Cabinet adheres to the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility and the requirement of the Act. Haven’t there been circumstances that a minister or Cabinet have not adhered to a regulation? Can we be clarified?

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, I rise to probably seek more guidance from the chair, because I am failing to see the contradiction. When I look at clause 6, schedule 2, what is the duty of Cabinet visa vie Parliament? That deviation in policy formulation, revenue, making decisions would contradict with deviation in the fiscal responsibility – Mr Chairman, you had guided, and I believe that if you guided further, we would be able to see these two positions differently and probably see how to merger both of them. 

To say that it is obvious for Cabinet to adhere is not true.  It is also obvious for us to keep law and order but we are still here making laws. So to say that what is obvious cannot be legislated on defeats the real reason why we are here. I do not see the Cabinet seated on the other side, seeking to get more responsibilities, clearly cut out. That would not be a problem. 

The problem is Parliament needs to have a role; how do we involve Parliament in the deviation of the fiscal responsibility? But on Cabinet wanting to be involved in making decisions or formulating polices - Mr Chairman, this is  the responsibility of Cabinet and if they want to have it in the law, it is my humble request that we get this harmonised so that we move forward. The two mean good; and the way the minister said it, I believed in him, just like the way I believed in Hon. Nandala’s proposal.

If we got to what these fiscal responsibilities are; if you looked at clause 6 and the format of schedule 2 then you would see what I mean. We are cautions, but I hope we are not over cautious. We can harmonise this and I pray that we be guided.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very, much Mr Chairman. The hon. Oboth Oboth comes from the same background like me. There is what we call the mischief rule; what mischief is intended to be cured by this particular proposal of the Minister?  That is what I am trying to seek clarification from the minister on, where is the mischief, such that if you do not enact this particular provision, then there are worries to face? I think that is what Hon. Betty Amongi was asking. 

We do not enact redundant laws; it does not make any sense. The point being explained by Hon. Amongi, is, if Cabinet is to deviate, it must have something in mind; do you legislate about it? Would you put it in the law, saying that if you must deviate, you must keep this in mind? How do you even enforce that? What are the options besides what you are legislating, do you have any other thing in mind? 

So, my view, Hon. Oboth, is we cannot afford to legislate something which is not here because that is exactly what Cabinet is supposed to do if they must deviate. The point being made by Hon. Nandala-Mafabi and Mr Speaker is that if they deviate then like they sought approval in the first place, they should come to Parliament for approval which makes sense. 

So, I just want to be clarified before I really support the minister, what is this mischief Hon. Omach wants to cure?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, from a purely drafting point of view, what the proposal of the minister does is to state the principle first and thereafter create the exception, which exception hon. Nandala now seeks to regulate. 

So, the principle stated by the minister is that in any decisions of those effects, Cabinet shall adhere to those principles. But in exceptional circumstances, the Minister may do one, two, three and four. Now, Hon. Nandala, I am saying that for those exceptions circumstances, whatever the Minister decides to do to deviate cannot take effect unless Parliament approves it. That is what is going to be stated here. Are we clear? 

So, this one is not really redundant as such but it is for the avoidance of doubt - you are stating the principle and then the exceptions and how the exceptional circumstances come through. You need to regulate this so that in case those exceptions come, they cannot take effect without parliamentary approval. Are we together, is that the spirit?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if that is the spirit, then one should come first. As Hon. Geoffrey Ekanya said, what is the heading of deviation? The first thing to deal with is deviation. Secondly, this deviation can only be done – if you bring the minister to make decisions, it has implication. We must ban the minister from doing deviation without parliamentary approval. Having banned the minister then we say but when the minister is going to do the deviation, he must follow the following and that is where Hon. Omach’s item comes in.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, the operating word here is “Exceptional circumstances”. And what we have to do is to go back to the interpretation section and try to guide the minister about exceptional circumstances. Once we do this then Cabinet has been properly guided on what they will take into consideration and what would amount to exceptional circumstances.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to make a new proposal on where we could take the issue of principle. If it is about the principle - the minister talked about adherence to the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. My thinking is that it could then require probably re-committal of clause 6 - it is just adherence. 

So, we could include a new sub-clause 7 - there have been changes in clause 6. Let us provide for adherence to guide the Cabinet that they should stick to the principles of the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility in policy formulation. 

Let me also think, as I had already made a disclaimer, let me also think as somebody who wants to speculate about Cabinet. One of the things we have been told about this Public Finance Bill is that it was intended to cure budget indiscipline.

And maybe the minister cannot come boldly here and tell us that sometimes the supplementary issues that bombard us - those changes that do not follow proper process, and even the questionable borrowing, all those things, he cannot say that it is difficult to get an overall Cabinet position. 

No wonder sometimes you find money has moved from a miserable segment like Gender and has gone to something like State House. Maybe that is the type of background the minister would like to ensure does not happen by causing the law to take the principle of adhering to the charter by Cabinet.

So, we could push it back to the minister in which case we would recommit clause 6 and then we have it as we had stated. Then we will proceed with the exception as the deviation under clause 7 and simply proceed with one as proposed by Hon. Nandala. That is what I would like to propose.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The impression I got from the minister’s amendment is that the amendment he is making would be a standalone clause and that is what Hon. Alaso is talking about. We have to cure the problem not withstanding Hon. Katuntu’s view; we should cure the problem. My submission is that we could have this clause as a standalone clause 7, adopt it and proceed to examine clause 8, including the amendments which have been moved by members.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is now a completely new situation from the original proposal, but it makes a lot of sense.

MR OBOTH OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I do agree with that proposal too. But when you look at clause 7(2), which is just below what was merely stated in the exceptional circumstances- And to respond to Hon. Katuntu, the learned Shadow Attorney General, I thought that was more defined in detail in clause 7(2). So, whether it is put in the interpretation section or not, the new proposal would harmonise this - I do not know why I am seeing it in a very easy way.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, can you now make the proposal so that we can see how to move on it?

MR OMACH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. What I had moved will now go under a new clause; clause 8, with the title, “Cabinet to adhere to principles of fiscal policy.” Ok, we can make it clause 7, so that clause 7 now becomes clause 8.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, propose now, properly.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose a new clause 7, which title shall read as, “Cabinet to adhere to the principles of fiscal policy.”

(1) Cabinet shall, adhere to the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility principles and other requirements of this Act, in making decisions with implications for the public finances, or in determining, formulating and implementation of policies of the  government  as well in  performing any other function conferred on it by this or any other Act. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that ok? I put the question to that amendment.
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, now we come to the existing clause.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, in clause 7 in the Bill, we propose that sub-clause 1 stays as it is. 

We propose to amend sub-clause 2 to read as follows: “The Government may deviate from the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility on a temporary basis when such deviation is due to a major disaster, unanticipated severe economic shock or other significant unforeseen events that cannot be accommodated through deployment of other flexibilities provided for in this Act or prudent fiscal policy adjustments.

(3) The Minister shall provide a report to Parliament stating the reasons for any deviation from the charter objectives, the plans to address the deviation and the expected time to achieve this.

(4) The Minister shall provide the report under this Section to Parliament within one month following the decision adopted by the Cabinet to deviate from the charter’s objectives.

(5) The minister shall publish the report within one week after the day it is submitted to Parliament”. I beg to submit.

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, a few minutes ago, I heard the Minister of Finance agree to a position; the amendment of “Parliament” to substitute “Cabinet.” Is it in order for the honourable minister, in less than two minutes, to turn around?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, before I rule on this, what was your proposal in sub clause (1) on the existing clause 7?

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, the honourable was not timing, so, it may be more than two minutes -(Interjection). The proposal is that clause 7(1) remains as it is. Then, we had proposed to substitute sub-clauses 2, 3, 4 and 5; what I have just read, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Chairperson of the committee, what had you proposed in clause 7?

MR KASULE: Mr Chairman, the only amendment we are making on the deviation from the objectives of the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility was that as (1) reads; “The Minister may.” We are intending to include “With approval of Parliament” and it would flow: “In exceptional circumstances, with approval of Parliament...” So, the one of Cabinet had gone.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But, Honourable chairman, your amendment is on sub-clause 2. Please, read the report.

MR KASULE: Ok, those reading the report, please, sub-clause 1 had stayed as it is - (Interjection). Mr Chairman, we had said “The minister may in exceptional circumstances, with the approval of Cabinet, deviate from the objectives in the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility”. In sub-clause 2, we said insert the words “With approval of Parliament”, between the words “The Minister may” and “Deviate”. And, it would read, “The Minister may, with approval of Parliament, deviate from the objectives of the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility where Uganda experiences a natural disaster, unanticipated severe economic shock or any other significant unforeseen event that cannot be funded from the Contingency Fund, other funding mechanisms provided for in this Act or using prudent fiscal adjustments”. So, it would come in that clause. And, the Minister has proposed that instead of that, let them replace or redraft using the statement he read.

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, reading from what the Honourable minister has just read, it is as if the minister is amending his own Bill, which we have. And, at the moment, he is amending the whole of clause 7, replacing sub-clauses 2 up to 5 with new amendments. And, we do not have that amendment. Is it procedurally right for us to proceed when we have a Bill in our hand and the minister has a new amendment on the same Bill and we do not have the texts of the amendment? So, which document should we now use as a reference point?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this Parliament by now should have had only two documents; the Bill and the report from the committee. Those should have been the operational documents for us to analyse because our own committee spent time looking at this Bill. They consulted; there was public hearing, an expert came and made presentation before the Committee. So, ordinarily, we should be looking at only two documents, but now I am being informed that there have been consultations which the minister is a party to. 

But, what the committee is proposing itself is a contradiction in terms- because you cannot propose parliamentary approval in (2) when you have not proposed it in (1). If the spirit is to put parliamentary approval in (2), then it should be in (1) also so that there is consistency. Because you cannot leave (1) with that “The minister may, in exceptional circumstances, with the approval of Cabinet, deviate from the objectives in the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility” and then in 2, you say “The minister may with the approval of Parliament…”; How do you do that now?

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am a member of the committee, and I remember it was agreed that we substitute “Cabinet” with “Parliament”. Maybe it was a typing error.

MR EKANYA: I want to ask the Minister of Finance. I am a bit disappointed, Mr Chairman. I beg for your indulgence-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Before we go there, wait honourable. Honourable members, let us not take that route as of now. Let us find a solution to this because what we have is the Bill and the proposal from the committee. The minister has come with something which I have not seen before, which he has just read. So can we come back to the Bill and look at the adjustment made by the committee, and see if it makes sense? If it does not make sense, then we can go to the extent that has been proposed by the minister. But if it makes sense, then we adopt what is in the Bill and the direct amendment by the committee.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, may we stand over clause 7?

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, there are fundamental principles here. We should have concluded this Bill two weeks ago. The Speaker then, using the wisdom and practice, deferred the matter for serious consultation and the minister and us had series of meetings forth and back. Cabinet too had discussion and we agreed not to backstab. We agreed to move this Bill very fast. Up to yesterday - I want to pick the minister clearly; why is he backstabbing Parliament? Because we agreed last time, if we start backstabbing each other now, we are going to cost the taxpayers’ money.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: By backstabbing, what do you mean exactly? 

MR EKANYA: What I mean is, we said we should be transparent. If you have any issue that you think needs amendment, please circulate it to the members so that we can research on it. That was the decision of the chairperson and the Speaker then and that was why the Bill was deferred. Everything that members had issues on was circulated and we did consultations and research. 

What hon. Omach is presenting is totally new. We have never heard about it; members have never received it and that is why I called it backstabbing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the contention here is, in exceptional circumstances, do you come to Parliament for approval – (Interjections) - if it is a yes, then we go with what is in the Bill as amended that it should come to Parliament. But is that the spirit, honourable minister; it is as simple as that?

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman that is the spirit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, if that is the spirit, then you amend (1), take out “Cabinet” and in (2), put “Parliamentary approval” and it is done, if that is the spirit.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, hon. Geoffrey Ekanya is so diplomatic - (Interjection) - yes, he has been diplomatic. If we tell you what has happened - hon. Fred Omach has been very unfair. In fact, we are here- personally, I should be in the hospital because I have a very bad cold; but I am here because we all agreed on today otherwise we should have started yesterday - we all came here because we agreed on all the issues and proposed to move on. The Speaker then told us to go and give our proposed amendments and indeed we gave. The technical people came back, and we met. There was a meeting last week. 

Recently, on Tuesday, we were not in the House because the minister wrote to you, pleading that we had not run out of the House. We were in your office and I remember, Mr Chairman, when you came, we were there. If hon. Omach can come and deny what we agreed here, then that makes me fear the Ministry of Finance. 

The reason I am raising this is, clause 6 says the fiscal charter will be approved by Parliament. You cannot approve it today and then you go and divert it at the bank tomorrow without Parliamentary approval. 

We are saying, having approved it, kindly, if you want to divert, you should come back to Parliament. Mr Chairman in this same Bill we are making, we are going to create what is called a contingency fund, which is going to deal with disasters. But I am worried about this law; what is the interest of the ministry in not accepting Parliament to approve the diversion? I need to understand that. And why did hon. Omach change last night or this morning, from what was agreed?
Mr Chairman, before we deal with this, I want hon. Omach to get up and say that we have put aside all the consultations we had, so that we come back here with bare-knuckles and we do it here. I can assure you that if we bring all the amendments here, this place will be on fire. Let him come and tell us that he has abandoned the proposals we made during the consultation and we go a full blast.

MR KASULE: The minister is coming -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, this is your Bill and we want to pass this Bill as fast as possible. So please guide us and we move on.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, hon. Mafabi and hon. Ekanya and I had a series of consultations and we agreed on the way forward. We agreed to the amendments that will include what the chairperson had read that this will be submitted with the approval of Parliament. There are a few other amendments that are supposed to come on. So my request was that we stand over this particular clause 7, so that we proceed to others and we move in tandem. So, that is my suggestion.

MR MWESIGYE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Clearly, there are glaring contradictions because when you look at the amendments of the chairman; he is leaving out “Cabinet approval” in one and introducing “Parliamentary approval” in (2). That creates a fundamental contradiction - No it is a matter of principle as well and of course the minister has introduced new amendments which are not served on you, Mr Chairman.

So, that is why we are proposing that let us stand over the clause, go back to the drawing board with the chairman of the committee and some other members and come up with a draft that unites the House. I beg to propose.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  No, honourable members, we need to be clear on what we are going to do. Today, I received the technical people from the Ministry of Finance. They advised me to abandon all other documents and come with only these two. That is why I have only these two. I left all the other documents that were given to me by the Minister of Finance herself and I came with these: the committee report and the Bill.

So, now if these matters are new, it brings us a little confusion. What we now need to know from the minister, which would guide us - even when we are going to consult because we cannot just go to consult without knowing what we are going to consult about.

The issue here is, “A deviation from the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility be permissible without prior Parliament approval” or should it be, “Parliamentary approval should be after the event”?  Those are the two issues. So, if you say, it should be with prior approval of Parliament then it will be amending clause 7 as it is and insert Parliamentary approval. 

But if you are saying that it should be after the event of deviation that the Parliamentary approval should be sought, then the provisions of what the Committee has proposed, to delete 3, 4 and 5 of clause 7, will have to be left there. So, why don’t you make it clear so that we know exactly what is going to happen?

MR OMACH: Mr Chairperson, the document which you are talking about that I discussed that morning; the first amendment would be to clause 7. It is sponsored by the minister and it is what I originally read to you and clearly indicates that the decision with implication to public financing, formulating and implementing the policies of government, Cabinet shall adhere to the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility and the other requirements of this Act, which now we say will go under its own sub heading.

Then (2), we are proposing to put another amendment which will deal with the issue of taxation and then, there are clauses that were being made by the committee as amended by hon. Geoffrey Ekanya which we would be coming to at a later stage and they come under clause 8 of the Bill. 

So, what you are asking now is that there are certain circumstances which you would not expect the Cabinet to come to Parliament first and ask for its authority before Cabinet can go ahead and implement and this is what this particular section is trying to cure. 

That we should not come first to Parliament but Parliament is insisting that whatever the situation is, we must first come and get permission or approval of Parliament before we can make any deviations from the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility as already passed in clause 6 which gives it -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, did you agree to that?

MR OMACH: Yes we did.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So then do not waste our time honourable member. But, now on what point are you rising again? The minister has confirmed that the deviation shall be with the prior Parliamentary approval. That is what you are saying. Then why should we again start debating? 

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, I wanted to find out- I am sorry I am having a bit of a headache but I have to stay here because of this Bill - I have taken water.

Mr Chairman, I wanted to find out what Article 155 of the Constitution says in line with the Budget Act. We had talked about the President, because the President is really the Minister of Finance, whether there is a certain stage whereby we shall have interpretation or definition, or we just say that the President - because that is what the Constitution talks about.

Article 155 says, “The President shall cause to be prepared  and laid before Parliament in each financial…” the entire budget process is about the President and in the Budget Act, it makes reference to that. 

Therefore, even clause 6 instead of using the word “Minister” it would have been proper to use the word “The President” unless we are going to define that a minister here means - because the Budget Act talks about the President and we did agree. Colleagues get me; we did agree that we are lifting issues within the Budget Act to this Bill. The Budget Act talks about the President and therefore I am seeking for your clarification.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Now how is that going to help us with clause 7?

MR EKANYA: I thought that the minister had conceded to the proposal of hon. Nandala-Mafabi and therefore before you put the question -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But we haven’t taken a decision. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairperson, a thorough reading of clause 7 (1) and (2) actually reveals that it is only one point being made and that is deviation. 

To make my point clear, if you were to redraft clause 2 and it read as follows: “The minister may, with the approval of Parliament deviate from the objectives in the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility where he goes and experiences…” would there be need for clause 1?

Really to me, it is draftsmanship here. So I do not know why they wanted to create so many clauses including - just that alone renders clause 1 redundant.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairperson, now that we have agreed as you have stated on the principle of involving Parliamentary approval in (1) and (2) because as a necessary consequence of that, (3) and (4) will certainly be deleted. Okay? Now the question is, how we do interpolate (1) and (2) so that we do not have any unnecessary repetition.

I was struggling to understand the difference; because in (1), it says “The Minister may in exceptional circumstances without tugging amounts to -”, now in (2), I thought that the provision was coming out with the exceptional circumstances. 

Now, to me, if it is true that what is intended in (2) as “Exceptional circumstances”- and we have agreed that because of those exceptional circumstances deviation requires Parliamentary approval, then there will be no need for sub-clause 1.
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, Honourable members, are we clear now? There will be no need for (1), but would (5) remain –(3) and (4) would go, what about (5)?

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, we only have to change (5), because having done it here, it should be gazetted and published. So for this one here, we would delete sub-section (3) and say that it will be gazetted, and also put in newspapers which are widely circulated.

THE SPEAKER: Is there another gazette which is yours? I thought that there was only one.

MR NANDALA: Okay, our gazette as a Country, the Uganda gazette. So that is why we would only delete sub-section 3.

THE SPEAKER: Sub-clause (3) and (4)?

MR NANDALA: No I am saying (5) will read, “The minister shall within thirty days after deviation publish the report in the gazette and publish it in the newspapers for wide circulation, and on the website of the ministry.” The justification for this is for the entire world to know the deviations we have made.

MR OBOTH: I intend to agree except to –(Interjections)- just like Hon. Fred Omach agreed. I just need help to fully agree on this other aspect of deleting (3) and (4).From the beginning of my submission, I was pointing at (1) and (2). I am glad the Learned Attorney-General has settled that. 

But (3) and (4), especially (3), gives a time frame and the basic fear of Government as I read from the Cabinet from the Minister of Finance was about delay. Would it also be – I thought I would hear from Hon. Omach that they would need a time frame, if he had the thirty days to cure this. Would they have the Parliamentary approval within a certain time frame, or we leave it open? 

In (1), we create another sub-clause so that Parliament is not blackmailed for unnecessarily withholding the approval of deviation. Hon. Ekanya, - people from Tororo –(Interjections) - if I may conclude, as I get support from Hon. Ekanya, my fear is Parliament can be black mailed at the end for the delay. But if there is no fear from the Government side or cabinet, then there is no problem, we can proceed. I was just trying to alert Hon. Omach, who nearly missed on being a priest.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, you know-
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we can resume business now. Honourable minister was on the Floor.

MR OMACH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. So clause 7 says that we agree with the position confirmed by the Attorney-General so that sub clause 1 becomes redundant; then sub clause 2 is amended by putting “With the approval of Parliament”. Clause 3, on page 14 is deleted; Clause 4 is deleted and then sub clause 5 stays with amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What was the amendment? “The minister shall within 30 days after the deviation, publish a report in the gazette, newspaper of wide circulation and the website of the ministry”. Is that ok? 

Honourable members, the final proposal which is now for consideration is to delete sub clause 1, sub clause 3, sub clause 4; redraft sub clause 5 to read that, “The minister shall within 30 days after the deviation, publish a report in the gazette, newspaper of wide circulation and on the website of the ministry.
2) The minister may with the approval of Parliament, deviate from the objectives in the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility where Uganda experiences a natural disaster, an anticipated severe economic shock, or any other significant unforeseen event that cannot be funded from the Contingencies Fund, other funding mechanisms provided in this Act, or using prudent fiscal policy adjustments”. Those would be the amendments as I have summarised in this particular clause 7.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, on that one, I have no objection. But there must be a comma somewhere because; “The minister may, with ...”, the reason is that if you read it continuously it may mean that, “May with approval” - he might refuse the approval.  So the purpose is to make sure the minister gets parliamentary approval. “May”, is optional on the deviation, but “May” is not on the approval of Parliament. So there must be a comma, so the minister may -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It can never be interpreted that way hon. Mafabi – (Laughter) - the minister “May”- the “May” is on whether he is going to do deviation or not. But this one states, “The minister may with the approval of Parliament -”. I put the question to the amendment -

MR OMACH: There was the proposal by Hon. Oboth Oboth that Parliament should also be given a time frame. I do not know whether that should not - can we use the word “Expeditiously”?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But you see it will come in the request because this thing will come by motion and the prayer will deal with the issue. The only vehicle for processing those issues will be a motion I suppose. I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.)

MR OMACH: Mr Chairperson, I propose that we introduce a new clause, “Tax and Revenue Bills”: “The minister shall as part of achieving the objectives of the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility present to Parliament Tax and Revenue Bills, which gives the Government power to obtain money from taxes, fees, charges and other impositions to be proposed in the annual budget”.

Mr Chairman, the justification here is that this is in line with Article 152(1) of the Constitution which states that, “No tax shall be imposed except under the authority of an Act of Parliament”. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you recall that we had this discussion when we were dealing with the budget. That is the only time Parliament focuses on the expenditure side; and it is only towards the end that we begin looking at the revenue side which creates confusion. This is intended to cure that difficulty.

MR EKANYA: I agree with you, Mr Chairman. I would like to seek clarification whether there is no need to improve on this. Because our argument and the argument of the private sector to Government is that tax in this country should be predictable. And we have asked that since government has medium term, MTEF, showing projection for revenue and growth for the next three years, government should be able to give the proposed taxes to the private sector the likely taxes to come in the next three years. 

But now, what the minister has proposed here, the way I understand it is only based on annual - the private sector and public would like to know the taxes likely to come. Is this annual or taxes that are going to be handled in the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility for the next three or five years in the MTEF?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Before the minister comes, I think clause 6(2)(a): “The Charter of Fiscal Responsibility shall provide- a) a detailed statement of the medium Term Fiscal Framework which shall indicate the measurable objectives of the Government…”.

MR EKANYA: It is very clear, but below, the proposal that the honourable minister has introduced is only talking about imposition to propose the annual budget. That is our concern; it contradicts what you have read.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But in achieving the objectives of the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility, “Present to Parliament, tax and revenue Bills, which give the Government power to obtain money for taxes, fees, charges and other impositions to be proposed in the annual budget”.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, the concern of the private sector, and this is their voice and the Minister of Finance know this position, that the private sector would even wish to know, the taxes that they are likely to pay in the next two , three , four years so that they can put it in their plan. 

Their concern is the haphazard intermediate taxes they introduced and it disorganised them in their planning; the last word here proposed in the annual budget is the concern. But if Government does not mind, please you can proceed like that. But that is their concern.

MR OMACH: Chairman, the budget is annual and the proposed tax measures are on annual basis.

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, I seek to be guided. I have a procedural concern. last time when we adjourned discussion on the Bill, in the process of considering it, Members had raised the issue of provisions that repeal or propose to repeal the Budget Act and we had said that before we get into those issues that will deal with budgetary issues, we first deal with the principle, whether we are going to have the Budget Act repealed and whatever. 

So, I thought that is something that we needed to dispose off at this stage and then we know whether we can carry everything and put it here or we are getting everything out of here and staying with – (Interjections) - because it was raised and there was an agreement that it will be disposed of at this stage when we begin considering budgetary issues.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, this particular provision is not in the Budget Act, or any other law that I know of. This is a completely new proposal that is being made, so it does not affect the Budget Act in any way. Can we pass this honourable members?

MR MWIRU: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. I would seek clarification from the minister. When we talk about deviation, I would think that, assuming a request came to Finance seeking an intended deviation, of course when you bring tax bills at that point, they would still be within the financial year. 

But to build on what Hon. Ekanya was raising, if you introduce tax Bills at that point, they would actually impact on the traders, whereas the tax Bills which have been introduced in the financial year come with a budget and the traders normally know that actually there will be taxes which will be introduced with the budget.
 
But when you introduce a request - as we talk now, the Public Finance Act and the Constitution require that when you raise a supplementary, you must show the sources where you are going to get the funds from. But it seems like the source of the funding of the deviation are these tax Bills, which are going to a company it; which are subsequent with the request. So I seek some clarification.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, is there anywhere in the world where taxes are presented three years in advance? 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, no, they are always on a yearly basis and we undertake a lot of discussions with the stakeholders.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman that is true. You know budget transparency means that the budget is predictable; it means the revenue and the taxes are always predictable and Uganda now is being ranked, I think out 173; it is moving down from 143 in terms of transparency; so we are doing well. 

But having said that, Mr Chairman, I wanted to impress the Minister on the following: Your proposals are good, but on deposits - what do I mean by on deposit? For example, if a foreigner comes to work in Uganda, by the time he is given a work permit, he is allowed to deposit money equivalent to his ticket which can take him back in case he fails to perform or when something wrong happens. 

Now, when you put the Bills like this, the deposit initially is a collection from somebody and should have a law attached to it. I was proposing that when you put taxes, fees and charges, these are the ones you have imposed on people; and you expect no problems on that. But you should also have a deposit; if somebody is to collect money from people, he must have the authority to do so. 

So, I suggest that we add after “Charges”, “Deposits and other impositions” to cater for deposits which we collect and at an appropriate time we can remit it. If they are not taken back, they go to the consolidated fund as income.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are deposits impositions? 

MR OMACH: Yes, they are. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So it is taken care of by other impositions. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Imposition is a tax – (Interjections) – it is money you collect from somebody anticipating that if anything occurs, you can pay him back. If he decides to leave the country - that is why we are having a lot of mismanagement of deposits in Uganda; after my three years contract, I go away leaving the money. Now the accounting officer, the one who manages the account sometimes knows that this person left. This will help so that at a particular time, for example, when the person has gone away, the money becomes income for Hon. Fred Omach.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister deposits - 

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman, I come from Kigezi, Rubanda. Hon. Mafabi is an accountant like me, so I would like us to reason together. At what stage does deposit become revenue? From his explanation, this deposit becomes revenue when it is not claimed. And when I relate it with the proposal from the minister on tax and revenue Bills, I do appreciate that this money which is not claimed must be captured. But it does not fall under the proposal the Minister is speaking about; maybe as we progress in the Bill, we shall find where to fit it, but it cannot fit in the tax and revenue Bill as the Minister is proposing. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, yes I am an accountant like him, and of course he is younger than me in the profession. I have been there for 22 years. He has raised an issue, when does it become revenue? The Minister has been very clear and said tax and revenue Bills. The revenue here is anticipated; it can be as prescribed or as anticipated. That is why I am saying, to save our Minister problem in future, it should be captured. I am sure you will do it because I understand what I am saying. That is why they have said it is not a tax.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Member for Rubanda, is that clear now; can we agree on this and move?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, I asked, when does it become revenue? You recognise revenue when it has been earned that is what Government does. So, I still believe that these deposits, before they become un-claimable, cannot be part of our revenue. Therefore, in just 12 months, you can hardly determine that this amount shall remain unclaimed. 

So we need to treat it from elsewhere in this Bill; as we progress, we shall find where it fits. I want to propose that we take the proposal by the minister as it is.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You mean the revenue Bill? You already have the revenue.

MR MUSASIZI: Tax and revenue Bills, these are projections within the financial year and you cannot project that a certain amount of default shall remain unclaimed at the end of 12 months.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But honourable member, we are passing a law that takes care of the whole situation. Hon. Ekanya, you can make the proposals later on clause 25 which relates to this subject, but can we deal with this at this stage?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the reason I am raising this, maybe, let me put it in another context; assuming the Minister of Internal Affairs has USD35 million on an account and it earns interest on that account. Under normal circumstances, when you are refunding you do not refund money with interest and that is the reason we have agreed to move those monies. So at an appropriate time in every year there is some money which will accrue as a result of those deposits, either in interest or money not being claimed. 

We must protect the minister in the sense that when somebody comes up after 20 years and he says that he had been charged – we should provide that after a given period of time you cannot claim it; you went away and it was taken. This will prevent people from saying that the interest on this deposit is their money; because, when you deposit money, you should get interest. This money is kept anticipating that some activities might take place.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, does it make sense to you?

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I would propose that we deal with that under clause 25 on collections and deposits. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay? Alright, I put the question to the amendment proposed by the minister on the new clause 8 which is proposed to be inserted immediately after clause 7, “The minister shall, part of achieving the objectives of the Charter or Fiscal Responsibility, present to Parliament tax and revenue Bills which give the Government power to obtain money from taxes, fee charges and other impositions to be proposed in the annual budget”. The head note for that section is “Tax and Revenue Bills”. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8

MR SSEBUNYA: Under budget framework paper, insert new sub clauses immediately after sub clause (4) as follows: (5) “The minister shall present with the Budget Framework Paper a certificate issued by the Attorney-General:

    1) Certifying that the Budget Framework Paper is gender and equity responsive; and 
    2) specifying measures taken to equalise opportunities for women, men, PWDs and other marginalised groups.
    3) 
(6) The Speaker shall committee the budget framework paper to the relevant committees for consideration.

Justification: To ensure that gender and equity concerns are mainstreamed in the budget framework paper. 

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I propose a small amendment to what the chairperson is suggesting on certificate of gender compliance. We have the equal opportunities commission and we have been engaging with it this morning. They have submitted to us that they are not comfortable with the Attorney-General issuing this certificate. Rather they are comfortable with the commission because it is mandated to monitor and support gender equity. This certificate should be issued by Equal Opportunities Commission but certified by the Attorney-General. That is the amendment I want to propose.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Where is the Attorney-General in this?

MR SSENUNYA: I said that the minister shall present the budget framework paper with a certificate issued by –(Interruption)

MR OMACH: Chair, it is the practice that we should submit to ministries and government agencies the budget circular which gives guidance to all accounting officers on how to proceed and it contains issues on gender budgeting. So we do not agree with the proposal of the committee; we would submit that it should reads as follows: “The minister shall present with Budget Framework Paper a certificate issued in consultation with the ministry responsible for gender confirming that the annual budget is gender and equity responsive”. I beg to submit.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I do not know why the committee thought about the Attorney-General and now the minister is coming up with the Minister of Gender. Supposing, tomorrow, Gender is a department under Ministry of Finance. I think the reason why the Attorney-General is being brought up is that he will be brought to book to answer why he gave the certificate. He would not be sued for issuing a certificate –(Interjections) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He has not accepted; so why are you accessing the microphone?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, let me give her. 

MS KWAGALA: Thank you chair for permitting me to seek clarification. The previous position of the minister was that the Attorney-General gives the certificate. But now the minister has changed his position and suggests that it should be the Minister of Gender to consider.

I am seeking clarification as to which position you are moving, because the minister who was presenting has changed and conceded that it should be Ministry of Gender because issues of gender equality are in that docket.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the problem we have with our colleagues is that they do not read –(Interruption)


MS KWAGALA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I rise on a point of order. Hon. Nandala knows the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament and knows that people should debate with decorum. He is also aware that people who come to this Parliament require only S.6 which I am above. Is he in order to impute that people do not read yet I was guiding him when he was speaking to an issue where the minister - which is even very simple; this one is a current issue on which he has not read but has continued making us believe that we should take a trend which we have moved from. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, for Iganga District, do you read? (Laughter) -If you read, then that one affects.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. The minister got up and said I am not agreeing with the committee which proposed the Attorney-General. He was not saying that he has changed his mind from his original position which has derailed us. So, if you have the Bill there my sister, check; this is a committee report which the minister is raising. 

Having said that, Mr Chairperson, I am raising that because inequality does not mean only women or children; it may mean even regions. Supposing Gulu is at a disadvantage as per the Constitution, you cannot say that the minister should only look at the gender; what about those areas which are not well developed? That is why I am raising it and I said the committee was good to say,  “Attorney-General, let us not look at only gender; let us look at also region and equity and if it is equity, the best person to deal with equity is not the Minister for Gender; it is either the Equal Opportunities Commission, as my sister has proposed, or -(Interruption)

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. The responsibility to ensure equity in distribution of resources, gender equity and regional balance is with the Equal Opportunities Commission -(Interjection)- and religion; and this Parliament passed a law on that and that commission happens to fall in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. The functions of the Attorney-General are clearly stated in the Constitution; they do not include ensuring gender equity, religion equity and region equity. So, I think the new proposal of the minister is correct. Of course it would have been more particular if we mentioned the Equal Opportunities Commission but since the commission falls in Gender, we could go with that. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, but it is a constitutional commission. 

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairperson, you have rightly put it -(Interjection)- I do not; what I am objecting to is the proposal that the Attorney-General does this work because that is not his or her work.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is unfortunate that my good brother who has read law, instead of thanking me who yielded the Floor, thanked only the Deputy Chairperson. So, he should apologise. That is why I am raising those issues and that is why at first I was trying to dispute the issue of gender and I was coming to the Attorney-General so that I support my sister, Mariam that we should amend these majors - the marginalised areas, regions - and this should be under the Equal Opportunities Commission. I beg to amend that this should not go to the Attorney-General but the Equal Opportunities Commission. But also to add under two areas which are marginalised to take care of even regional areas.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairperson, we also conceded that it is the minister responsible for Gender and therefore agree – because the Equal Opportunities Commission is under Gender, then the ministry will -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, that is not what I have said.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. If I got the essence of the amendment proposed by the minister, he is talking about being issued by the Ministry of Finance in consultation and that is the position I want to support; that this certificate should be issued by the Ministry of Finance because it is the Ministry of Finance that has the technical expertise to deal with the budget framework from all ministries and all the departments. We can agree on the issue of “in consultation” that it is in consultation with the Equal Opportunities Commission; that will have the aspect of examination of the issues.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if you give the equal opportunities commission responsibility of vetting the budget then they will do no other work. It will not be able to do any other work. Just look at the budget; it is not a small thing. The Equal Opportunities Commission may not be seized of the technical expertise to handle the entire budget and issue certificate to that effect. So let us be realistic here.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, we had so many issues including the National Planning Authority to ensure that the budget is in conformity with the National Planning Authority; we had issues to ensure that the budget has the issue of health in regard to the UN; so we took a decision which we need to introduce that it is the responsibility of Parliament to use its technical institutions when analysing the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility and when analysing the issue of MTEF to ensure that the budget, the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility, and the medium term expenditure framework are in conformity with the gender equity policy of Government; are in conformity with the National Development Plan and all these other responsibilities. 

So, we need to introduce a clause there where the technical people from this department come to Parliament and advise members of Parliament so that when we are preparing the medium term expenditure framework, we make a provision and say, according to Parliament, on the gender perspective, you need to move this figure to this figure and then we present it here and then it is passed. 

It is not about the certificate; it is about policy and revenue on which Parliament must take a decision. Those people must come here and advise Parliament because we said even if those people are given a certificate and members of Parliament are not in agreement, some Members will throw it away and so, a decision was taken that all the technical institutions of Government that are very important to the budget should come and give Parliament input. 

So, we needed to introduce a clause that in analysing the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility, the medium term expenditure framework, the Equal Opportunity Commission shall participate and ensure - we agreed on that, that the National Planning Authority will participate and that the MTEF will be in conformity with the provisions of the law. That is the decision during consultation because we realised that the process will totally fail. I want to be very honest with my colleague.

MS NALULE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. I think this discussion is timely and I would like to respect what hon. Ekanya is saying. But as far as the technical aspect is concerned, I would like to inform this Parliament that the Minister of Finance has already developed gender and equity guidelines and it has an entire department which actually works on these issues. So basically, when the recommendation is framed that the minister - because in the interpretation section ‘minister’ means Minister of Finance. So, if the recommendation is saying the minister, meaning the Minister of Finance will submit a certificate issued, I feel that the technical aspect would have be done in the Ministry of Finance.

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I think the issue of the gender and equity certificate is very important. We are all aware that there are different roles between men and women and these socially constructed roles have their own needs and those needs must be catered for. That is why we see that when we have the certificates, the minister will be able to remember that there are needs of women, men and minority groups which must be catered for and must be translated into financial implication; that is why we want the certificate there. Without the certificate, nobody will even think of these issues and my colleague, hon. Ekanya said this should be given to Members of Parliament. 

I would like to inform you that the most important people in the budget are the technical people in the Ministry of Finance and if they have already drafted something, it is easier for members of Parliament but if they do not, it cannot work. So, I still insist that let us have the certificate of gender and equity. Do not think that gender is for women alone; it is for you, men. You also have needs which must be catered for.

The issue of the minister, yes, the Minister of Finance can issue the certificate in consultation with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development so that they know how to advise them accordingly. So, I think that our certificate of gender and equity must be there if you want to support the marginalised group. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Listening to members about the issue regarding the gender and equity, we have got a tendency of looking at one side when we are talking about the budgeting regarding the issue that affects the other gender. 

And we have been mainly looking at the part of the expenditure. I want to bring to the attention of the members that we should also be looking at the issue that affects the revenue aspect - the issue of taxation, like hon. Baba Diri said that there are special needs that affect us based on our gender roles. We have seen where the women and girls have been affected as result of imposition of taxes and they end up failing to buy something because taxes have been imposed on those items and the price therefore goes up. 

So, we should be able to look also at the tax aspect rate when we are formulating the tax policy. We should not only be looking at the expenditure aspect because the certificate of financial implications mainly will deal with the expenditure aspect of it. But we must also bring on board the issue of the tax element such that the disadvantaged will not suffer as a result of the imposition of tax. That should be looked at also and that could be information that should be brought to the attention of the technical people as they are handling this matter. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there seems to be an agreement that there is need for somebody to certify that the Budget Framework Paper is gender and equity responsive; that seems to be agreed. So, can we now determine who should do this?

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. When we put in place the law for the Equal Opportunities Commission, we gave them a mandate and the mandate had precisely to do with ensuring equity and it is also specifically in the Ministry of Gender. So, we know who we are talking about in the Ministry of Gender; it is not the directorate for youth, women; it is the Equal Opportunities Commission; it is the one that we gave this mandate. So I think that in order for us not to get into some ambitious position, it would be proper that this certificate is issued by the Ministry of Finance in consultation with the Equal Opportunities Commission.

Secondly, I would like that the idea mooted by hon. Ekanya, - the one of members of Parliament doing this kind of role and collecting technical people  - be really dropped, reason being that this budget we are talking about is an expensive process. By the time it reaches here, it is the tip of the iceberg. If you lose out on gender and equity at the formulation stages, you have lost it completely.

Lastly, for the Ministry of Finance, the reason we really need the Equal Opportunities Commission to work with them is that they have the huge burden of compiling this Budget. Then we are asking them to look at their back to see whether they have addressed the issues of equity and gender responsiveness; you are asking them to kind of mark their work. Somebody else needs to help the Ministry of Finance at least to deal with issues of gender and equity. So, in a nutshell, it should be in consultation with the Equal Opportunities Commission.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: And what about the National Planning Authority, the Vision 2040 and all these other things captured in the annual proposals because there could be a deviation from the Vision 2040 and the five year development plans so that there is -

MR OMACH: Mr Chairperson, a proposal of having in consultation with the ministry responsible for Gender was because the Equal Opportunities Commission falls under the Ministry but since it is a statutory body, we concede.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Maybe I should have spoken before the minister came in but normally when the Minister of Finance issues the Budget Call Circular, there is a statement in there which requires the various ministries and departments when they are formulating their budgets to ensure that the budget is gender responsive. At the initiation of the budgeting cycle, that is where the Minister of Finance comes in. 

When the sector working groups in the various ministries are allocating their resources to the various priorities, my thinking is that when the Budget Framework Paper is being laid on Table here, it should be with a certification from the various ministries that each vote - because you know a budget is a big thing and I do not want to believe that the Ministry of Gender will be able to check in each and every budget and vote and certify that it is gender responsive.

So, I want to push this responsibility to each vote to ensure that when they are budgeting, whatever Budget framework they present and it is coordinated and formulates the Budget Framework Paper, a certification by each entity is attached that their department budget is gender responsive. When this budget framework paper is laid on Table, it will be upon each sectoral committee to ensure that what is certified in that budget framework paper by vote is actually gender responsive. That is when we check to ensure that the Budget Framework Paper, by vote and department, is gender-responsive. And of course they would have attached by department, those certificates in the Budget Framework Paper. 

Now when Parliament is making its recommendations to His Excellency the President through that one document prepared by the Budget committee, formulating recommendations of Parliament on the Budget Framework Paper, that is when Parliament and each sectoral committee should be able to make a comment as to whether what was delivered in the Budget Framework Paper is actually gender-responsive by sector committee. 

And when that budget is presented and the budget is read - I am still looking at the cycle by the Budget Act - and we receive the policy statements, that is when we shall check to ensure that our recommendations in the Budget Framework Paper, inclining to gender-responsiveness or non-responsiveness of that Budget Framework Paper, have been taken into account and if we are satisfied as Parliament or as a committee, then we pass that Vote. But if we are not, then the committee will take it upon itself to ensure that the budget being laid here by the chairperson of the committee for adoption and appropriation should be gender-responsive and therefore adjustments should be made at that stage. That is my proposal, Mr Chairperson. 

And I think it is more practical because we are looking at a big document which you cannot just give to one department, for example, the Ministry of Gender and the Equal Opportunities Commission to handle. Imagine even in Parliament, we are giving committees and it is committees made up of a total of 386 MPs; what about that small Equal Opportunities Commission? It cannot. So, let us be realistic and handle it that way. Thank you.

MR LUGOLOBI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I thought that we should put the whole idea of budgeting into its rightful context. An annual budget implements a National Development Plan; that is the idea behind the budget and the National Development Plan has a cascading effect from the national vision. What we have in the national vision are simply our aspirations as a nation over the long-term and, these national development plans, which we execute every five years, are meant to implement that national vision. 

Mr Chairperson, we have said that the Budget Framework Paper will be consistent with the National Development Plan and the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. In effect, we are saying that in preparing the National Development Plan, due account is taken of the gender-mainstreaming issues.

The National Development Plan takes a very wide consultative process. The annual budget, because it is implementing the National Development Plan, we should not be spending too much time because ideally we are talking about figures which are generally already contained in the National Development Plan. Now, for us to be spending so much time in scrutinising gender issues, which are already covered in the National Development Plan, the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility, I think will be very complex for this Parliament. 

I must submit that we are about to undertake a new roadmap for the budget cycle and it is going to be most likely -(Interjection)- I was coming to that. I am not opposing but I am saying that by the time we get to the budget, we have already solved a lot of problems relating to gender. So, we should not be so terribly worried and that is why I wanted to buy the amendment by the minister that the minister issues the certificate in consultation with the Minister of Gender. Because the cascading effects from the vision to the NDP to the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility and to the annual budget - unless we are saying there is no consistency.

MS ALUM: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I would like, first of all, to thank hon. Omach for conceding because we went to Rwanda sometime back together with the minister and we learnt a lot from Rwanda on how they are handling the issue of equal opportunities. The most important thing is the gender indicator which can be done well by the Equal Opportunities Commission, just as it is being done in Rwanda. 

I want to give an example; if we say that we leave the aspect of gender just at large like that and we say that we are going to follow the usual practice coming to Parliament here, we are going to miss it. Let me pick the example of the health sector, we can say that in order to address the gender issue, we are going to buy maternity beds for women. Yes, we are addressing gender issues but at the end of it all, we might realise that we have not bought beds for the disabled women. Much as the beds are there, we will have not tackled the nitty-gritty of the disabled women. 

So, it is very important when we bring the Equal Opportunities Commission to consult with Finance. Some of those issues which cannot be quickly seen by other agencies or intuitions like Parliament can be addressed by the body which was created by this Parliament. Mr Chairman, we had the Ministry of Gender; we had the Ministry of Finance but we still created the Equal Opportunities Commission because we had a gap and this body has come to fulfil that gap. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The Minister of Finance, in consultation with the Equal Opportunities Commission, shall issue those - okay, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, I propose to amend clause 8 as follows: For purpose of sub section 1, each accounting officer shall in –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, be specific about what you want to amend, please.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, I am starting with clause 8(1)&(2); you have a copy of it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, but I see clause 8(2).

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, by inserting a new sub clause (1), “Each accounting officer shall, in consultation with the relevant stakeholders, prepare a Budget Framework Paper for the vote and shall submit the Budget Framework Paper to the Minister.” The justification is for clarity as to where the Budget Framework Paper is submitted. Thank you very much.

MR OMACH: I concede, Mr Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, can I put the question to this particular amendment?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, that is where we got a problem and if the minister had done it earlier, I think this debate would not have been there. The amendment that I want to add to this is to merge - because the person who knows about balanced development and gender issues would be the one to prepare that Budget Framework Paper. So I would say, ‘…taking into consideration balanced development, gender and equity responsive.’ The justification is that the first call-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, first, the phrasing of what you have just said-

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: After what hon. Ekanya has said, then add “…, taking into consideration balanced development, gender and equity responsive.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Equity responsive - how would it fit in the flow of the text?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Or responsiveness. The justification is that the first person to know about balanced development and gender issues will be the first person preparing the Budget Framework Paper so that he takes that into consideration when doing so. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister and hon. Chairperson, is that okay if we take a decision on this addition?

MR OMACH: Mr Chairperson, these are details that are catered for when we are dealing with the regulation. But if you want them to be put –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment proposed by hon. Ekanya and improved on by hon. Mafabi. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, more amendments to clause 8. Hon. Minister and hon. Nandala-Mafabi, on the establishment of Treasury, I was told that you are going to move it. (Interjection)- It is in clause 8. Insert a new clause after new clause 8.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But that is not clause 8 then. I put the question –

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairperson, we know how big the Budget Framework Paper is. In clause 8(6), there is a proposal to publish the Budget Framework Paper in a newspaper of wide circulation. I wonder whether this proposal is practical. Should we not limit this to the website of the ministry alone? We might legislate something that is impracticable to implement. I am moving an amendment to delete the expression “and in a newspaper of wide circulation.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, I do not think the framework they are going to publish in the paper is that huge book. That is why it is even called Budget Framework Paper. It is a paper. It can be one page or two pages; but what will happen is it will say, the Ministry of Finance will have this budget and this amount for this period. It is a summary. So, Mr Chairperson, it will be better for the public to know how much each sector is going to get. The detailed one in that huge volume which will have the investment plan, NDP and others will be on the website.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But that is the Budget Framework Paper. There is only one paper, not two. The summary of a paper does not become the paper. Can you really publish the Budget Framework Paper in a newspaper? Even the newspapers will not have the capacity to publish it. (Laughter) 

MR KATUNTU: Well, I hope my brother hon. Nandala-Mafabi withdraws that. We are faced with government publications and with due respect to the colleagues on the Frontbench, we wake up every day and look at your pictures. Three quarters of the paper will have the ministers’ and permanent secretaries’ pictures and we are paying money to look at their faces daily. 
This is a very important point and I think Government has a policy - it is very expensive -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Katuntu, there is a proposal to delete publication in the newspaper.

MR KATUNTU: And I am justifying it -(Laughter)- I am saying it should be deleted because sometimes, we are just looking at these people’s pictures under the guise of publishing government policies and so forth.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, this is the Budget Framework Paper. I put the question to that amendment for deletion of that aspect of publication.

(Question put and agreed to.)


THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that clause 8 as amended stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. I beg to move an amendment - there are two amendments - to start a new clause after clause 8: Establishment of Treasury. 

A treasury is hereby established consisting of:

    a) The Minister
    b) The Secretary to the Treasury
    c) The Accountant-General and
    d) The directorate of the ministry responsible for economic and finance matters.

ii) The minister shall be the head of the Treasury.  The subsequent clauses be renumbered accordingly.

The justification is to provide for the creation of the treasury by law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, honourable minister? Do you agree?

MR OMACH: So long as my pictures continue appearing in the newspaper, I have no objection.-(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR EKANYA: I wish to propose another amendment to clause 9(1) (g)-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We have not come to clause 9 yet.

Clause 9

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairperson, on clause 9 under the headnote: Functions of the Secretary to the Treasury, in sub-clause 1(b). Insert immediately after the word “coordinate” in the first line following the words “the preparation of the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility.”
The justification is that this is also the role of the Secretary to the Treasury.

In sub clause (1)d, rephrase the provisions as follows: d) monitor the performance of the financial management system. The justification is setting standards for the financial management system should be the Accountant-General’s role but the Secretary to the Treasury can monitor his performance. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We are on clause 9.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, first of all, we have established the treasury. Now we are going to functions of the Secretary to Treasury but we have not defined who the Secretary to Treasury is? At least the minister is known; the Accountant-General is defined but the Secretary to Treasury is not defined. 

The appointment of the minister is known, the appointment to the Secretary Treasury is unknown and even the Accountant-General is known. The problem which is coming up is that we are giving somebody a function before we know who the person is. So, Mr Chairperson, before we provide for functions, we should first define who the Secretary to Treasury is?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Define.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, I want to say that before (1), the Secretary - first of all, we shall amend the heading. We are talking about the function and we should also amend it. The Secretary to Treasury, the appointment, the function - because we are going to lump them together; so, I want to define the Secretary to Treasury as somebody who manages the resources for the treasury.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I like the creativity of the former Leader of the Opposition. Are we defining it at this point? I believe if he wants to establish the Office of the Secretary to Treasury then we would go into qualifications and appointment but if we are defining at this point, that would be a great intervention that would be relevant in the earlier -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Would you like to improve on it?

MR OBOTH: Yes, have they established already a secretariat?  No what we established earlier is a Treasury; we now come to Secretary to Treasury and we do not go to who that person is but how that person gets to be appointed and then the qualifications needed. I believe that is what the former Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, wanted us to do but since he was in Mwiri and some of us were in Manjasi, that is how the creativity –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, who is the Secretary to the Treasury?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, I have now benefited from my brother who is learned. I think at an appropriate time, we are going to establish the Office of the Secretary to Treasury and that is the time when we shall bring in who the Secretary to Treasury is, the appointment, qualification and the tenure.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But honourable member, who is the Secretary to Treasury? Are we creating a different Secretary to Treasury from the one we have now?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, we do not have a - the current one if you look at the law, the Secretary to Treasury is not defined anywhere.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But here they say, the Secretary to the Treasury and Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, the Secretary to Treasury does not necessarily have to be the Permanent Secretary for Ministry of Finance because if you are creating this idea, you see how it is moving. The Secretary to Treasury is going to have a lot of power more than the P.S. The reason we have merged this - we have brought a problem to the PS. The PS is Secretary to Treasury, he is managing finance, economics, and is also managing others and we want to look at this treasury. The purpose of the public finance is that finance must be managed separately. World over, treasuries are different; we are the ones who made a mistake of merging and now we have got the law. We should create the Office of the Secretary to Treasury but even if you combine him specifically here - because we can see here that they are saying “Secretary to Treasury” they are not saying, “Secretary to the PS” and not Permanent Secretary / Secretary to Treasury. They are defining it as Secretary to Treasury.

That is why, Mr Chairperson, we must - since you have brought him separate, it will be prudent that we define or we establish- That is why I want to propose here that there should be an establishment of the office of the Secretary to Treasury.

Mr Chairperson, my brother hon. Lugolobi should be a little bit patient. The justification is that the Secretary to Treasury’s function will be managing the treasury and the treasury consists of finance or cash. Now the one who mobilises cash brings it to him and his job is to see how to manage this money. That is why we need to establish that office. You can add him other duties as a PS but we should have the Secretary to Treasury well defined.

Mr Chairperson, I want you to give me a few minutes and I establish that –(Interruption)

MR LUGOLOBI: Mr Chairperson, I thought that by moving in the direction he seems to be moving, we are unnecessarily moving too far. The amendment brought by hon. Ekanya created the treasury office and in that office we find the minister, the Secretary to the Treasury, the Accountant-General, the directorate and directorates of the ministry and the ministry shall be the head of that treasury. In other words, we have created the Office of the Secretary to the Treasury. 

Now in clause 9, we are defining or describing the functions of that office. So, I really do not see a gap because with all these functions from (a) up to (i) it is going to be very difficult for us to attempt to define – I do not know what expression we are going to use to summarise all this.

The management of cash that we are talking about is being referred to in (f), “manage the Consolidated Fund and any other Fund as may be assigned by the minister.” So, I really do not think that we should go beyond what we already have now in place. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairperson, there is another office in the Ministry of Justice where the Permanent Secretary actually is a Solicitor-General. These are statutory offices. You have already created a treasury and you need a Secretary to that Treasury. The law as it is now - the Bill is providing for distinctive functions of the Secretary to the Treasury. In the law, it does no harm because you see what has been happening is that the Secretary to the Treasury office did not have statutory backing, it was just literally administrative. 

The proposal from hon. Nandala-Mafabi is that we can include the statutory establishment of that office. There shall be the Secretary to the Treasury appointed by the President and then you go ahead and provide for the function. It is also good for the order of that office to know his creation, his powers and his function stemming from the law. So, I do not see any harm in us specifically creating that office since we are now giving it other functions which that office has not been performing previously. So, I suggest –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Hon. Katuntu, the challenge we have in our administrative system is that we are using certain concepts, terminologies and management systems that were borrowed from the UK, Australia and American. In the UK, according to the information I know, the Secretary to the Treasury is the minister. In some countries, there is a head of Public Service and in this case we have mixed the issues and we have said that the minister is the head of the treasury. Therefore, the secretaries to treasury in the UK and other countries are even junior officials, who help the minister to run. 

So, I am seeking clarification from you, hon. Katuntu; don’t you think that if we have the secretary to the treasury also being appointed by the President and the Ministers also being appointed and then you create an office with powers, we will have duplications? Don’t you think we may need to do more research on this? 

MR KATUNTU: I do not know whether what hon. Ekanya has said has improved the point I was trying to make. Anyway, Mr Chairperson, I suggest that we just create that there shall be a secretary to the treasury appointed by the President and consequently provide for the function - (Interjection) – okay, you can make the amendment.  

MR MWESIGE: The amendment I am making is on recommendation of the Public Service Commission. 

MR KATUNTU: I concede.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Where are you putting the amendment? You do not just amend; where is it? Do we just leave it floating? Where is it going to be? -(Laughter)

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairperson, we shall create 9(1) and say, “Secretary to the Treasury” as a headnote and say “There shall be a Secretary to the Treasury appointed by the President on recommendation by the Public Service Commission.” Then 9(2) “Functions of the Secretary to the Treasury…” I do not have any problems with that.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I think after the creation of the office, we need to put the qualifications for that office before we get to the functions.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: What hon. Ekanya is raising is true. If we have created the office - I want to make amendments to what hon. Katuntu raises that there shall be a Secretary to the Treasury appointed by the President on recommendation of Public Service.” 

I want to improve it by saying, Public Service Commission. The reason I am raising this is with the approval of Parliament. The justification is that –(Interjection)- listen to me; the Secretary to the Treasury is a powerful person and he will be overseeing even the Bank of Uganda. The Governor Bank of Uganda comes here for approval and you do not want to accept approval by Parliament.

Two, whenever they bring a budget here, the first question Parliament asks is, “Where are the accounting officers?” Unless the accounting officers have been approved, they cannot release the budget. Now this Secretary to the Treasury, we have entrusted him with a function of appointing accounting officers. So, he should have a place also to report to. 

So, Mr Chairperson, that is the reason I want to move an amendment on what hon. Katuntu has raised that the President will appoint a Secretary to the Treasury on recommendation by the Public Service Commission, with the approval of Parliament.” The justification is what I have mentioned.

On the qualification which hon. Ekanya has brought - since he is going to deal with resources, the qualifications this person must have are high level, of course one of them is integrity but one of the qualifications first -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you are proposing amendments to the law but the way you are proceeding, I do not know how it is going to be captured as an amendment. Honourable members, can we be systematic? We have done the establishment of the treasury. In that establishment, indeed the Secretary to the Treasury referred to in the clause would be appointed by the President; So that we have a sequence - the secretary is already referred to in what we have just passed. So, can somebody guide us along those lines - because if you say we shall be at the level of a permanent secretary, then that means appointment issues also will be - okay, then go and deal with that properly so that it can be effectively captured. Please, somebody can do that for us and then after that of course there will be the functions which are already here.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, the amendment which hon. Nandala-Mafabi had proposed and to which hon. Mwesige conceded is that the Secretary to the Treasury be appointed by the President, on the recommendation of the Public Service Commission, with the approval of Parliament.” That is what hon. Nandala-Mafabi had proposed. 

The justification that hon. Nandala-Mafabi made and hon. Mwesige- I beg you to just give me one minute - the reason is, I have told you and this information is at your fingertips, that in some countries secretaries to the Treasury are even ministers. But here, we are using terminologies we have mixed up because in this case, we have a minister who is the head of the Treasury and we have a Secretary to the Treasury. And below it, the Secretary to the Treasury in his absence can even delegate responsibility. 

But the fact that the Secretary to the Treasury appoints accounting officials, who account for a lot of money and yet according to the Constitution, all accounting officials are accountable to Parliament; we think that it is prudent enough that the name comes here and it should be a person of integrity for approval. And normally, hon. Adolf Mwesige you know that this Parliament - the best of its work - Mr Chairperson to the best of its ability, has never deferred any appointment because most of these people are scrutinised and vetted by the Public Service Commission. They have always done their job.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairperson, the amendment I had made had really balanced the amendment hon. Katuntu made. First of all, when the Public Service Commission recommends, just like the Judicial Service Commission does for judges, the President cannot appoint somebody who is recommended by the Public Service Commission, in view of this amendment. So unless the Public Service Commission has sourced and recommended the person of the Secretary to Treasury to the President, the President will not appoint that person. 

So, I thought that check and balance was good enough – (Interjection) - I am just talking about the check and balance. We have the Head of Public Service for example who is actually the head of all permanent secretaries. He is appointed by the President on recommendation of the Public Service Commission but his name does not necessarily come to Parliament. The head of the Treasury is the minister, going by the amendment which we have already passed and the minister comes to Parliament for approval. So, I thought we would stop there and say, let the - (Interruption) - have you agreed? Can you kindly concede and we move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Hon. Adolf Mwesige, you are right; it is the Judicial Service Commission that appoints those judges but they always come here before the Appointments committee. They come because they need to get another vet. The Secretary to the Treasury is going to manage Shs 15 trillion –(Interruption) 

MR SSEBUNYA: Following what hon. Adolf Mwesige has said, the head of the Treasury is the minister. Now what will happen if two people - the head of the Treasury and his secretary - all appointed by the President disagree with each other? 

MR OBOTH: I am tempted to agree with hon. Adolf Mwesige. You cannot have in the same Treasury, a minister who is appointed by the President and approved by Parliament and then have somebody below her or him also appointed by the President and- get the-  it is possible ground for conflict - of asking who you are. 
Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, let us not lose the battle on this; you had a very good point. Let us go by the modification of hon. Adolf Mwesige so that we move on.

MR OMACH: Can I request hon. Nandala-Mafabi to concede because hon. Oboth said exactly what I was going to say –(Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, if the President is so high up there, then let us say, “On recommendation by the Public Service Commission, with approval of Parliament….” Yes, because you fear the President, so let us say with approval of Parliament. The reason we are raising this is we have made many laws here recently, where we put members of certain boards or workers who can be appointed there and we approve them in Parliament. There are many laws we have passed, of recent. 

So, Mr Chairman, what we are trying to do is to get this person to account to Parliament. So, the Secretary to Treasury should also be one of those – (Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: I actually wanted to whisper to you. But we could have a problem; the Secretary to Treasury is actually a civil servant and in this country, there is a head of the civil service and that head of civil service does not come here for approval. So to have one of his subordinates approved by Parliament, it would create a little bit of a problem. So, I was really thinking that we could move on.

MS ALASO: Mr Chairperson, thank you very much. I just want to respond in a way to the fears raised by hon. Oboth that there is a minister who heads the Treasury and then you have these civil servants appointed by the President and so forth.

Mr Chairperson, that just sent me thinking that then it is important also as we deal with the composition of the Treasury, to clearly point out the role of the minister. It sounds obvious that it is political supervision but now that there seems to be an inherent conflict already embedded there; if we do not specify what the minister will do, we have seen reports in this House, where ministers have issued directives that should have not been issued by ministers. 

We have examined in the Public Accounts committee (PAC) supplementary budgets that came here and the permanent secretaries denied having a hand in making them. So that inherent conflict has to be addressed probably now. Of course I have the view even when my colleagues have said something better, I still held the view that we should have vetted the appointment of the permanent secretaries; but their views seem so superior to mine. So, I will let mine rest. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairperson, my view is associated to that of hon. Adolf Mwesige and hon. Katuntu because we are likely to run into a danger of having our law that we are struggling to enact countermanded in the courts of law because under Article 172 of the Constitution, it is very clear that the appointment of public officers is categorically laid down in that Act.

It is only statutory bodies and the Judiciary and other specified officers who are clearly specified in the Constitution, whose appointment goes through certain bodies to the President and later to Parliament. 

Creating any other office in that way of appointment coming here, would certainly contravene Article 172 of the Constitution and we end up in the Constitutional Court. Therefore, the process should be recommendation of the Public Service Commission and the appointment by the President.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I do not have an amendment on qualification but – hon. Nandala-Mafabi, do you want to move it?
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you proposing qualification?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Mr Chairperson, I am proposing qualification. This person should have a high degree in financial management.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: How do you measure high degree - (Laughter) - is it by height?

MR EKANYA: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, don’t you think we can take this qualification to the regulations in 76 - I mean defining the qualification of Secretary to the Treasury; we could easily take it in the regulation in 76 so that we can move if you do not mind, and after all the regulation will come here. I do not know what you think about it?

MR KIWANDA: Mr Chairperson, there are very many other constitutional provisions which talk about qualifications and they just relate. Can’t we say that, that person should be at the level of a permanent secretary and above so that at least public service can use that as a basis?

MR OKUPA: Mr Chairperson, I want to propose that we could import the qualifications that we put in the Audit Act for the Auditor-General or the Accountant-General because the issues of the Treasury, of course you must be in the field of finance, economics, statistics, accountancy or we could say, say must have a minimum of a master’s degree -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In the law, in the Act?

MR OKUPA: Mr Chairperson, I withdraw that; that is why I earlier on stated that we could have the qualifications or improve on the qualifications of the Auditor-General in the Audit Act because - if someone could help me with the Audit Act, we could improve on it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can the qualification come in the advert? (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: But in the Audit Act we had something.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, hon. Okupa for giving way and Mr Chairperson. Whereas it is nice and it sounds prudent for us to prescribe qualification, but if we are giving the power or the opportunity to recommend to the Public Service Commission, can we tag the prescription of this qualification and experience to the Public Service Commission so that we do not really get into prescribing because honestly, if I were given opportunity, as one of the qualifications I would say, he should be a Japadhola  -(Laughter)- that is just on a lighter note. Mr Chairperson, my proposal is that the principle can be captured in the legislation and then the details can be left to the Public Service Commission. 

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairperson and honourable members, Article 166 of the Constitution provides for the functions of the Public Service Commission and in that Article 166(1), they say, “Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, the functions of the Public Service Commission shall include-  (c) to review the terms and conditions of service, standing orders, training and qualifications of public officers and matters connected with personnel management and development of public service and make recommendations on them to Government.” 

So, this function is constitutional; it has been given to the Public Service Commission and we think it is sufficient to move under that provision. 

MR EKANYA: Hon. Aston Kajara, that one does not apply. We have been here and we have seen where public service just recommends anybody. I do not want to mention my colleagues here and that is why it is prudent that we say the qualification shall be defined by the minister in the regulations. We have agreed with the minister that the regulation will be laid here before Parliament so that we move and then the Public Service Commission will use that to appoint. Yes, we can just say the qualification will be asked by the minister in the regulation. 

It is mentioned in other clauses that are coming ahead, Mr Chairperson. We have made reference to the regulation which is in clause 76, about the issues that we are referring to in the regulation; so that we can move because we cannot go in the detail of that qualification now. It is better in the regulation because public service will continue training people and new requirements and standards will continue coming up and therefore the regulation is the best place because it is easy to amend.

Mr RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, once again I want to associate myself with the views of hon. Kajara because he was very clear; the duty to appoint public officers is under Article 172. Article 166 that he has cited talks about the functions of the Public Service Commission and even (a) says to advice the President in performing his or her functions under Article 172 of this Constitution and one of the functions is cited, he read it in the same Article. To do anything in this Act we are enacting would be amending this Constitution by infection and you will find yourself in the Constitutional Court. So, let me say it here; if you continue and pass it, then I will meet it in the constitutional Court. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can we borrow from the appointment of the Clerk to Parliament? “Article 87 (1)- “There shall be a public officer designated Clerk to Parliament appointed by the President acting in accordance with advice of the Public Service Commission.” and there is no qualification. So, can we proceed on the basis of that. Can I put a question to the amendment - the one that is defining the appointment of the Secretary to the Treasury? I am talking about the appointment. I know that we have already established the Treasury but we are now dealing with the Secretary to the Treasury and the issue was on how to handle the appointment and I have just given you the example of how we handle the issue of the Clerk to Parliament. Would that be a way to go to deal with this? Can I put the question to this?

HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”

MR OKUPA: Mr Chairperson, we had passed that element. We are on the qualifications; we had already passed that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, then we do not need it anymore.

MR OKUPA: I was of the view – hon. Oboth had proposed something and if we had gone by that, on that part of the qualification - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: For the person to be a Japadhola? (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: No not that one -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I said, in the case of the appointment of the clerk, there is no qualification. So can we handle this and since we are there, do we need to do qualification, honourable members, in the law? 

NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, it is very good to hear that. The President can anytime appoint anybody -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: On the advice of the Public Service Commission.

NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes and they can direct public service to recommend. Mr Chairman, you saw recently, agricultural officers were removed and we took the UPDF - (Laughter) - and the Treasury was talking about resources, finances. The clerk to Parliament may be somebody who has known legal issues, accountancy but what we are dealing with is resources. We are trying to ask: who is this person? We are saying on recommendation of public service but among the qualification is that this person should be capable of being appointed a PS.

He should have knowledge in finance, accounting, economics or law. At least he should have knowledge in public finance. The reason we are raising this is because these are public finances. Let 
us say:

    1) A person capable of being appointed a permanent secretary.
    2) A person with knowledge in finance. 
    3) A person of high integrity or moral grounds. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we then borrow from the Auditor- General? Article 163(2): “A person shall not be appointed Auditor-General unless that person -
    a) is a qualified accountant of not less than 15 years standing; 
    b) is a person of high moral character and proven integrity?”
    c)  
I am just reading from the Auditor-General’s requirements, you cannot improve on that. That is a constitutional provision.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairperson, unless we really amend the Constitution; I am sorry, let us listen to each other. This provision you are citing is a specific provision in the Constitution on the Auditor-General, Article 163.

When you say an accountant, can an economist be Secretary to the Treasury? The most fundamental part of it is that the provision you are citing, Mr Chairman, is a constitutional provision. Unless you have a specific provision which maybe you can propose when we are making reforms in the Constitution on the Secretary General – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This is another meeting, Learned Attorney General. (Laughter)

MR RUHINDI: I think these expressions rhyme in a way. Unless you have a specific provision in the Constitution on Secretary to the Treasury, there is no way you can affect the provisions relating to public service on appointment of public officers. There is no way constitutionally. I would rather, Mr Chairperson, that we go with what you have recommended; we import and use the expression used in the appointment of the Clerk to Parliament.

MR OBOTH: In addition to the Learned Attorney-General’s opinion, in most of these other appointments where qualifications and experience is clearly stated out for statutory bodies – talk of the NFA - they have a specific professional and academic experience stipulated in the law. If we needed that one and I implore hon. Katuntu who has already conceded, we may need to establish - we should be able to drop this and move on as you had guided, Mr Chairperson.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, we are making a big mistake. Even in the same law, there are some offices where they are defining qualifications for people. I don’t know why when you reached Secretary to the Treasury, you ran away. Do you want to become one tomorrow? We have created an office of the Secretary to the Treasury, we would have said that this office is under public service and we don’t need to create it but we have created it. We have described how the public servant who served there is put in that office and we are asking, what would be the guiding principle to public service?

One, this person should be capable of being appointed permanent secretary. Two, he should have knowledge in financial management issues. We are trying to move on to a general framework. We are not saying –(Interruption)

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson and hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for giving way. You cannot give a guiding framework to an independent body like the Public Service Commission, which has an exclusive mandate independent of you to determine the qualifications of public servants in this country. The power for them to determine qualifications is given to them by the Constitution. 

As the Attorney-General has rightly pointed out, the office of Secretary to the Treasury is becoming a creature of this Bill now; it is not a constitutional body like Auditor-General where the Constitution prescribes the qualifications of the office.

It is not like the Office of the Attorney-General where the constitution prescribes the qualifications. The Office of the Solicitor-General, which is not constitutional, its terms and conditions of service are defined by the Public Service Commission. So, the motion you are moving, hon. Nandala- Mafabi, apart from offending Article 93 of the Constitution - I had restrained myself to comment on that - is also unconstitutional as far the Attorney-General’s opinion is concerned. 

MR NANADALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, I allowed hon. Adolf Mwesige because I thought he was going to contribute differently –
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, Article 2 - supremacy of the Constitution; the Constitution has given the office which you have seized with the responsibility by passing this law, the responsibility of determining who can be nominated to that office and that is the Public Service Commission. We have given it that responsibility. Do we now want to legislate for it who it can give that post by directing the PSC on what to do and yet the same Constitution says the Public Service Commission shall not be independent and shall not be subject to the directive of anybody? Are we now directing the Public Service Commission on what to do?

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, I think we are not, since hon. Adolf Mwesige has raised the issue of Article 93, members are concerned because we did not also raise certain issues when it came to appointing Mr Rwakoojo, the Secretary to the Electoral Commission - I did not want to mention his name - the Act defines who should be the Secretary to the Electoral Commission but our friend did not qualify and what the Public Service Commission did - because the law says, with recommendation. So, the Public Service Commission recommended and when we queried, they said their work is to recommend.

So, that is why and within this law –(Interjection)– yes, that is what the Public Service Commission said and he had a background of experience. 

And within this law we have created the treasury which includes the Accountant-General and we have defined who should be an Accountant-General because he or she should be a member of ICPAU. Under the Accounting Act of Uganda, he should be able to practice. He should qualify. You cannot just come from anywhere and become Accountant–General.

So, we have discussed this matter and therefore we are realising that you have this Secretary to the Treasury who is going to appoint accounting officers and the qualification of accounting officers are defined. But the qualification of this person is not defined; we are leaving a lacuna but if that is the position - it is not unconstitutional but it is in good faith so that when Public Service are going to appoint this person, they have a guideline. 

The same Constitution says that the Governor Bank of Uganda is independent in his operation and shall not work under directives but the Governor must account to the Auditor-General on how  he manages public resources. Independence does not stop you from being accountable to institutions.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can we take a decision on this matter and move forward. We have not reached clause 9, we were still concluding with the new clause which was inserted on establishment of the Treasury and that is how this debate came up. So we have established the Treasury; we have handled how the Secretary to the Treasury will be appointed under this new clause. So, we are not going to be able to go to clause 9, the way the business is proceeding.

 It is now a quarter past 7 O’clock and when the Speaker is speaking, senior members should know that they are supposed to be seated -(Laughter)- because I have seen seeing members of the House standing at the same time when the presiding officer is giving guidance on how to proceed on this matter because they do not require any further advice on this subject. 

So, honourable members, can we stop at this time here and then see how to move on from there but we have concluded on the issue of establishment of the Treasury and also on the appointment of the Secretary to the Treasury; that the appointment will be by the President on the advice of the Public Service Commission.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Chairperson and colleagues, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the Whole House to report. I put the question to that motion

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered a Bill entitled, “The Public Finance Bill, 2012” and passed clause 7 and clause 8 with amendments and part of clause 9. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we did not reach clause 9 but we inserted two new clauses.

MR OMACH: We inserted new clause 9(1) and passed with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Do you want to move the motion for the Third Reading of the Bill? Honourable members, this will be a good time to adjourn. So, the House stands adjourned to Tuesday, 2 O’clock.

(House rose at 7.15 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 25 November 2014 at 2.00 p.m.)




