Thursday, 27 November 2014

Parliament met at 3.03 in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Your Excellency the Vice-President and Members of Parliament, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. 

The East African Community Affairs ministry invites you for an awareness walk on 5 December 2014 at 9.00 O’clock starting from the Constitutional Square. The East African Community is organising an awareness week and they want you to participate in a walk - You are beating the messenger. (Laughter)

Honourable members, secondly, I shall be altering the Order Paper slightly; after the laying of papers, I would want us to complete the Public Finance Bill - there are only four clauses - and then we go back to the Order Paper. I will also make room for Members because as you know, according to our Rules of Procedure, on Thursdays the private members have an opportunity to raise issues. So, I will give them that opportunity. 

I also want to alert the members of the Government that there are 59 pending questions; so starting from next Tuesday, I will put two questions on the Order Paper with or without your reply. All the 59 were submitted to the Government but no answer has come back. So, from next week, you will just find yourself on the Order Paper and if you cannot answer, that will be your problem. We have written to the Government Chief Whip complaining about all these questions. So Prime Minister, I am giving notice.

3.06
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise on two issues in relation to matters of national importance and one is under health. 

For seven years now, Adjumani District Referral Hospital does not have an ultrasound machine and also an x-ray machine. We have been following this but there is no reply. This has caused a lot of negative effects on the community. One is in relation to unnecessary referrals and those who cannot afford to facilitate themselves to go to the referral hospitals beyond Adjumani District are left to die. This is because they will not be able to travel, first of all, and at times to even pay for the services. Lastly on this matter, it has even reached the extent that people are getting treatment based on guesswork because thorough investigations are not done and they are just given drugs take. 

Can I now know from the Government whether they did not know about this problem? I have written to the ministry and I had verbal interactions with staff of the ministry. My request is: can the Ministry of Health prioritise this because we have over 300,000 people that should benefit from these services?

Secondly, under the Ministry of Lands, there was a letter written by the minister in charge of lands about reopening the border between Adjumani and Amuru. It was written on 1st October and the activities were to commence on 6th October. It is coming to the end of November; can we get a briefing about what is happening? When this issue reached the district, people were excited but because now one month has elapsed and there is nothing seen, people have become emotionally charged. Madam Speaker, I think if something is not -(Member timed out.)


3.09
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the invasion of Elegu village, Bibia Parish, Atiak Sub-county in Amuru District by elephants and hippos. The animals cross from South Sudan to Uganda, cause destruction and then move back to South Sudan. Three months ago, a woman was killed right in her garden by an elephant and a boy was killed by hippos when he was on his way from a trading centre to their home at night.

The animals are quite unique and as I mentioned, they do not come from Uganda. Sometime back, the Uganda Wildlife Authority mentioned clearly that they have no authority to contain the animals that cross from other countries. However, right now, our people are so worried. The elephants and hippos are destroying crops and scaring our people. 

Madam Speaker, I call upon the Government to take very serious steps, noting that this is the time for harvest in our districts. If the elephants continue destroying people’s crops, the parents or the community may not afford to have school fees for their children come next term. I am calling upon the Government to take very serious action and find a way forward in containing and controlling these animals that come from South Sudan. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Join me in welcoming the speakers from the local governments from the greater northern urban councils. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.11  
Mr WILSON ASUPASA ISIKO (NRM, Busiki County, Namutumba): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning issues of school-going children in Busiki County, Namutumba District. 

All the children of school-going age at primary 1, 2 and 3 in Namutumba District sit on the bare floor. It is a very appalling situation and learning cannot continue as it is supposed to be. I took this matter up with the Ministry of Education and hon. Chrysostom Muyingo advised me to contact non-governmental organisations for assistance. (Laughter) I have tried that path but the assistance is not forthcoming. 

I now want to appeal to the Prime Minister and the Government to come to the rescue of the people of Namutumba, Busiki County. Half the children in primary school sit on the bare floor.

Secondly, in 2003, there was a survey done for power to Namutumba District along Tirinyi Road, between Namutumba and Tirinyi. That was in 2003 but up to now there is nothing that has been done. 

I have been asked by the people to ask this Government - I have seen areas where they never did surveys at that time but they already have power right now. What is the problem? When you move along that road, from Tirinyi to Mbale there is power, from Namutumba to Iganga there is power, but there is a small section of 10 kilometres that has no power and yet it was surveyed for power in 2003. What could the problem be? We need an explanation. The people have asked me to ask the Government to explain this issue. What is wrong with -(Member timed out_) 

3.14
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Last evening, news spread in this country, and indeed it has been proved, that our own, a woman, the NRM flag bearer, the Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly, hon. Margaret Zziwa, was suspended from the Assembly. This was done in a coup mounted by our own members that we elected to represent us in EALA.

Madam Speaker, in Article 1 of our Constitution, it says that power belongs to the people of Uganda. Under that Article and in Article 86 of the Constitution, this Parliament exercised its mandate to truly elect our representatives to the East African Legislative Assembly. It is very unfortunate that our own members have now turned against Uganda and they are the ones spearheading the removal of our own Speaker, the cherished woman leader in the region and at continent level.

In the East African Treaty, section 53 in particular, it says that the Speaker of the Assembly shall be elected on rotational basis. All the other countries have served their five years peacefully. Uganda has been given the chance to be in the chair for these five years but we, Ugandans, have turned into enemies of each other. We are pulling our own down. 

Madam Speaker, our representatives have not come to this House to us, the electorate, to present this matter. They have not –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is not a debate. You asked to raise a matter of national importance and not to debate. Please, raise the issues you want the Government to deal with.

MS NALUBEGA: Madam Speaker, our members have not come here to consult us on this matter. The President of the Republic of Kenya, Uhuru Kenyatta, has written officially and distanced his government and members from this matter. Our own government has not at any point come up with a statement. 

We, therefore, want to ask the Prime Minister now to tell us the position of Government on this matter or else we are going to move a motion under Article 86 and recall all members back here - (Applause) - so that we can send people who can represent our views. My prayer is that the Prime Minister now tells this Parliament the position of Government on this matter in the Assembly. 

The Minister of East African Affairs, hon. Shem Bageine,    convinced the Council of Ministers and it was in that council that this matter of suspending the Rt Hon. Speaker was adopted. Was that a government position? Can the Prime Minister clarify and state to this House whether this is the government position, that our Speaker, our lady, our woman representative, should not lead the region? Is this the position of the Government?

Madam Speaker, I beg to hear from the Prime Minister before I move a motion without notice that will recall these members. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those were the issues of national importance. Do the ministers want to say anything on the foreign animals? What shall we do about the foreign elephants which are disturbing people in Amuru? What are you going to do? Are you going to give that statement today or will you come back to us?

3.18
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM AND WILDLIFE (Ms Maria Mutagamba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank colleagues for raising the question. Indeed, very many different Members of Parliament have been raising the same concerns over and over again. I have a statement which I wanted to -

THE SPEAKER: Speak to that when you are making your statement. So, hon. Gilbert Olanya, your answer will come during her statement. Prime Minister, there is the issue of power in Mazuba and the issue of EALA and the machines in Adjumani?

3.19
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will make a few comments on what has already been raised on x-rays and imaging equipment in Adjumani and other hospitals. 
The honourable member is right that there is a problem with x-ray and imaging equipment in our hospitals. The main reason is that Government reached an agreement with a company to supply and maintain equipment over a given period. That given period was over and Government has not been able to replace that company, partly because of procurement issues. So, the Ministry of Health is at the moment in the process of trying to procure a company to maintain the imaging and x-ray equipment in our hospitals.

On the question of the Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly, our sister Margaret Zziwa, this story has been on for quite some time. His Excellency President Yoweri Museveni has had interactions with his colleagues on this subject matter. Actually, I thought the matter had cooled down and had been sorted out until I saw in the media another exacerbation of this subject. We are waiting for a report from the Minister for East African Community Affairs, hon. Shem Bageine, so that we do not act on the basis of –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Last week I raised the same matter in this House as a matter of national importance. The Deputy Prime Minister said that he had heard half of what was said but he promised that he was going to ask the Minister for East African Community Affairs, hon. Shem Bageine, to come here and report on Tuesday this week about the same matter. Before that could happen, today is Thursday and we are hearing about what took place yesterday. 

The clarification I seek, Prime Minister, is: you are saying things have been taking place but do your ministers brief you about what is happening in your absentia? It started here and at that time you were in Zambia. I asked the same question then, whether this is the Government position. Why are we exporting our indiscipline to the East African Community and what is this all about? 

We are hearing a lot of things about procurement, some disagreeing on illegalities and everything is affecting Uganda and the East African Community as a whole. So, can you clarify on this matter? Do you get briefs from your ministers about what is taking place? Are you in the know about what is happening in EALA? Are you in charge of your ministers, hon. Prime Minister? Thank you.

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Prime Minister for giving me this opportunity to seek clarification. The Prime Minister has just said that as Government, they are waiting for a report. A report after a team of elected honourable members of EALA in a mobocratic way ­– mobocratic comes from mobocracy, mob justice –(Laughter)- have taken over democratic governance of the people and the country that sent them to represent us. I am looking at a scenario where a team led by one of us, maybe hon. Ssewungu, with due respect, in an undemocratic manner mobilises our colleagues and they remove our capable Speaker, the Rt. Hon. Kadaga, and hon. Ssewungu sits in that chair and the Prime Minister tells us “we are waiting for a report to act”. Madam Speaker, what would we do as members of this august House? What would the Prime Minister expect from us - to wait for a report or to take action? 

We should not just wait for a report; we should demand for immediate action. This immediate action should be given a timeframe and this timeframe should help us, especially on the gender aspect. Madam Speaker, I need clarification on whether it is not good enough for us to move a motion now.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, Government will act on this matter on the basis of factual information from the minister responsible and not on the basis of newspaper reports. Government, of course, is very concerned. Government wants a stable and effective East African Legislative Assembly and we are looking forward to doing whatever is possible to ensure that the Assembly stabilises itself as quickly as possible and resumes its normal transactions.

THE SPEAKER: There is the issue of power in Busiki and the children sitting on the floor. Will they be answered? We urge the minister to answer next week on the issue of power and the schools.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Madam Speaker, we are very concerned about the matters of the East African Community. We see our country being embarrassed. A Speaker has been suspended; there has been a coup in the Parliament and the coup was carried out by our own and yet we are not getting a timeframe within which we shall get an answer to this problem. Madam Speaker, we need that from the Prime Minister, please.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are facing an unprecedented situation. In the history of the East African Legislative Assembly, this has never happened, so we do not have a precedent. Even for us to stampede and move a motion today, I think is not right. We need to give ourselves time. 

Our work was to elect; I do not know whether we have the power to recall. So, I want us to give ourselves time to study the situation while waiting for the Government to respond. However, this is urgent because the people of East Africa need answers. So, please bring a statement next week. We shall also do our legal work and see what the rights and responsibilities of these voters are? The statement will come next week. I have given guidance; we cannot move a motion today. 

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PUBLIC FINANCE BILL, 2012

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, yesterday we had done most of the work on the Public Finance Bill. We had stood over clauses 28, 46 and 73(a). So, we go back to clause 28.

Clause 28

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson and honourable colleagues, after careful consideration with the committee, we have accepted the rephrasing by the committee. So, we allow it to go as amended by the committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, are you withdrawing your amendment? Where is our chairperson? Honourable chairperson, read your proposal because the minister said he now agrees with it.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, clause 28 - Investment of balances on the Consolidated Fund. The committee proposes to replace the entire provision with the following: 

“The Minister may authorise the Bank of Uganda to invest any sum standing to the credit of the Consolidated Fund-

(a) with an approved financial institution
(i) at call.
(ii) subject to notice not extending 12 months; or

(b) in an investment authorised by the law for the investment of trustee funds and approved by the Minister”. 
The justification is: to give legal mandate for investment of idle cash balances in line with good cash management practices. The provision has been redrafted for clarity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I asked yesterday whether this provision would apply to all the credits including funds returned to the Consolidated Fund at the end of the financial year by the local governments. We want an answer to that.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, when funds return from the local governments or any other ministry, they return directly to the Consolidated Fund and they are mingled with other moneys which is incorporated in the budget for the next financial year. The money that we are talking about now is money that rests with institutions that did not directly deal with the Consolidated Fund; these may include banks and other institutions like the NSSF. These are unclaimed balances that go to the Bank of Uganda.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The Consolidated Fund does not mean one account; there can be a number of accounts under the Consolidated Fund. So, what our proposal is targeting are the monies or the funds that remain on the Consolidated Fund without any clear justification on how they are being used. The moment this money remains, it is categorised as “idle funds”. What do we do with these funds? These funds should be availed for investment. This is what clause 28 is intending to cure.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I understand what you want to do. My fear is when you say, “standing to the credit of the Consolidated Fund” without distinguishing whether it is idle funds or funds for other purposes. Why don’t you say it is idle funds so that we know which money is being targeted? 

MR MUSASIZI: In the justification the chairman gave –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, I want it in the law. The justification will not be in the Act.

MR MUSASIZI: Maybe we would say that any sum of money standing idle on the Consolidated Fund should be reinvested according to the provision the chairperson is making.

THE CHAIRPERSON: This one has such a big basket. To say everything on the credit is idle – 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, your point needs to be brought out because when you say the credit side of the Consolidated Fund, you may even touch money which has been returned. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is my worry.

MR MUSASIZI: We need to differentiate between funds which have been returned but they are going to be utilised for budget purposes and funds which are idle. Therefore, I want to suggest that the chairman improves his proposal and we move on.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, we operate a cash budget in our economy and Government sometimes borrows money. So, you have a point that the Minister of Finance needs to clarify about this investment of balance. As you are aware, in the report of the Auditor-General for the last three years, the Bank of Uganda has been in deficit and we have been recapitalising it. Sometimes we also borrow from the NSSF and commercial banks. Therefore, we really need clarity on these kinds of funds which the minister calls idle.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can somebody find a technical word for “idle” without being idle? (Laughter) 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I agree with you. I am a member of the committee and we found out that instead of Government borrowing - recently, you remember we were fighting about domestic borrowing - that money can be recommitted for other purposes. It is not idle but the Ministry of Finance should take initiative to recommit that money to activities which help Government. It cannot be reserved because any money on account must be utilised and if it is unutilised, it is a cost. 

This is why we are proposing that it should be clarified and should clearly state that the money standing on account which has not been committed or which is in the budget process should be recommitted for a purpose and should be clarified. It should not be idle and it stays there but it should be separated from that which is unutilised. So the Minister of Finance should-

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we need a proposal. What words shall we use to secure that – to come out clearly on which money we are targeting?

MR KAKOOZA: We commit it for reinvestment; that should be the amendment. We commit it to reinvestment for further purposes.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to know from the minister: when do we have idle money on an account? If you budget money for Bugiri and you disburse the money late in May or June and the money is returned yet the money was meant for building a health centre or repairing boreholes, does it become idle when it comes back? Why does that money not go back to do the work? When does the money returned become idle? We do close to deficit budgeting almost always; how can we have idle money on an account?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, have you found the word?

MR KASULE: I have just got clarification from the technical people. They say that any sum of money standing to the credit of the Consolidated Fund is cash at hand. If we have appropriated money to the tune of Shs 14 trillion, for example, and then Government through revenue realises Shs 15 trillion, that money is not going to be appropriated but because it has already been appropriated, it is already cash at hand. Government has that money - it is a surplus. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is it said in the law? That is what we are looking for. We know it is surplus but we want to avoid a situation where money for Kiryandongo is returned because it was sent on the 1st day of June and then in July the minister decides that money will be reinvested and yet it is supposed to go back for the programmes for Kiryandongo. That is what we want, honourable minister.

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, this particular clause is addressing money which is over and above what is in the Consolidated Fund after meeting all the requirements of the budget. So, anything that remains –(Interjections)- You see, as we go into oil and gas, there are opportunities that will cause us to have excess money in the Consolidated Fund. Therefore, whatever is over and above what is required to meet the budgetary requirement should be available for reinvestment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, can you put it in words so that we put it in this law? We do not want you to interfere with the money appropriated to the local governments. Put it in words so that we can secure the money for the local governments.

MR WADRI: Madam Chairperson, we are addressing two issues, especially the concern that you have raised and given the example of Kiryandongo. If money has been allocated to an agency and that agency has started on the work for which that money was meant, at the close of a financial year the accounting officer does not have send that money back to the Treasury. The accounting officer can commit that money and it remains on the district account and it can be used up in the subsequent financial year.

Secondly, the minister is talking in terms of excess money and that we are going to go into oil business; that is something for which we need to be very careful about. If we are not careful, we run the risk of this Parliament, which has the role and the responsibility for appropriation, being overtaken by the bureaucrats who will make it very difficult. We should never at any one time give a blank cheque to bureaucrats and politicians to begin appropriating money on our behalf outside Parliament. If there is such money, then it can go into the consolidated account and can only be approved by this institution at the right time when required to do so.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Chairperson, clause 28 is proposing investment of balances on the Consolidated Fund. We do appropriation as Parliament; we appropriate both the revenue side and the expenditure side. Let us say we appropriate Shs 15 trillion; the Consolidated Fund account may receive excess money beyond what we have appropriated -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I was not dealing with excess money. Go to clause 15 which we passed; that is my concern. Go to 15(1).

MR MUSASIZI: It says, “Every appropriation by Parliament shall expire and cease to have any effect at the close of the financial year for which it is made.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Go to 15 (2).

MR MUSASIZI: It says, “Any balance of any moneys that is withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund that is not committed by Government or a local government by the close of a financial year shall be repaid into the Consolidated Fund by the 31st of July.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is my concern. All this money is going back to the Consolidated Fund and you are saying that if any money is found sitting there, it should be invested. So, I am asking: why don’t you separate this money from the general fund?

MR MUSASIZI: The minister should then propose the right wording.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is what I am asking you to do. Let the minister provide protection for this money.

MS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. You are totally right. The money mentioned in clause 15 refers to money that has been appropriated in the budget but not used for whatever reason; the one in clause 28 talks about balances and new revenues that have not yet been appropriated. It talks about revenues that were realised during the year but had not yet been appropriated by Parliament.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, can you put that in the law and state it clearly? That is what I am asking you to do.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, there is a fundamental problem. Initially, I had risen to give a proposal on how we can handle this matter but having listened to the minister, I find myself in a very tricky position. If you have excess revenue raised during the course of a fiscal year, you cannot spend it and cannot invest it except by an appropriation made by Parliament. There is only one way of dealing with it. The problem is that legally, the Government cannot spend - an investment is expenditure by another name anyway. You cannot invest surplus funds except if it has come to this House and we have appropriated.

May I request the minister to explain what a surplus fund is? In my mind, there is nothing that you can call a surplus fund. It is revenue accruing to the Government of Uganda and therefore Parliament must sit and appropriate it.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, to cure your concern and the concerns of members, I think the best way to do it in the law is to say that for any amount which is not appropriated at the end of the financial year, the Minister of Finance should declare the amount – lay it on the Table - and then Parliament appropriates as the need arises. That is the best way.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Your worry is about funds which have been devoted to local governments, for example, but have not been committed at the end of the financial year. If they have not been committed at the end of the financial year, they therefore cannot be committed in the subsequent financial year without being appropriated by Parliament. What we mean by commitment -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, do not divert the debate. 

MR KYOOMA: Madam Chairperson, I will give an example. A certain local government could have started on a project or could have just contracted a company and they have not started on the project yet; those funds are already committed and therefore they cannot find their way to the Consolidated Fund -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we passed clause 15 (2). This is what we passed. According to clause 15 (2), the funds will go back to the Consolidated Fund.

MR KYOOMA: Madam Chairperson, provided you have already got a contractor, those funds are already committed -

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not want to hear about the contractor; I want to protect the money because we have said in this law that it will go back to the Consolidated Fund.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, the provision you have read is right. If we continue to 15 (3), it says, “Any money that is committed by a vote but which is not spent by the end of a financial year may be re-voted by appropriation by Parliament.” So, it is already provided for. Once it comes to the Consolidated Fund, it is re-voted back to the activities that it was assigned to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Re-voted at which stage?

MR KASULE: I think we have put a time lag in sub clause (4): “Where Parliament re-votes by appropriation under subsection (3), the appropriation shall be made by the 31st of August.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where it isn’t, what will happen? Suppose it is not done by 31st August, what will happen?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: It is required by law that Parliament must seek to re-vote this money back to the district.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us be serious about what we are doing.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, there is a fundamental problem with the whole of this clause, the starting point being that there are no funds that can ever stand to the credit of the Consolidated Fund that are known as idle funds; they are not there. If by any misfortune or fortune you have any funds that are idle, the law has already provided for how we deal with them - you bring those funds to the Floor of the House and they are appropriated and then spent. You can ask that the funds be appropriated for investment and then you spend. 

Therefore, I would like to propose, Madam Chairperson, that we delete the whole of clause 28. It does not refer to anything known either in economics or even in law. 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, let us amend and insert another paragraph (d). The title of this clause is “investment of balances on the Consolidated Fund”, and this is after we have appropriated, as you say. So, let us create another paragraph (d) saying that for any balances which have not been appropriated, the minister declares them to Parliament for other appropriation - as simple as that - at the end of the financial year.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I want to draw members’ attention to clause 26, which is about the Consolidated Fund. It says, “(1) All revenues or other monies raised or received for the purpose of the Government shall be paid into and shall form part of the Consolidated Fund except the…” So, we have already prescribed how all monies of government, whether debt payment, receipt, fees, go into the Consolidated Fund. Further below here, we say how it will be withdrawn through appropriation by Parliament. 

Therefore, I think the motion by hon. Fox Odoi is clear and categorical; if the minister wants to invest, capitalise UDB, they just come here through appropriation and it is done. So, clause 26 is categorical. (Applause)

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, we had included this clause 28 to coincide with the age of Maama Mabira but since she is claiming that it is above her age, we agree to delete it. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 28 be deleted.
          
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 46

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, I think the committee did not any amendments here. Maybe to read what it is –
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we were arguing over the general audit committee. I think we had dealt with the general audit committee.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, we had created the position of “internal auditor” and then clause 46 says, “Audit committees 
(1) The Minister shall establish an audit committee for each vote which shall consist of not more than five members.

(2) An audit committee established under subsection (1) may serve more than one vote. 

(3) A member of an audit committee shall not be a public officer. 

(4) A member of an audit committee shall be appointed by the Minister on the recommendation of the Secretary to the Treasury. 

(5) An audit committee shall- 
(a) assist the accounting officer in carrying out the oversight responsibilities relating to financial practices, internal controls, corporate governance issues, compliance with laws and ethics and audit matters; 

(b) review the arrangements established by the accounting officer for compliance with regulatory and financial reporting requirements; 

(c) review the financial statements prepared by the accounting officer to ensure that the disclosure in  the financial statements is adequate and that fair representation is achieved;

(d) facilitate risk assessment to determine the amount of risk exposure of the assets of the vote and the possibility of loss that may occur, with a view to mitigating risks; and 

(e) consider the reports submitted by the internal auditor to the accounting officer under section 45 and make recommendations on the findings of the internal auditor.

(6) The accounting officer shall report to the audit committee the actions taken or planned in response to the recommendations of the audit committee.” 

Madam Chairperson, we stood over this clause because we were arguing whether we should have an audit committee for each vote, given that the number given to us was 203. I said that what makes this number huge is the number of districts and municipalities we have. The ministries are definite - they are known - and I think each ministry requires an audit committee. The problem now is on the side of the many districts and municipalities and whether they can cope with the number of five per vote.

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, we stood over this clause in order to substitute the word “votes” with the word “sector”, and then we were required to give a definition of “sector”. I would like to give the definition and all the others will go under the regulations contained in section 76.
The definition which we have come up with is: “A sector means a group of institutions or votes that have common functions, objectives and mandate.” We so submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The chairman did not add anything; what we wanted was to replace the word “vote” because a vote would mean that each local government would have to get an audit committee. Now that he has said “sector”, they are put in clusters and we do not need-
 
MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Chair, when we say “sector”, how will it work at the district or local government level? We can maybe say “district” but if we say “sector”, what would that mean at district level?

MR OMACH: Right now we have 17 sectors - accountability, education, health, administration sectors, among others.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think logically, you also clustered the districts the same way. I think the districts also have sectors drawn from the central Government; isn’t it? 
         	    
MR MULUMBA: Madam Chair, I have no objection with this provision save for the nature of what is provided here. I thought there should be some exclusion. We have always had the risk of having members of audit committees appointed by the minister also doubling as members of boards of agencies that are supposed to be audited by the very audit committees to which they relate. So can’t we have a framework which proposes exclusion so that we cannot have somebody -

THE CHAIRPERSON: You propose it. 

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, I would like us to be clear on this; do we want audit committees for districts? If we want a district to have an audit committee, then we should mention it here. What the minister has said caters for the central government; it does not indicate whether districts shall have audit committees or not. So we should make that distinction. Do we want districts to have audit committees? If so, we have them and then we have audit committees for the sectors of the central government? That should be clear such that if we say -

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do you propose?

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, I propose that -(Interruption)

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Yesterday we discussed these committees and we agreed that we should not include the districts because it will be very expensive - (Interjection)– listen! Why don’t you want to listen? 

We agreed that the audit committee will cater for the sector level and we even got that number from the minister. How did we know it was 17? You are not the first person to mention it; it was mentioned by the minister. So, we agreed - (Interjection) - It was agreed to by consensus that having them in the districts would be very expensive. 

MRS OKWENYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I really find this particular clause quite ambiguous. If a minister is going to appoint a five-man committee per vote and you multiply that by the number of votes that have been -

THE CHAIRPERSON: We had moved away from that. We had already amended that; it is no longer five. Let us have proposals and we move.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I do not agree with the proposal of not having audit committees at district level. Why? I come from Kabale District which has a budget in excess of Shs 40 billion. It has a chief finance officer and a chief of internal audit, among other people in the structure. 

Maybe to bring colleagues on board, audit committees are responsible for providing oversight of the internal audit function. Now when you say that you do not want an audit committee at district level, it means this chief internal auditor at the district, for instance Kabale, will not have where to report to after he has done his internal audit.

One of the challenges we have as a country is that we live in bias and fear. This is a corporate governance principle. If we have to have internal audit, then we must give it the necessary and desired independence. There is no way you can have an internal auditor heading an institution and you do not give him where to report to. That is where compromises come in. You find and internal auditor reporting directly to the Chief Administrative Officer. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t you just make proposals, honourable members? We have had this debate for so many days. I think one of the worries of the members is how you will fund the people at the district. How many should they be? These are the issues.

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much. I just want to build on what hon. Musasizi said. Don’t you think that if we utilised the district public accounts committees, they can be a good place where they can report?

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, honourable colleague, for seeking that clarification. Madam Chairperson, a district public accounts committee looks at the report done by the external auditor; in this case this is the Auditor-General. The internal audit report is supposed to be given to management. I want a bridge between the Chief Administrative Officer and this internal auditor in order for him to get independence.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what do you propose? Please, propose.

MR MUSASIZI: My proposal is, let us maintain audit committees at district level but it should not be a fulltime employment. We say maybe they sit quarterly in a year.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can I know where you are going to get them from? Are they civil servants? Are they civilians walking around in -

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, can I propose?

THE CHAIRPERSON: You first explain to me where they are going to come from and how they will be paid even if they are sitting once in a quarter.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, to qualify and sit in an internal audit committee, you must be a person of high integrity and must have no conflict of interest. In this case, this is an internal audit committee that is going to oversee public funds. Therefore, this person should not be a civil servant.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Musasizi, which Ugandan are you going to make work for three years with no pay even if you have a lot of integrity?

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, since now we have agreed that there should be some audit committees at the districts – (Interjection)- The sub clauses that follow say that a member of the audit committee shall not be a public officer and that one audit committee can serve more than one district –(Interjections)- This is what it says in the Bill. Members, please read the Bill.

Clause 46(2) reads, “An audit committee established under subsection (1) may serve more than one vote.” That is to minimise on the number of audit committees; so one audit committee can serve the whole of western region districts, for example. So I propose -

MR EKANYA: I think based on what the chairman has said, we need to improve sub clause (1) because we shall have a problem. It says, “The Minister shall establish an audit committee for each vote…” We may need to delete the words, “each vote”. 

Also, if we are now going to use “sector”, then we need to say, “The minister may, through a regulation, establish the appropriate number of audit committees for each district” so that we leave that responsibility to the Minister of Local Government and Minister of Finance. They will, through a regulation, establish appropriate members of audit committees to serve the local governments - [Hon. Member: “For groups of districts.”] - For groups of districts, thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now what is the proposal? Can you say it so that we hear it? 

MR KASULE: “The minister shall establish an audit committee for each sector for central government and audit committees for a number of votes in local governments.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, that is a detail. So, is that okay, honourable members? Honourable members, I put the question that clause 46 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 46, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 73

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. Insert after clause 73, a new clause to read as follows: “Liability on failure to meet requirements. 
(1) Where any institution or department of government which receives public money does not meet the requirements of this Act or contravenes this Act, Parliament may request the minister responsible for the institution or department to make a report to Parliament with an explanation on the matter. 

(2) Where it is established that the institution or  department did not meet the requirements of this Act, or contravened the Act due to negligence or misconduct of a public officer of the institution or department, the public officer shall be held personally liable in accordance with section 74 or section 75 of this Act.” I beg to move. Thank you. 

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, this is different from what the shadow minister submitted to me last evening -(Interjection)– no; it is not. It is different. 

However, having said that, I do not agree with his proposal. We had a number of submissions from the shadow minister and other colleagues here which we went through effectively and we agreed to agree. Where there was disagreement, we also agreed to disagree. So, this was one of the areas where we agreed to disagree and so we maintain that. I do not accept the proposed amendment. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, that document is the position we agreed to with the minister and it is one of the documents that the minister has. We have actually lifted it from the current Public Finance and Accountability Act; so, I do not know what the alternative is.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, I listened to the proposal by hon. Ekanya and it has the following ingredients: One, a public officer offends the law, commits a breach of sections of the law, and two, the minister responsible causes a list of such officers to be brought to Parliament. Three, Parliament actually finds that they breached the law, and four, that the breach was as a result of negligence, and then it imposes sanctions, which is the last leg, and the sanctions are also provided in the law. 

This is even directly carried from the provisions of the Constitution. You know that under the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda now, if an accounting officer causes loss, he is held personally liable. There is no better provision to protect public resources than this particular one, and I request hon. Jacan Omach to concede. The Minister for local Government agrees with me -(Laughter) -[Mr Mwesige: “No, I do not agree with you; not yet.”] 

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, in fact I want to invite hon. Adolf Mwesige, who is a lawyer, to read Article 164(2) of the Constitution. What does it say? It is about accountability, and the Permanent Secretary or accounting officer in charge of a ministry or department shall be accountable for the funds in that ministry or department. 

Article 164 says, “(2) Any person holding a political or public office who directs or concurs in the use of public funds contrary to existing instructions shall be accountable for any loss arising from the use and shall be required to make good the loss even if he or she has ceased to hold that office. 
(3) Parliament shall monitor all expenditure of public funds.” 

Another article about Parliament and how we organise issues here – Article 91 – says, “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the power of Parliament to make laws shall be exercised through Bills passed by Parliament and assented to by the President”. It then goes on to mention how committees of Parliament operate. 

Madam Chairperson, really, there is nothing new. What I am just saying is that we are just legislating what is provided for in the Constitution, to ensure that the management of public funds is in conformity with the Constitution. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What problem do you have with this provision, honourable minister?

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, this was passed yesterday.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 73 A was passed yesterday?

MR OMACH: Yes, it was passed. It was read by hon. Niwagaba. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 73 was passed but there was proposal to bring a new 73 A. So this is what he is talking about.

MR OMACH: We have no problem with this. This is one of the areas we agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed –

MR KASULE: Madam Chair, you know there are many papers here flying up and down, but it is as if the Minister has agreed to a position which was passed yesterday. Hon. Ekanya’s provision is catered for in clauses 19(1) and 73. Clause 19(1) says, “A vote shall not enter into a contract, transaction, agreement that binds the Government to a financial commitment…” –

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is unrelated.

MR KASULE: Also, clause 73 says that Government shall not borrow money -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed by hon. Ekanya.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us go to the interpretation section. Honourable minister, you made some changes in the definitions. 

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, other than the one for the definition of “sector”, I do not recall any other change.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, state your proposal because we are now in the interpretation section. State that new definition of “sector.”
 
MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, under clause 4, I beg to move that we include “sector” and define it as follows: “A sector means a group of institutions or votes that have common functions, objectives and mandates.” I so submit.

MR KASULE: Under clause 4, the committee proposes to include the definition of “budget” to read as follows: “‘Budget’ means the government plan of revenue and expenditure for a financial year.” 

The committee also proposes to include the definition of “budgeting” to read as follows: “‘Budgeting’ means the process by which Government sets levels to efficiently collect revenue and allocate the spending of resources among all sectors to meet national objectives.” 

The committee also proposes to include the definition of classified expenditure to read as follows: “‘Classified expenditure’ means the expenses and commitments incurred by an authorised agency for national security or for collection and dissemination of information, disclosure of which would damage confidentiality requirements or national security.”

The committee further proposes to define “commit” as follows: “‘commit’ in reference to a vote means entering into a contract or other binding arrangement which creates a future expense or liability.”

The committee proposes to include the definition of the National Oil Company to read as follows: “‘National Oil Company’ means the company established under the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Act.” The justification is: to define the national oil company proposed under the amendment to clause 53. 

The committee also proposed to define the Secretary to the Treasury as follows: “‘Secretary to Treasury’ means a person designated as such in the public service.”

Lastly, the committee proposes to define “Treasury memorandum” as follows: “ ‘Treasury memorandum’ means an action report by the Minister detailing actions taken on recommendations of Parliament arising out of the report of the Auditor-General in accordance with Article 163(5) of the Constitution.” The justification is that “Treasury Memoranda” is used but not defined. I beg to move.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I want to ask my friend who asked me about classified expenditure whether he has shifted away from the definition that he wanted. The Minister of Defence wanted a definition but it does not take care of – 

MR KAKOOZA: I would like the chairperson to help me because there are some relevant laws which we have that define classified expenditure. In the interpretation clause of the National Audit Act, classified expenditure is defined as, “the expenses and commitments incurred by an authorised agency for the collection and dissemination of information related to national security interests and includes the cost of procurement and maintenance of the related assets.” This is the law, the National Audit Act.

Now, in this original Bill, it says, “classified expenditure means the expenses and commitments incurred for the collection and dissemination of information for a defence or a national security purpose.” I think they wanted it to be consistent with the other relevant laws. If we change the definition, I do not know how we are going to deal with the other laws. Why don’t we be consistent and leave it as it is?

DR KIYONGA: The definition in the Bill we are considering is just about information collection but under classified expenditure, we are collecting information and also procuring sensitive equipment. So, we would like the two included in the definition. 
What hon. Kakooza has read from the Auditor-General’s law is more consistent with what we are saying. So, we could substitute the current formulation with what is in the Auditor-General’s law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Kakooza, can you state your issue again for completeness? Read it now as you want it to be.

MR KAKOOZA: The National Audit Act, 2008 says, “‘classified expenditure’ means the expenses and commitments incurred by an authorised agency for the collection and dissemination of information related to national security interests and includes the cost of procurement and maintenance of the related assets.” That is the definition. In the original Bill that we are dealing with now that definition was captured and inserted in the law. I think we need to be consistent.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, do we bring in the provision under the National Audit Act? Does that satisfy you, minister?

BRIG. GEN. KATIRIMA: I just wish to propose that in that definition of classified expenditure, we should add “…whose unauthorised disclosure…” –(Interjections)- Yes! If it is disclosed officially, there is no problem but if it is disclosed unofficially and it endangers national security, then that is a problem. So the definition should capture -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does that fall under the definition section which we are dealing with? 

BRIG. GEN. KATIRIMA: Yes, it falls within the definition section; if I could borrow hon. Kakooza’s.
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is your iPad? Lend him the Bill and the National Audit Act.
 
MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, we can then define classified expenditure to mean that which is defined in the National Audit Act, 2008.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So we go back to the National Audit Act. Hon. Katirima, have you got the National Audit Act? Someone should give you the National Audit Act if you have issues with it. Hon. Kakooza, lend him. 

Honourable members, I put the question that the interpretation section be amended to define classified expenditure as is defined in the National Audit Act.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I want to seek clarification from the minister and the chairperson of the committee on government debt, page 8 of the Bill - the definition offered there in relation to Article 160 (2) of the Constitution. Are we redefining what a debt is? Why do we have it as “Government debt” here whereas the Constitution uses the words “public debt”? 

When you look at the interpretation in the Constitution, it is very elaborate. Here it is limiting to requiring payment by Government of the principal or the principal and the interest to a creditor; whereas when you look at a public debt, I thought it was more enriching. When Government borrows, it is not just the obligation of borrowing and paying back the interest and the principal; it includes the interest for purposes of borrowing - If you look at this interpretation, it says, “Public debt includes the interest on that debt, sinking fund payments in respect of that debt and the costs, charges and expenses incidental to the management of that debt.” I thought that was broader and would be enriching. 

Unless we have a different government and public debt here, we would be meaning something different. However, if it means the same, I would invite the honourable minister and the chairperson of the committee to adopt this.

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, I think that is why he is called Oboth Oboth - not just once. So, I accept the amendments.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the words “Government debt” be defined as is in the Uganda Constitution, Article 160(2).

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, I just seek clarification from the chairperson because he did not mention that we removed the petroleum revenue holding account. We also decided to give a new interpretation to the petroleum revenue investment reserve when you removed “reserve” and replaced it with “account”. I just want that clarification.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We had dealt with that one. Is there anything new? 

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I want to propose an amendment to the definition of “treasury memorandum”. As it is now, it restricts us to the Auditor-General’s report. It reads, “‘Treasury memorandum’ means an action report by the Minister detailing actions taken on recommendations of Parliament arising out of the report of the Auditor-General…” 

There are those issues of public finance management that this House takes decisions and makes recommendations on but they are outside the Auditor-General’s report. There are some ad hoc committees, for example, which we form to investigate issues like the standard gauge railway, Katosi and others. When the House makes recommendations from such committee reports, we should get a mechanism where Government reports back. 

I therefore want to propose that after “arising out of” we add “public financial management matters” and then we continue to the report of the Auditor-General. So, it would it cover both the issues that have come out of the Auditor-General’s report and those which are outside the Auditor-General’s report but touch on the Treasury.

THE CHAIRPERSON: There are also other resolutions of the House. They are supposed to come back to us and tell us what they have done.

MR BAHATI: So, are suggesting that we cover everything? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes.

MR BAHATI: If that is the case, then we stop at “Parliament” and say, “…means an action report by the Minister detailing actions taken on recommendations of Parliament.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is better. Ok, I put the question -

MR KAKOOZA: On the Consolidated Fund -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, let me deal with Treasury memorandum first. Honourable members, I put the question that the definition of Treasury memorandum -

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, I just wanted to caution because this is a constitutional provision. Maybe hon. Oboth can help us to refer to the Constitution.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, that one covers everything that we do. It is not limited to any sector. It is for all; that includes finance, public accounts etc.

MR SSASAGA: Madam Chairperson, we have just passed the inclusion of “public debt” whereas the committee report had referred to “government debt”. So I want clarification from the Minister of Finance on this. 

I know a debt can be a public debt or a national debt. A national debt is raised from within the country whereas a public debt is borrowed by the Government on behalf of the citizens from outside the country. If you come to the definition of a government debt, it is stated very well here that a government debt is a public debt and a national debt and it is owned by the central Government or the Government on behalf -

THE CHAIRPERSON: What are you reading?

MR SSASAGA: I am reading about the government debt.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your source? We want to know because we do not what you are reading.

MR SSASAGA: Madam Chairperson, this is Google. (Laughter) Even as a student of economics, that is what I know. I know a public debt is different from a national debt and when you combine the two, you get a government debt. That is the clarification I wanted to give.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now I am lost. What do you want us to do? Before we take a vote on the Treasury memorandum, let us hear hon. Kakooza’s issue. There is something we are checking here.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to draw attention to the interpretation of Consolidated Fund. I thought that to be consistent with other laws, “Consolidated Fund” should be defined as the Consolidated Fund of Uganda established under Article 153 of the Constitution because the Constitution is clear and it empowers Parliament. 

Article 153 of the Constitution says, “(1) There shall be a Consolidated Fund into which shall be paid all revenues or other monies raised or received for the purpose of, or on behalf of, or in trust for the Government. 
(2) The revenues or other monies referred to in clause (1) of this Article shall not include revenues or other monies…” 

I thought that this is more elaborate other than defining and leaving it. We could use the Constitution.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, you amended the Constitution -

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, where any law is inconsistent with the Constitution, the Constitution will prevail.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, honourable members. I put the question that “Consolidated Fund” similarly be interpreted as provided for in the Constitution under Article 153 -

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Chairperson, I am of the view that we refer to the Constitution generally but not name the Article because the Articles of the Constitution can change especially -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, the Article is not going to come in. I mentioned it for him and for our Hansard so that we know where it came from but it will not appear in the interpretation. Now, honourable members, someone was telling me here that Treasury memorandum is defined under the Constitution and that is what we are looking for. (Interruption)  It is not? Okay. I put the question that the definition of “treasury memorandum” be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, on the definition of accounting standards, I want to propose that we change the wording from “accounting standards” to “accounting practices”. 

My justification is that the accountancy profession uses this phrase for different things. Accounting standards are defined differently in the profession, so when we use the term “accounting standards” as it is defined it creates a gap between what is being taught and what is practiced. Therefore, I want to propose that instead of the words “accounting standards” we use the use the words “accounting practices”. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, I do not know whether you read the definition. It says, “…means authoritative statements approved by the Accountant-General…”

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, accounting standards cannot be approved by the Accountant General. The Accountant General approves accounting practices. Accounting standards are approved by the standards setting bodies. In this case, in Uganda we have the Institute of Certified Public Accountants.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, we have agreed to change because the accounting standards are set by international accounting standards bodies; so for this Bill - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the change?

MR KASULE: We propose to change it to read, “‘accounting practices’ means authoritative statements approved by the Accountant General, indicating how particular types of transactions and other events are to be reflected in the accounts and financial statements of a vote.” 

Now, this is a domesticated kind of action; the other one on accounting standards refers to internationally accepted standards.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are the standards just going to be local?

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, here the standards can include both international accounting standards and local standards. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then why are you conceding?

MR MWESIGE: Madam Chairperson, I am not an accountant but these terms also have legal implications. Legally speaking, the term “standard” is binding but practices are just practices; they do not bind anybody. For you to remove “standards” and just say that the Accountant General, which is a statutory office, will just state accounting practices, I am not an accountant but I need help to understand this.  I am not convinced that we should replace “standards” with “practices”.

MR EKANYA: My brother, you know that practices are a norm but standards are principles, which are agreed to, and they are binding to the body.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, like hon. Ekanya said, standards are agreed upon procedures by the standards setting body. Now what happens -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member I think you should abandon your proposal.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, let me clarify only two -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable members I put the question -

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I think my colleague, the accountant, has not defined it well. A standard is set by a professional body to qualify those professionals like in the law council, so it cannot be a practice. It is applied all over the world; once it is a professional body, which is the Certified Public Accountants, it follows all over the world. It cannot be a practice.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 4 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

The Title 

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, we had agreed to change the title. 

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, we had proposed to change the title to “The Public Finance Management Bill”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the title be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELIOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Chairperson and colleagues, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “the Public Finance Management Bill, 2012” and has passed it with some amendments.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM 
THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT BILL, 2012

4.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: “The Public Finance Management Bill, 2012” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the “Public Finance Management Bill” be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED: “THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT ACT, 2012”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank very much the combined committees of finance, budget and natural resources, the minister and all the members of the House. It has been a long journey to enact this law. Thank you very much. Congratulations to the minister.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, in modern English we say, “Awadi fo saru”. (Laughter) It means thank you very, very much.

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Maria Kiwanuka): Madam Speaker and honourable members, as the Speaker said, it has been a long journey - two years and eight months. We thank the Speaker for the wise guidance and the patience she has shown us throughout this process. We thank the honourable members for the stamina and the potential –(Interjection)- Serena, yes; I saw you there in June and I will see you or whoever is minister will see you there in June.

THE SPEAKER: Ok, thank you very much. 

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION
BY RESIDENTS OF BUJUMBA CONSTITUENCY, KALANGALA DISTRICT
OVER THE MV KALANGALA SHIP

4.55
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am standing in for hon. Fred Badda, Member of Parliament, Bujumba Constituency, Kalangala. I move under rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

Your humble petitioners are residents of Bujumba Constituency, Kalangala District, who have been greatly distressed by the delayed return of the MV Kalangala Ship. The operations of the said ship on the lake were suspended temporarily by the Minister of Works and Transport to allow it undergo routine servicing in Mwanza, Tanzania, since January 2014. 

The said repairs were supposed to be done within and not later than 50 days from January 2014, but it has been more than six months with no tangible progress or communication from the concerned ministry -

THE SPEAKER: Go to the prayers.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Wherefore, by this petition, the petitioners pray that Parliament resolves that: 

1. The Minister of Works and Transport informs Parliament and the petitioners about the progress of the routine works on the ship;

2. The Government, through the Ministry of Works and Transport, expedites the process of outstanding repairs on the said ship; and

3. The Government intervenes in the mode of work in the Ministry of Works and Transport.

Your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray. Hereto your humble petitioners have appended their signatures. I beg to lay the petition on the Table, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I think the minister can handle the first two prayers quickly. It is the third one, which requires the committee. So I direct the minister to handle the first two requests in that petition. The last one can go to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. Thank you.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION BY TOBACCO FARMERS 
IN BUGANGAIZI WEST CONSTITUENCY, KIBAALE DISTRICT

4.58
PROF. KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Madam Speaker, I present a petition under rule 29 of our Rules of Procedure from the tobacco farmers of Bugangaizi West Constituency. 

These farmers sold their tobacco to Continental Tobacco (U) Ltd and Premier Garden Tobacco (U) Ltd. For the last four months, they have not received their payment and they pray that Parliament investigates this matter, holds these companies liable and causes them to pay the farmers.

I present and lay the petition on the Table, plus signatures and photocopies of the receipts of the farmers.

THE SPEAKER: I send that to the Committee on Agriculture for expeditious perusal and report back.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION BY CARBONATED SOFT DRINK INDUSTRY IN UGANDA

5.00
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I move this petition under rule 29 of our Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

The humble petition of the carbonated soft drink industry in Uganda comprising of Century Bottling Company Ltd, Crown Beverages Ltd, Harris International, Bukheresa, SAI Beverages and Galaxy Beverages appealing to the Government to revise the excise duty on carbonated soft drinks from 13 per cent to seven per cent, presented by myself, showeth and states as outlined under. 

Now, therefore, by this petition, the petitioners pray that Parliament resolves and urges Government that the excise duty on carbonated soft drinks is revised by reduction from 13 per cent to seven per cent.

Your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray and hereto, your humble petitioners have appended their signatures. I beg to lay, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. (Ms Nambooze rose_) On what point do you rise; on EALA?

5.01
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that the issue of EALA is close to our hearts but I rise on another matter concerning petitions. The people of Mukono Municipality and even formerly, the people of Mukono North brought to this Parliament a number of issues, over 10. For some of them it has taken four years now and my people have not heard from Parliament. 

There was also the issue of the Kampala Capital City Authority. Madam Speaker, you had promised this House that you would constitute another committee to look at that petition once again. The petition came here in 2012. 

Madam Speaker, I seek your assistance so that the people of Mukono hear from Parliament. It is so frustrating to bring matters before this House and it takes years before a report can be brought to Parliament. Thank you.

MS NABULYA SSENTONGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to make to add to the submission by hon. Nambooze. The issue of petitions is a very big problem. I have also presented more than 10 petitions regarding workers and nothing has ever been brought to the Floor of this House for discussion so that we get some solutions. It is a big problem. 

If this is because of the weakness of our colleagues as committee members, I think we need to pull up our socks. If it is a lot of work that is making it difficult for these petitions to be brought on the Order Paper, then I beg, Madam Speaker, that we consider them as urgent matters. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Margaret Komuhangi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Nabulya for the issue she raised but I request her to mention the petitions because the recent one she presented was only a week ago. So I am wondering, which other petitions she talking about and when she brought them. Raise them so that they can be on record because in my committee, I only have two pending petitions on workers.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue that hon. Nabulya is raising does not only affect the Committee on Gender. We have a lot of petitions that have gone to the committees of finance and natural resources. 

What she is saying is true because I have also been part of those petitions and they are many. We are not saying they only affect your committee; we just want you to understand that they have been taken to various committees. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am glad about what hon. Nabulya has said. You are the members of those committees; it is not the Speaker. You are the ones who are not attending to your work. So please, all those who have petitions should work quickly. 

Secondly, honourable members, I want to appeal to Government; the reason why Parliament is being inundated by petitions is because people do not have where to go to solve their problems. So they think they should come to Parliament to get a solution. Government, please find ways of helping these people. They end up here because they have nowhere to go on many issues including pensions, unpaid salaries, unpaid retrenched workers and others. We need your help. I hope you have heard that. 

Hon. Nambooze, I will respond to yours on Tuesday after I have checked on what is happening in the committees. I did not know what you wanted to say, so I do not have answers until next week. I will give you a response on Tuesday.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the petition for KCCA, it was your promise that you would constitute a committee to look at this petition after it had got issues in the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. Your ruling was that you would constitute a committee -

THE SPEAKER: I will update you on why it has not been constituted. That is why I am saying I will check and give you an answer.

MS NAMBOOZE: Much obliged.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO SUPPORT THE INTER-PARLIAMENTARY UNION PROPOSAL FOR A STANDALONE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOAL ON DEMOCRATIC GOVERNANCE BEFORE THE UNITED NATIONS OPEN WORKING GROUP ON SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS

5.07
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Geoffrey Ekanya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to support the Inter-Parliamentary Union proposal for a standalone Sustainable Development Goal on democratic governance before the United Nations Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals. I move under rule 47.

“WHEREAS the Ninth Parliament of Uganda successfully organised and hosted the 126th IPU Assembly from March 31st to April 4th 2012 in Kampala, with the Rt Hon. Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga, being elected to the IPU Executive Committee;

AND WHEREAS the Speaker of Parliament, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, while addressing the 128th General Assembly of the IPU in Latin America, city of Quito, Ecuador, challenged parliamentarians from all over the world to position themselves as key stakeholders in the post-2015 era of sustainable development goals, highlighting the fact that in many crucial decisions, parliamentarians are unfortunately engaged long after the decisions have been taken by their governments; 

NOTING THAT the March 2013 Quito General Assembly underscored the fact that there can be no development without democratic governance and by extension, the rule of law being firmly hinged on participation, transparency and accountability; 

NOTING FURTHER THAT a democratic governance goal that can adjust to different country circumstances and apply to all three pillars of sustainable development with Parliament as its key institution is a critical imperative;

AWARE THAT an open working group of the UN General Assembly consisting of 70 countries has been at work since last year to develop a first proposal for the new SDGs that will replace the current MDGs at the end of 2015;

APPRECIATING THAT after extensive consultation with parliamentarians, the IPU is advocating within the open working group for a standalone goal on democratic governance that would also include specific indicators of parliamentary capacity;

FURTHER APPRECIATING THAT given the divergent views within the open working group on where the question of governance should be considered, either as a target or a standalone goal, it is urgent and incumbent on all parliamentarians to make their voice heard at this critical juncture to inform the on-going negotiations before the open working group reports on its draft recommendations to the UN General Assembly;

RECOGNISING THAT the parliamentarians have a critical role to play in determining and influencing what the new SDGs will be and how they are structured;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament of Uganda, duly convened and sitting today, as follows:

1. That Parliament unequivocally supports the incorporation of a standalone goal on democratic governance that would include specific indicators of parliamentary capacities under the new SDGs.

2. That Government of Uganda commits herself to spiritedly defend Parliament’s position on this matter at all international levels of diplomacy with the UN structures.

3. That no effort should be spared to ensure that Uganda’s voice on this matter is heard at the UN General Assembly.” 

The motion is moved by myself, the Shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and seconded by hon. Amos Lugoloobi, MP of Ntenjeru County North. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. Are you going to justify? Be brief.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the world is at a crucial moment of making a fundamental decision that will move the world to eradicate poverty post-2015. 

Uganda is blessed; there has never been a moment in the history of Uganda when we are blessed to take a critical position and influence that decision. The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) have been achieved by many governments but specifically, as Uganda we have achieved some of the important indicators. It has been argued that maybe one of the reasons why the MDGs may not be achieved by 2015 is because of lack of democratic governance as a standalone goal. 

So many schools of thought and scholars have defined democratic governance differently but for this debate, I wish to define democratic governance as representation, institution for service delivery, which encompasses human rights, the rule of law and equity. Therefore, as the world will be assembling in 2015 to design a new framework with the President of the United Nations General Assembly being a Ugandan, there is no greater opportunity that we have to influence that decision. 

Madam Speaker, after my recent presentation in July at the UN meeting on this matter, it was requested that you use your leverage as Speaker of Parliament, who now has a Ugandan chairing the general assembly, to push for the position of IPU to consider democratic governance as a standalone goal to be adopted by the open working group. Colleagues, because of the participation of our Speaker and all of us internationally, the UN has even proposed to host another meeting to discuss these issues next year here in Uganda. (Applause)

We cannot lose this opportunity. I wish to appeal to Government to take this motion very seriously. Democratic governance as a standalone goal will help Parliament, an institution of governance, to bring about accountability, service delivery and to appropriate the right resources to build its capacity.

Studies have indicated that Parliament, being one of the three arms of government, is just an appendage when it comes to resource allocation, that parliaments are supported by civil society and NGOs and that our voice at international meetings like the UN General Assembly is not heard. Sometimes we are just observers or we are not serious participants. 

The IPU is negotiating and requesting Uganda to use this leverage so that we should be able to have democratic governance as a stand-alone goal. Only then shall we be able to measure the issue of gender equity, resource distribution, transparency, corruption and the capacity of Members of Parliament to hold their governments accountable.

Madam Speaker, with these brief justifications, I beg to call upon colleagues to support this motion.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lugoloobi, if you can just use five minutes.

5.16
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion for a resolution of Parliament to support the IPU proposal for a standalone sustainable development goal on democratic governance before the United Nations Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals. As we speak, this working group is formulating the goals for after 2015 when the MDGs come to an end. 

We have noted that a number of countries have not been able or will not be able to attain the MDGs by 2015. Therefore, it has become imperative to formulate new goals and in the thinking of the IPU, we should have one of the goals as democratic governance. 

Democracy has been defined as a form of government in which eligible citizens may participate equally, either directly or indirectly through elected representatives. These are elected representatives like ourselves representing the people. It is through improved governance that the benefits of democratic development most directly impact the lives of our citizens. It is important to note that.

I would like to look at the other side of the coin, regarding the inability of public sector institutions that participate in the delivery of governance to function effectively and democratically, undermining the sustainability of democratic reforms. There are a number of institutions that operate in Uganda but which are under performing and therefore, they are not helping us to achieve our targets.

Some of the key democratic values that we commonly talk about in democratic governance include transparency, representation, pluralism and accountability. This is business that we normally deal with in this House. I want to note that a capable and effective national legislature is a foundational pillar and that is why we are recommending that Parliament of Uganda should support this motion. It is important in shaping laws and policies, overseeing the work of the Executive branch like in formulating and implementing the budget, advocating for gender mainstreaming and fighting for the rights of marginalised groups.

If we talk about democratic governance as a goal, we must talk about the associated indicators relating to this goal- what we shall be focusing on as we put measures in place to achieve this goal. Some of the critical indicators may include the rule of law and access to justice, and targets could be set against that indicator, civil and political rights, economic and social rights, political competition and electoral process. Others indicators include democratic role of political parties, government effectiveness and accountability, civilian control of the Police and the military, minimising corruption, the role of the media, political participation, Government responsiveness, decentralisation and international dimensions of democracy, just to mention a few. It will be important to set targets against those numerous indicators. 

It is on that basis that I seek the support of Parliament to support this motion for the standalone sustainable development goal on democratic governance, which is before the United Nations open working group. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Lugoloobi. Honourable members, you know this is an important opportunity. It will be the first time that parliaments will be heard. All the other goals were designed with no participation of Parliament; we received a finished product. Now we have an opportunity to have our own input. So can I ask Members to support? 

5.21
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion moved by hon. Ekanya about creating a standalone SDG to do with the democratic governance.

I want to associate myself with this motion. Recently, I was touched when, in this era, the army in one of the West African countries decided to overrun a democratically elected government. By coming out as parliamentarians to condemn, we encourage whoever is interested in taking power to consider taking it democratically instead of using firearms or the military to overrun a government that is elected by the people.

Concerning accountability, I think this is the way to go. In New vision, I read that the President has asked -(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a point of order. I think my colleague who is been on the Floor did not get his facts correct. The Government of Burkina Faso was not overthrown by a military coup. It was the people that stood up and said Compaore had been in power for 27 years and therefore, they could not accept this man to stand and be elected again. The people went to the streets; it was a people’s revolution. 

Is he therefore in order to mislead this House and the whole country by saying that the Government in Burkina Faso was overthrown by the army? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what we know is that the army acquiesced in the actions of the population and that is why they did not attack them. So, the army was part of it but the civilians were at the front. 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I think you have said it all. What I was trying to say is that if anybody is interested in taking over power let them use the power of the ballot box, like what Uganda has been pushing for.

I am happy that even the member who raised the point of order - We have just been encouraging them that if they are interested in taking over power, go to the masses, convince them and take the day instead of using coercive means of taking over power. This is what we are emphasising - democracy and good governance.

I want to salute the President. In today’s New Vision, I read that he has directed those who stole the Katosi Road money to refund it immediately. This is what we are saying - accountability, transparency and the rule of law. This is why we should empower our people to demand for what belongs to them. I think the President is just looking ahead. 

I want to encourage members to support this cause. We have talked about maternal health, infant mortality and equal access to education. The time is now to promote good governance and democracy where people should always look at engagement and dialogue instead of using coercive means to demand for power. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.25
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am interested in this topic because it brought premonitions to the Floor of Parliament one time, that democratic governance enables people to get power in the right way. In the same instance, if you know that there are elections, you will know that the terms of the elections are prescribed for every country. This brings political stability as well as social and economic progress. 

As hon. Muwuma said, the rule of law brings all of those variables - equity and equality – together, although comparatively I will talk about Uganda. Some people know that other countries have not reached the standards of democracy but are on the road. That does not stop us from supporting this issue of the democratic governance being an independent aspect internationally. In the same sphere, this reduces the fear of parties who do not expect to access power because in a democracy, there is time given for elections, and there is freedom to participate and representation. 

I would also like to reiterate that under democratic governance, people are accountable politically, socially and economically. If that goal is an independent one, I think even it’s assessment, monitoring and ownership can be obtained. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.28          
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Madam Speaker, allow me to use this opportunity to thank hon. Ekanya for introducing this well-thought-out motion to this august House. I support this motion in all aspects for which it has been introduced. 

We are all aware that democratic governance is quite a complex matter to achieve. This is the reason why countries world over are struggling to achieve it. However, quite a number of countries have not reached there. For the Inter Parliamentary Union to consider democratic governance as a standalone goal, I think is the right way to go. 

I want to appreciate this Government because I think that we are on the right path of democratic governance and our history can attest to this. For this reason, allow me to thank this Government for all it has been doing to actualise democracy in this country. This explains why within the region, Uganda enjoys relative peace and tranquillity, if you do a comparative analysis with other countries. 

I also want to appreciate the mere fact that all Members of Parliament in this august House came to this House through a democratic process. So it would be credible for this Parliament to support this motion. I thank you.

5.30
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion of having good governance as a standalone goal in the SDGs. 

Madam Speaker, you realise that we are coming to 2015 without realising most of the MDGs and I believe that most of these MDGs are dependent on good governance. I therefore believe that if we have this goal as a standalone, we could actually rectify what went wrong, particularly in achieving all these goals. 

When you look at attaining gender equality and maternal health, for example, these are some of the things that we have been grappling with. Good governance will cause accountability in terms of all that is taking place, right from the top level to the local level. I believe that effective service delivery is certainly important and it stands on the pillar of good governance. That is why I want to support this motion if we are to achieve these goals. Maybe it was an oversight for us to forget this because it keeps on whipping us who are in leadership to deliver or to account for whatever one is doing in terms of transparency, fighting corruption and service delivery. 

Therefore, I strongly support this motion. I want to call upon the Parliament of Uganda to raise its voice in having good governance as a standalone goal if we are to also achieve the other MDGs that are hanging. I thank you.

5.32
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Ekanya for the timely tabling of this motion. 

A while ago, somebody said that we all have come to this Parliament through a democratic process. Yes, but only if you bothered to measure the scale of democracy in this country in the sense that when you define democratic governance, it is the freewill of the people to choose their own leaders, un-tampered with in terms of encumbrances.

Madam Speaker, each one of us in this House has got a long itinerary of events that they went through before they came here. Of late, you have even heard the Governor of Bank of Uganda coming up to say, “I mistakenly funded the 2011 general elections with Shs 142.7 billion” –(Interjections)- The over commercialisation of voting in this country is something which – 

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, when I hear my former UPM friend, the hon. Kiyonga, I think the vice might have caught him and he might have also used his position to do some manyanga or guarded democracy in Kasese. He could have done that. 

The point that I am making, however, is that as long as we stand as a country without having a yardstick against which the international community measures us, we are bound to be in a cocoon where we think we are the alpha and omega. So to have good governance as a standalone goal in terms of world commitment, I think this will provide us with an opportunity as parliamentarians and as people on this globe to come up and decide how best we want ourselves to be governed.

Madam Speaker, when this comes to fruition, it is the only way through which citizens of various countries will be able to enjoy their constitutionally provided rights. In this country, immediately after the 2011 general elections, we saw the type of suffering that our people went through. Not long ago, one of our own who just wanted to travel from Masaka to officiate in a beauty contest was denied that right to go there. Hon. Amama Mbabazi was blocked and stopped from going to Masaka where he was invited. Is that democracy? Are people enjoying their right of freedom? Are people moving together?

Madam Speaker, this is a motion, which has come very timely and as a country, if we were to respect and go by good governance, we would want to see independent institutions operating in this country, institutions that should not be cowed by the government of the day. We would want a situation where the IGP, Commissioner General of Prisons and the Chief Justice should be able to stand up and say, “Your Excellency, Mr Minister, I am sorry but I am going to make this independent decision in the best interest of this country”.  That is where we want to go. I believe very strongly that with the experience of Ndugu Rugunda who was our permanent representative at the United Nations and the rich experience he has, and furthermore that we have our own as the President at the UN level, we should be able to pursue this thing, which should be good for all of us. 

Madam Speaker, there is much more that we can do for ourselves as leaders and for our people, if only we got rid of the corruption vice in this country. Today people are talking about poverty and saying they do not get access to services. Let me tell you that Uganda is a very rich country; unfortunately, if Uganda was like a loaf of bread on a plate, it would have got finished by now. Why? This is because of high level corruption. 

We do not seem to have the commitment to fight corruption. Why did it take so long for the Auditor-General and the IGG to come out and say that this contract on the Katosi-Mukono Road is a bad one, cancel it? The ministers and technical people do not take independent professional advice. Instead, we go back, dilly-dallying around and waiting only to hear from the President that those who have served themselves with the Shs 24 billion must cough it out. I think we need to do much more for our people as leaders of this country.

Madam Speaker, I will want to come up and say if we are talking about good governance, world over it has got a yardstick definition. When we go through the electioneering process, there are certain institutions, which should provide security to secure our borders, and that is the army. However, the moment we have elections where we have the army moving everywhere harassing other people and, with due respect, becoming like rabid dogs which are released, then where is justice? Where is good governance? 

Some of us who are in this Parliament are here because of the good support and goodwill of the people who elected us. If it was not because of that -(Member timed out.)

5.38
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to support the motion moved by my young brother, hon. Ekanya, on the importance of democratic governance and it being recognised on its own as a critical pillar for development. 

We support the motion because of the firm conviction that we have on the government side and also as a movement in the importance of democracy. We believe that without democracy, what we are trying to build cannot be meaningfully sustainable. That is why democracy is point No.1 of the political programme of the National Resistance Movement. 

Madam Speaker, the lack of development in our country has been characterised by regimes that were anti-people and instead of focusing on democracy, they were focusing on suppressing people. The notorious regime of Idi Amin in particular is a very eloquent example where instead of focusing on democracy and governance, it was focusing on eliminating individual citizens of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, there has been criticism levelled by my brother, hon. Wadri - who continues to point fingers even now as I speak - on his comrades about the independence of our institutions. Our institutions are relatively young; they are growing and they are being nurtured by Government. Sometimes they may not be perfect but our institutions are growing well and I will give one or two examples. 

In one example, he even quoted that the Commissioner General and Inspector General of Police may not have the courage to speak out to the President, to ministers or to Members of Parliament. I want to assure you, my dear brother, that these institutions are led by capable people who frankly and openly tell their bosses when they think that their bosses may not be on the right line. This close interaction between the political leadership and competent technical officers has made this government come up with correct policies and steer the country to greater heights. 

If I may conclude; it is true that in recognition of the democratic gains that Uganda has made under the leadership of the Movement and the leadership of President Museveni, Uganda has been recognised beyond her borders in the region and on the continent. That is why a Ugandan, Ndugu Sam Kuteesa, was elected President of the UN General Assembly. This is a great achievement for this country and for all of us. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, this is –(Ms Nambooze rose_)- I will wait for my sister, hon. Nambooze’s, clarification, with your permission.

MS NAMBOOZE: I want to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for accepting to receive my point of clarification. Prime Minister, you have elaborately told this House how you are endeavouring as a government to make sure that there is good governance and democracy in this country. It is true the country has been endorsing international protocols and indeed it is true that now you are standing here to support this motion. However, in my opinion, I think that we also need home-grown solutions for issues concerning governance in this country. 

Just yesterday, a conference closed on building consensus on free and fair elections. The government, which you represent here as Leader of Government Business, was invited - the President was invited - but you were absent. You did not send an apology neither did you indicate that you were interested in building consensus as a nation towards achieving free and fair elections. 

So, do you think that we can only achieve democracy and good governance for this country through endorsing international protocols and depending on points raised by UN, other than seeking for home-grown solutions for issues of good governance? That is the clarification I am seeking - why the President did not turn up for this good conference. 

DR RUGUNDA: I would like to take this opportunity, Madam Speaker, to thank my sister, hon. Nambooze, for her point of clarification.

First of all, I have sent a complaint to the organisers of the conference you are referring to because we did not receive any invitation for this conference. The Movement has always been at the forefront in the struggle for democracy and free and fair elections. There is no way the Movement would have boycotted a conference on free and fair elections. We are wondering why the organisers discriminated against the Movement. The Movement will nevertheless continue to struggle to have its voice heard.
 
Madam Speaker, on the point of waiting to confirm international conventions and other issues, we are looking for home-grown democracy. That is why the 27 young men and women led by Ndugu Yoweri Museveni went to the bush, to fight for democracy as point number one on the ten-point programme.

To finalise this point, I want to support this motion. I also want to inform my colleagues, especially my sister, hon. Nambooze, that the Movement and this Government is more than open and more than ready to discuss any issue that will help the growth and deepening of democracy in our country.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House do resolve as proposed.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Members, some of you will speak on the other issues; we have many items on the Order Paper. I have seen you all. Let us go to item 5. Thank you very much, honourable members.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

5.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to make a statement prior to the commemoration of the World AIDS Day that is supposed to take place every 1st of December. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, as you are all aware, every 1st day of December, the world joins together to remember those who have succumbed to the HIV/AIDS epidemic and to show solidarity with those infected or affected by the disease, and also to take stock of the important milestones in the struggle to defeat the disease. The day is also used to raise awareness and provide support for the UNAIDS vision of zero new infections, zero discrimination and zero AIDS related deaths.

On 1 December 2014, Uganda will therefore join the rest of the world to observe the World AIDS Day. The national venue of the event will be the Boma Grounds in Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole District. I would like to inform the honourable members that all the other districts have been requested to commemorate the World AIDS Day activities at venues selected by their district leadership. The Uganda AIDS Commission has already given the necessary guidance concerning the commemoration of the event. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, you are all aware that Uganda is still experiencing an enormous burden of the HIV and AIDS epidemic. As you are all aware, data from the surveillance programmes and studies indicate that prevalence in the country increased from 6.4 per cent in 2004/2005 to 7.3 per cent in the year 2011. This is mainly attributed to the continuing new infections and also the declining mortality as a result of our expanded ART treatment programmes.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the country also continues to experience many new HIV infections. Although the new infections remain substantial, there has been a reduction in these new infections since the year 2009. In the last three years, there has been a reduction in the number of new infections from 162,000 in the year 2011 to 153,000 in the year 2012 and in the year 2013, we had 137,000. The Ministry of Health and partners are refocusing our response to ensure that we continue to dent the occurrence of the new infections.

Madam Speaker, the Government of Uganda and partners have put in place robust interventions to respond to the challenge of HIV/AIDS. You will recall that His Excellency the President launched the National Prevention Strategy on the World AIDS Day in the year 2011 that is premised on the combination HIV prevention. 

The national HIV/AIDS and health sector strategic plans have been revised and have set ambitious targets for the implementation of the National Prevention Strategy. In the implementation of this strategy, the Ministry of Health has intensified the public health interventions for the IEC and Behaviour Change Communication (BCC), focusing on abstinence, being faithful and the use of condoms, the biomedical interventions for HIV counselling and testing, elimination of mother-to-child transmission, safe male circumcision, STD management and Anti-Retroviral Therapy. The Uganda Aids Commission is also at the forefront in ensuring that HIV/AIDS messages that are disseminated are in line with the HIV/AIDS prevention strategy. 

Madam Speaker, as we mark the World AIDS Day, I would like to report that the country has registered significant achievements in the struggle against HIV/AIDS. The national HIV/AIDS strategic plan and the national HIV/AIDS prevention strategy, which were developed in the year 2011, have been implemented with a good degree of success. Current data shows that Uganda has registered progress with evidence of an upward trend in the range of indicators of HIV prevention and treatment coverage.

We have significantly scaled up our AIDS treatment programmes; for instance between July 2013 and June 2014, 179,468 people were enrolled on the anti-retroviral treatment, exceeding the number of the new infections in the same direction. At the end of June 2014, we had 680,514 people on treatment out of the 1,447,859 people who require treatment based on the revised HIV prevention and treatment guidelines. Furthermore, deaths due to HIV/AIDS have also reduced because of the expanded treatment portfolio. 

I will not read everything because members have the document. Allow me to inform members that with the Elimination of Mother to Child Transmission (EMTCT) programme, we have rolled out the implementation of the EMTCT guidelines for the elimination of mother to child transmission to the whole country. Over 95 per cent of the target population of 102,000 HIV positive women who are pregnant or lactating are now accessing the services.

The programme was launched by the First Lady in the year 2012 and data already indicates that we have made progress; for instance, five years ago, we had close to 25,000 babies born with HIV/AIDS and in the year 2012, when we launched this campaign, the number reduced to 15,000. We have also projected that by the year 2014, this should fall to 8000. However, our target is that by 2015, we should see zero new babies born with HIV/AIDS. 

I would like in a special way to recognise the contribution of the First Lady, hon. Janet Kataaha Museveni, who has been our champion for the EMTCT campaign. Government is also working with other partners to implement other evidence-based interventions. We have been working with cultural leaders and religious leaders in this.  Therefore, all the cultural leaders in this country have been engaged. 

The HIV/AIDS response requires committed, strong and sustained leadership from political, cultural, religious and civic leaders. I would like to salute His Excellency the President who has led the campaign from the front over the years. You will be aware that only recently, on 9 November 2014, His Excellency the President launched yet another campaign, “Protect the goal campaign” at Namboole Stadium under the theme, “This is your game; do not let HIV/AIDS score”.

Although we have never talked about this, allow me to congratulate the Parliamentary team for defeating us. However, we did quite well because they had told us that they would actually score 28 goals. In this campaign, we will use the popularity and convening power of sports to unite Ugandans towards the goal of an HIV-free generation. It will also help us to raise awareness around HIV prevention and encourage especially the young people and all Ugandans to get actively involved in both the national and global response to HIV prevention and control. We will work with stakeholders to take this campaign to all parts of the country over the next two years.

The national theme for this year’s World AIDS Day is, “Getting to zero is my responsibility”. We are looking at zero new infections, zero discrimination and zero AIDS related deaths. The theme calls for individual responsibility in the fight against HIV/AIDS. Of course, individual responsibility includes taking precaution to remain HIV-free by focusing on and practicing the prevention messages of abstinence, being faithful and condom use for those of age, but remember prevention is key.

Secondly, being responsible means you should know your status - take an HIV test. Today, we just have about 50 per cent of the population in this country who know their status and 44 per cent are men, 66 per cent are women. Being responsible also implies linking those who are not infected to services that enable them not to catch the infection. For those infected, you should ensure that you protect yourselves from re-infection, protect others by not passing on the infection, seek treatment from recognised health workers and take your antiretroviral medicine as prescribed by health workers. Being responsible also means that we should not discriminate against those who are infected by HIV/AIDS. 

I want to request members of this House to step up their efforts in the leadership for the response and to speak to their people in their constituencies about HIV/AIDS. Speak to your constituents about the need to protect themselves and urge those that are infected to utilise the existing services. Let us all lead by example and test so that we get to know our status, be faithful to our partners and act responsibly. 

The Government of Uganda appreciates the assistance from partners who provide funds and technical assistance for the implementation of the HIV/AIDS response. We acknowledge the contribution of the respective governments to the financing of the national HIV/AIDS response. We could not have successfully implemented our plans and strategies without their support.

The Government of Uganda is committed to ensuring sustainability of the current HIV/AIDS response. You are aware, Rt Hon. Speaker, that the HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Act 2014 provides for setting up of the HIV/AIDS trust fund. Government has already embarked on the process to ensure that the implementation of the fund comes to pass. 

Finally, I would like to call upon you, colleagues, to use this period to mobilise your constituents and communities to commemorate the World AIDS Day. I also want to use this opportunity to invite all of you to join us in the World AIDS Day celebrations at the Boma Grounds of Kabarole. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, minister, especially for fulfilling one of our demands that Government should brief the country early enough.

5.59
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for this wonderful presentation. I wanted to inform members that the bus to Fort Portal will be leaving at exactly 6.30 in the morning on Monday and we expect many people to come.

I want to be on record, and I am glad the minister is here because she is the one in charge of primary healthcare; this Parliament appropriated money to buy motorboats to cater for pregnant mothers and all sick people from the islands. The Parliamentary Committee on HIV and AIDS went to Buvuma and we found that it comprises of over 50 islands. They have only one health centre, which is in the middle of Buvuma, and other health centres are not catered for. We found that so many HIV positive people are not catered for because they have no transport.

When you go to the islands and see what is happening there, you will come back crying. It is time for me to task the minister of health in charge of primary healthcare. We gave you money because you put it in the budget and you were supposed to use it for transport equipment and I saw it. We gave you the money as Parliament but the islands have no motorboats. If this money is not used for its work and you come with another budget next financial year, I will form a rebellion against you, honourable minister, with my colleagues here. You must buy transport equipment for the people in the islands so that they can get treatment.

Rt Hon. Speaker, people who know their status are better off than those who are living in darkness. If you asked how many people have been tested in this Parliament, you will be shocked. One time I moved with one colleague whose name I do not want to mention, to test during the health week here. I moved to the bench where they were removing blood from and when I looked around, the person I was with had disappeared from me -(Laughter)- I could not see the person, and this person was a male. So the statement by the minister that the men do not know their status is very serious because men are not testing. I do not know why men have become cowards. 

This is the time for MPs, especially the men who are here, to test themselves and know where they belong. If you are sick, the drugs are there. When you are not sick, you will just prevent yourself from getting it. But to move and start collapsing here and we start concocting some diagnosis about you is very wrong for this Parliament; we must lead by example.

Another thing is, the children in universities are being finished by men who have got money –(Interjection)- Not MPs; they could be there, but I do not know them. I can tell you the universities and other institutions of higher learning we have in Uganda here are being hit by men who are looking for these kids because people think that these kids are virgins. So, it should be the responsibility of all Ugandans to protect young children and mostly girls. (Member timed out_)

6.03
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I want to thank the minister for this good information she has given us as we commemorate the World AIDS Day. However, there are a few concerns that I would love to raise. 

One, when you look at these age bracket of 16 to 25 years, the rate of prevalence is going up; they are contracting AIDS at a high rate. This makes me think that maybe we have a problem with packaging our information. There used to be a time when prior to any news bulletin - There was a way information was packaged to suit the various age groups. 

I think the Ministry of Health and the information ministry can do something about this, to ensure that we get ways of packaging information so that it attracts the youth. Let them admit that AIDS is a reality. I can see many of the youth even fear pregnancy more than contracting AIDS because they think you can take ARVs, but it comes at a cost to the country. So, I think the means of packaging information should be looked at. 

The other issue from the minister’s communication is that we have this wonderful programme called Eradication of Mother to Child Transmission (EMTCT). It is a wonderful idea but when we go down to some districts and facilities, like where I come from in Bukwo, many mothers attend antenatal clinics but by the time of delivery, the percentage has reduced greatly; the percentage of women who deliver in health units reduces greatly. That means that we have not done much to help those people. 

The ministry should investigate the circumstances under which pregnant mothers attend antenatal clinics at a high rate but when it comes to delivery at the health centres, they greatly reduce. That means they cannot be accessed for the EMTCT programme. I think this must also be an issue elsewhere and if it is common elsewhere, then I think the ministry should do some research so that when we make the programme a reality, we can really reduce the incidences. We can then be seen to be a population that is heading towards an HIV-free generation or minimum infections. 

With the increasing rate of infection, I believe the number of those infected could be higher than what has been mentioned because there are people who do not check for their status, like my colleague had earlier on stated. I hope that when we do something along that line, we may be able to achieve our goals. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.06
MS LOWILA OKATAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to thank the minister for the statement. I also want to commend Government, and in particular Ministry of Health, for the achievements made as far as reducing the number of babies born with HIV is concerned. It is quite notable and I really thank Ministry of Health. 

The minister has not made one point clear, however; she talked about the increase in HIV/AIDS prevalence from 6.4 per cent to 7.3 per cent, and in her statement she has said that this increase is attributed to increasing new infections. Honourable minister, what exactly are the factors responsible for these increasing new infections? I think it is very important for the ministry to take note of these factors if we are to ensure complete reduction in this prevalence rate. 

I also appreciate the robust intervention that the minister has mentioned in the statement. However, I see that there is a gap as far as supporting the livelihood of the people infected or affected by HIV/AIDS. We know that the people who are infected have low immunity and it automatically affects their productive capacity; I do not hear and I do not see any deliberate effort to try and address the livelihood of these people. I think here there is need to strategize and consider a multi-sectoral approach; maybe Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Gender and Community Development will need to come in, so that we really support the livelihood of these people who are infected with HIV/AIDS. 

Honourable minister, I also have a concern as far as the commemoration is concerned. I think for the last two to three years, we are have been commemorating this day in one region. I think it would be good if we spread these celebrations to other regions so that we also help to disseminate information to the people. This will help in the campaign against this virus. Madam Speaker, I thank you.

6.09
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a few things to say which I believe the minister should take note of. 

I have been thinking about children who contracted HIV when they were born and some of them have now matured and they can engage in sex. I also believe that during their first encounter with sex, most of these people go live without any protection. Some of them even go out with our children who are in secondary school and other institutions of learning. I want to seek clarification from the minister about what plans they have with the Ministry of Education in such situations. 

I have seen condoms around Parliament, I have seen some materials in bars and other recreational places but I have not seen them in schools. Equally, sex education in schools is limited and yet I know that we have a duty as Government to protect our children because we believe we are living with AIDS.

The second issue is about accessibility to drugs. The recent report on the population census in Uganda, which I have read, indicates that there some sub counties with a population of over 60,000 people, and your policy is that every sub county will have one health centre III. Equally, there are also sub counties which have a population of 5000 people. I want you to clarify how you would compare the 60,000 with only one health centre III and the 5,000 people; how do people access treatment in that regard?

Lastly, I want to thank you for presenting your report on HIV/AIDS, but I want to comment on hepatitis B. You have given a lot of attention to HIV/AIDS and I want to thank you for that, but Hepatitis B is killing very many people, more than even HIV/AIDS. I personally have gone to immunise myself against this, but the formula is a bit tricky and also the drug is expensive. After taking the two injections, you go for the third after six months. Sometimes even our doctors do not inform us that you are supposed to return and you are supposed to repeat the cycle. 

Which formula are you going to use to make sure that we really access this drug? Equally, it is expensive. My three children and I should have paid over Shs 600,000 -(Member timed out.)

6.12
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for her statement. However, before I say anything, I want to pay tribute to Philly Lutaaya who lived in Sweden, the country where I lived for five years, and came back to this country and declared that he was HIV positive. From that time when Philly Lutaaya spoke openly that he had HIV/AIDS, quite a number of people woke up.

I also want to thank Government because President Museveni and the First Lady came up to talk about HIV/AIDS. It was a taboo and many countries did not want to talk about HIV/AIDS because they feared they were scaring away tourists, but Uganda came out openly to talk about the problem we had in this country. 

Now, HIV/AIDS requires information and people should know that this is a terrible disease. At that time, I want to tell you that some of us who lived in Europe were feared; people feared sitting next to us. They thought that sitting next to a black person would lead them to contracting AIDS. Now, information is very important, so your ministry must pay great attention to spreading information about HIV/AIDS. 

In your statement, you report great success. However, I get confused because the Uganda AIDS Commission in Ntinda portrays the picture that HIV/AIDS is on the increase, and it is true that the numbers have gone up. Poverty has contributed to this rise, and even sex workers are some of the people spreading HIV/AIDS. We have been listening and talking about the fishermen at landing sites. The other day, I watched on the news that Mildmay, an organisation that is helping to fight HIV, had gone to the landing sites. What is your ministry doing about them? These guys are some of the reasons why prevalence of HIV/AIDS is going high. 

When chemical industries started producing drugs here, we felt so happy that our people were now going to access the drugs. However, Madam Minister, I do not know how often -(Member timed out.)

6.16
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement she has given on HIV/AIDS. 

The minister mentioned safe male circumcision as one of the methods used to prevent the spread of HIV/AIDS. I want to say that this may not be a one hundred per cent perfect because in Bugisu they circumcise, in Kapchorwa or Sebei region there is circumcision of males, but HIV/AIDS is rampant. Therefore, we should not rely on this as a safe method for the control of HIV/AIDS. I wish she also talked about FGM; FGM is still continuing -(Interruption)


MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, the whole world, including professional doctors, agreed on this. The World Health Organisation has come up openly and said that circumcision reduces HIV infection. Is my colleague in order to say that Kapchorwa people are circumcised yet transmission of HIV/AIDS is high? Circumcision reduces the risk of infection; it has been declared by the World Health Organisation. Are you in order therefore to tell this House that circumcision does not help in the reduction of HIV/AIDS?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can you prove that circumcised people do not get AIDS? 

MS CHEMUTAI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your good ruling. I was saying that I wish she had also talked about FGM; FGM was banned but it is still in existence. As we speak, it is practiced in Kapchorwa District, in Buikwe, Kween and Amudat. Very many girls have been circumcised and I think there is need for sensitisation; we still need a lot of sensitisation so that our people understand the law.

This circumcision is done stealthily; they do it at night, in the bushes. They even run to other neighbouring countries and do it there. We are not sure of the methods they are using; so I fear that HIV/AIDS may be spread among the women in those FGM-practising districts. (Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I want to inform hon. Chemutai Phyllis and the House that male circumcision, which is safe, reduces chances of getting HIV by 60 per cent, but it is not 100 per cent. So, it only gives you 60 per cent prevention or protection but 40 per cent remains there.

Secondly, when you are doing female genital mutilation stealthily, it means you are using unsterilized methods. This means there is a possibility for you use the same knife on many women. Madam Speaker, there are three things to note here: you can transmit HIV/AIDS, hepatitis B and even somebody can end up getting tetanus because these machines they use are not okay. So, the females in Kapchorwa, whom hon. Phyllis Chemutai, is pleading for, are at risk and these things must be condemned. 

I know there was a law which was passed here; I do not know why it is still being practised? Why are we not implementing the law? If there is anybody circumcising women, they should be put inside.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to give additional information. It is true, and there is scientific evidence, that male circumcision reduces the risk of HIV infection up to the level of about 60 per cent. The scientific explanation is that on the foreskin of a male penis, there are specialised cells called Langerhans cells and HIV has a high affinity or attaches itself to these cells and it aids entry into the human body. So, when you circumcise, those cells are removed; therefore, they are not there. 

The message which we give the public, however, is that when you circumcise, that is not enough for you to have live sex. You should still protect yourself by putting on a condom because it is risky; there is a 40 per cent risk. So we advise circumcised people still not to go into live sex.

It is true female genital mutilation carries a risk, especially when non-sterilised surgical instruments are used. However, I also want to inform this House that the law was passed; I was the mover of that law- the prohibition of female genital mutilation law. It is being implemented; actually, the data we have shows that the prevalence has been coming down, especially in Kapchorwa. However, it is true that in Bukwo, Kween and Amudat there is still a challenge. 

This challenge is largely because the traditional surgeons come from Kenya during the cutting season to come and circumcise the women there. However, I think there are interventions on the ground and all of us should work together with the leadership of the affected areas to continue sensitising the people to bring down this challenge of female genital mutilation. Thank you very much.

MS CHEMUTAI: Thank you. The law is being practised in these areas but the people have not understood it very well; that is the main problem. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as hon. Ibi comes up, I want to say that this House has really been supportive of the campaign against FGM. Personally, I go to Kapchorwa every year and I have been going there for the last 15 years. There is no part of Sebei where I have not gone to speak about this. After I leave, I do not what happens, but I go every year.

6.23
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for this information. 

I want to begin by refuting a point from a colleague who was recommending that condoms be provided in schools. Honestly speaking, if we are parents and God-fearing, and as a teacher by profession I would be the last person to promote the issue of condoms – (Interjection) - Not at all! Whether it is happening or not, let us continue talking to these children. Taking condoms to schools is like making beds for these children to be sleeping around in schools. We would be the worst people to begin advocating for the provision of condoms in schools. 

Madam Speaker, the other issue is that men in Teso region do not want to test for HIV. When the woman goes to the facility and she is given medicine, the man would want to share the quota of the medicine that the woman is taking. If she declines to give him, she is beaten. So, honourable minister, through our partners, we need to beef up sensitisation. Let us take it seriously because the men are not complying in a friendly way.

Lastly, I want to be counted as one of the women who advocated for female condoms. Let us not talk about the male condoms and forget that female condoms exist. Let us not be shy about this. These gadgets are at the Ministry of Health and are there to be used. So, why do we feel shy to talk about the female condoms? 

I want to urge the bodies we have in this House like UWOPA, NAWMP-U; you are talking about population explosion, you are talking about rights, you are talking about whatever but please promote the use of female condoms. We should empower the women, especially the elite class. Why do we continue having unwanted pregnancies and engage in the issue of abortion –(Interruption)

MR MUWUMA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of information. I wish to agree with hon. Florence Ekwau that so many people, including Members of Parliament, are shy to talk about female condoms. 

Recently, when we were carrying out a campaign about early marriages and teenage pregnancies in the countryside, a testimony came out from the teenage girls about the emergency pill, which is being abused. Emergency pills could be one of the factors that are leading to the increase in the HIV spread. Why? These girls’ argument was that they can swallow the pills and they get rid of pregnancies in a short time. In the end, they are not scared of HIV; they are just scared of pregnancies. 

So, if we began talking about the female condoms, it can be an option to the emergency pills, which the girls are misusing and hence contracting HIV as they avoid pregnancies. It is a serious issue.

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much, hon. Milton Muwuma, for that information. Let us especially reach out to the girls at the higher institutions of learning. Girls are dying due to rudimentary abortions and unwanted pregnancies. Why would a girl at university die at a traditional birth attendant’s ramshackle house because of an abortion? These are the class of young women who can be encouraged to use female condoms. 

If our generation feared to use them, let us encourage the younger generation to use them but not the ones of school-going age - the ones at the adolescence level. I would be the last to promote that. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.27
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the minister for bringing this report in time and giving us an opportunity as Parliament to talk about the status of HIV in our country. 

Most of the issues have been mentioned, but I want to raise one issue. Recently, Uganda was in the international news for a very bad reason. It was said that we are one of the countries where issuance of fake HIV results is taking place. The BBC team in April this year carried out a survey in Kampala here. Out of the 15 clinics they visited, disguising themselves as people who were seeking HIV-negative results, 12 of the clinics did give these results at a cost of US$ 20. It was broadcast internationally. So, even as the minister was giving us figures here, I wondered because we do not have capacity as a country to collect the right data. 

Early this afternoon, one of our colleagues was talking about the need for equipment in hospitals in her area and this is a concern across the country. So, where do we get these figures? Do we get them from those few people who turn up at health centres? Do we have capacity as a country to go out and get everybody tested and give figures well knowing that they represent the true data among our communities? We do not have that capacity. 

The fact that corruption has invaded the health sector, so that a person can be presented as HIV-positive when they are negative, or they can be presented as HIV-negative when they are positive, leads to false data. At the end of the day, we might find that the figures which are being given by the ministry, which are giving us comfort that we are in control, are false or are based on false data. So, I want to know what the ministry is doing after this report which went (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Nambooze for having giving way. Hon. Nambooze is raising a very important concern. The point I want to raise is about the test kits. As we talk now, we have test kits being sold in every drug shop and in every clinic. You find young boys, instead of going to the hospital to test, go and buy the test kits and they test by themselves. 

I would like to give you an example. A boy from my district got a partner and they went to the drug shop and bought the test kits. After buying the test kits, they tested themselves. Unfortunately, the boy was positive and he went and committed suicide, because there was no counselling. Therefore, the issue of test kits being sold in every clinic and drug shop is causing death in our young generation.

MS NAMBOOZE: As I wind up, Madam Speaker, I want to thank the honourable member for that information. What is saddening is that when the BBC team talked to the Minister of Health then, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, he said he was not surprised. He said, “It does not shock me. Nevertheless, it is a challenge for the Government and the country and we need to pull up our socks.” Well, it did not surprise him but he should have been surprised, in my opinion. He talked about “pulling up our socks” and I want to know from you, Madam Minister -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Which socks is she going to pull? I will take hon. Baba Diri and then the Minister; other members will speak on other subjects.

6.32
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement she has given us on HIV/AIDS.

Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I think this day helps remind us that HIV is real and it is still affecting, infecting and killing people. We know that AIDS has been here for the last 30 years and now many people have taken it for granted. They say, “after all, not everyone has died and there are antiretroviral drugs”. As a result, people are complacent; they do not care about it. 

We have to remember that HIV is still here. I had wanted testing to be made compulsory in the Act but it was not passed. Quite often, when a woman goes for antenatal visits and she tests negative, the man also says he is negative when he could possibly be positive. However, when the woman tests positive, he says it is only the woman who is positive. In the end, it is the woman who is crucified.

I think if anybody goes for medical treatment, especially at these government health centres, they must be tested so that they know their HIV status. A person might start complaining of headache, the next day malaria and then cancer when actually the person is HIV positive. So, let us encourage all men and women to test for HIV so that once they test positive, they can be counselled and they get the antiretroviral medicine.

The minister mentioned the number of people who are infected by HIV and the number of people who are receiving the antiretroviral medicine. There is a difference between these two groups and I would like to know what is happening with the others. Should the remaining die without antiretroviral medicine? What is the problem? Is it not enough? 

Quite often, people go to the health centres and they do not get this medicine and yet if you miss a day, it makes all the difference. You will have to start with different medicine altogether. I appeal to Government to ensure that the antiretroviral drug is there every time. We should not have any shortage regarding the treatment of HIV/AIDS. For those who are affected, if you are taking care of yourself by eating well and getting the medicine, you can even live longer than those ones who are not infected. So, take courage and get your treatment and eat well.

I would like to talk about the children who have HIV/AIDS. These children are not taken care of. They do not have special treatment -(Member timed out.)

6.34
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will begin from where hon. Baba Diri left off because that is my passion. 

I want to appreciate the minister for the statement. However, paediatric Antiretroviral Therapy (ART) has been left to the private sector. Antiretroviral drugs for children with AIDS are being provided by Mildmay, Elizabeth Glaser and the other philanthropists; they are the ones giving ART. Paediatric ART is only limited to health centres IV and hospitals. It is not given at health centres III; it is very expensive. 

Madam Speaker, the training of medical workers and health workers, unless one specialises, is devoid of handling children in regards to HIV/AIDS. Which nurse can talk to a child who is suffering or infected by HIV/AIDS? 

Teacher training also has to include this kind of orientation. The message on HIV/AIDS does not bring out the fact that even children can be infected. In the event that even a 12-year-old girl can send nude pictures on social media, from what I read, it means that children are as active in sex as the adults. So there is need for us to have an appropriate message, where also children will be told that they can get sick. It is very expensive for parents and guardians to try to handle the issue of HIV/AIDS. Even in Fort Portal where the function is going to happen, paediatric ART has broken down. Madam Minister, you need to be aware of this. 

The “boarding school” syndrome does not seem to mainstream issues and cases of HIV/AIDS to ensure sero-status, compliance, psycho-social interventions and linking to services. I will be glad to see the data of those who are on treatment disaggregated to show how many of these are children, because we cannot keep thinking about men and women when we know that there are children. Only on page 4, paragraph one and two, is where the minister scantily talked about children, under EMTCT. 

I would like, therefore, to recommend that under the responsibilities on page No.5, responsibility No.2 be amended to say, “let us know our status and that of our infant children” so that the children are mainstreamed into this HIV messaging and HIV interventions. Paediatric ART can then be brought to health centres III so that it is nearer to clients than it is now. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if you could just use five minutes because we have a lot of work on the Order Paper.

6.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank colleagues for their comments. 

I will begin with hon. Bitekyerezo. He talked about the motorboats. The procurement is underway and I want to assure you that early next year, these motorboats will be available for use in these islands -

THE SPEAKER: Does that involve Kalangala, Buvuma, Lake Bunyonyi, Namayingo and Koome Islands?

MS OPENDI: I may not recall the number but I think about four or five motorboats are going to be procured. Even motor vehicles and motorcycles will be procured for the other districts. The procurement is on, as I indicated, and we hope that by early next year they will be available for use in these areas. 

Hon. Sabila was wondering about the 24-year-olds getting infected. Yes, this is a fact. The HIV/AIDS prevalence is rising amongst this population. As I indicated earlier, the challenge with our youth is that they are indulging in reckless behaviour. 

Messages have been going out but maybe we have not been specifically targeting the adolescents. This is why, as I mentioned earlier, the recent re-launch of the HIV/AIDS campaign by His Excellency the President on the 9th of November was really to re-engage the leadership in the fight against HIV/AIDS but majorly focussing on this young population. This is because they are the ones you find wherever there is a football match. So, we are targeting this population with messages to protect them. We are glad that most of these youth are very active in social media. We also have social media campaigns for them and so many responses have come up.

Madam Speaker, this is not only our responsibility as Ministry of Health, as I indicated earlier. It should be everybody’s responsibility to reach out to our people and tell them about HIV/AIDs. The biggest challenge we have is that most of these young people were born when antiretroviral drugs were available in the country. They did not see what happened in the early years. Seeing those skinny people was enough to make most of the men and women pull their trousers and skirts up. But today, we are seeing everybody moving - Today, those living with HIV/AIDs are able to live long because the antiretroviral are available. 

Hon. Sabila talked about the low numbers of women who deliver at health facilities. This is a fact. As you will note, I indicated that although the numbers of children born with HIV/AIDS is reducing, still 8,000 children are being born with HIV/AIDS and that is really unacceptable since we have the option B+ drugs available in the country. So we all need to encourage the women to go for antenatal care and also ensure that they deliver at the health facilities if we are to achieve the desired zero new infections amongst the young children.

Most importantly, Madam Speaker, the involvement of men is also another key factor. Most of these women at the time of delivery are not supported by their husbands. When it is time to deliver, the men are absent; the men disappear and do not want to take care of the women. These are the findings. This is the reason why currently we just have about 66 per cent of the women that deliver at the health facility; so most are left on their own and they do not have adequate resources. Therefore, male involvement is key. 

However, we have also embarked on a programme to engage the men in this country to ensure that they do support their women. We started off with Karamoja with our partners because this is where the male involvement has been least; we hope to roll this out to other parts of the country.

Hon. Oketayot noted that HIV/AIDS was increasing and wondered what the factors for this increase were. There are various factors for this increase, one of which I have already indicated - the reckless behaviour especially among the youth. There is also complacency. The medicines are available so people no longer fear HIV/AIDS as they used to in the past.

We note the issue of commemorating the World Aids Day in one region. I noticed when I joined the ministry that it was in Rakai -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I have other work. Please, conclude.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, I think we note the points that have been raised by the members. On hepatitis B, allow me to say that I remember standing on the Floor of this House and I did indicate that we are constrained by resources. It remained an unfunded priority. We need close to Shs 49 billion for us to able to immunise people in the 11 high-burdened districts in this country. So, with funding, we shall be able to move. Without funding, it will be very difficult for us to actually move forward and provide the vaccines for hepatitis B.

Madam Speaker, I think issues of circumcision were already answered; since time is not on my side, I will not say more on that. However, allow me to say that we have the HIV/AIDS trust fund and we are trying to ensure that once we have the law - The Act is in place but we need to have the enabling legislation for this plan to be operational. This will help us resolve the challenges like the shortage of the anti-retroviral drugs that was raised by hon. Baba Diri. We have also been having challenges with the supply of these test kits. So, this is why this fund will be useful in helping us to ensure that we have adequate supply in place. 

Hon. Kabahenda, your point has been noted about paediatric HIV/AIDS. The challenge with paediatric HIV/AIDS, and that is why most of the partners are the ones supporting this, is funding. We do not have adequate resources. The HIV/AIDS response in this country, Madam Speaker, has been funded mainly by our partners, USAID and others. It is high time that we look into this to ensure that we have adequate funds to solve this. 

Most importantly, Madam Speaker, let me appeal to colleagues; prevention is better than cure. Let us not wait to get infected when we can prevent HIV/AIDS. We need to reach out to the population with the message. These young girls who are indulging in reckless sexual behaviour and fearing pregnancy should know that pregnancy is a onetime issue - you will give birth and become normal - but once you contract HIV/AIDS, you will remain on drugs forever. So, prevention and abstinence is the message; be faithful and use condoms if you cannot avoid it. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, I just want to know, did you say that to vaccinate against hepatitis B, we will require Shs 49 billion? Honourable minister, really, we have been borrowing money for roads and other things, can’t we borrow Shs 49 billion to treat Ugandans? (Applause) Can’t we borrow Shs 49 billion to treat hepatitis B, which is finishing our people? 

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, the Shs 49 billion is the amount required for the 11 high-burdened districts but for the entire country, the figure is over Shs 300 billion. So, we are trying, Madam Speaker, to find the resources, however that is a challenge.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this House is instructing you to go to Cabinet and ask for authority to borrow this money so that we can treat our people. Thank you.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, the point is noted. However, as a ministry, we are not sitting back. We have reached out to various - We are trying to do something, Madam Speaker.

LAYING OF PAPERS

6.49
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the following financial statements for the Uganda Livestock Industries Ltd for the period ended 30 December 2002 to December 2010 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General:

i) Uganda Livestock Industries Limited, 2002;
ii) Uganda Livestock Industries Limited, 2003;
iii) Uganda Livestock Industries Limited, 2004;
iv) Uganda Livestock Industries Limited, 2005;
v) Uganda Livestock Industries Limited, 2006;
vi) Uganda Livestock Industries Limited, 2007;
vii) Uganda Livestock Industries Limited, 2008;
viii) Uganda Livestock Industries Limited, 2009;
ix) Uganda Livestock Industries Limited, 2010.

I beg to lay.

LAYING OF PAPERS

6.54
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I also beg to lay on the Table financial statements for the years ended 30 June 2011 to June 2014 together with reports and opinions thereon by the Auditor-General for the following:
	
i) The National Housing and Construction Company Limited; 

ii) Makerere University – Training Health Researchers into Vocational Excellence in East Africa (Thrive) Project, Welcome Trust Grant No. Wt087540ma.

iii) Strengthening Evidence Based Decision Making II Project – OPM Component. 

iv) Amended Special Audit Report on the Peace Recovery and Development Plan Programme for the years 2008-2012.

v) Energy For Rural Transformation Project II (ERT II) – Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development Project Coordination Unit (PCU) Component – IDA Credit No. 4554 Ug And GEF Grant No. Tf 094484.

vi) Comprehensive Reproductive Health Services – UNFPA funded projects Lot 2 - Moroto District Local Government; Ministry Of Health; Kaabong District Local Government; Katakwi District Local Government.

vii) Kyambogo University.

viii) Ministry Of Health – Support for national prevention, care, treatment, laboratory services, strategic information and policies for HIV/AIDS, sexually transmitted diseases and tuberculosis in the Republic of Uganda under the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief – Grant No. IU2GPS000936-05.

ix) UNDP Award No. 00062241–00079645 – Strengthening Institutional Framework for Service Delivery. 

x) UNDP Award ID: 00062248–00079653 – Strengthening Sustainable Environment and Natural Resources Management, Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation in Uganda. 
xi) UNDP funded Project No: 00062246–00079650, Development of Inclusive Markets in Agriculture and Trade.

xii) UNDP Award No. 00061407–000777771 Uganda Youth Network – Youth Empowerment in Karamoja.

xiii) UNDP funded project No: 00062243–00079647 - Strengthening Oversight Functions for Accountable Service Delivery. 

xiv) UNDP Award No: 00060230–00075753, Territorial Approach to Climate Change in Mbale Region. 

xv) Diaspora Resource Mobilization and Utilization - UNDP funded project No: 00062240-00079644.
Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Commissioner. All are sent to the Committee on Public Accounts for expeditious perusal and report back.

LAYING OF PAPERS

6.55
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Parliamentary delegation to the 60th Commonwealth Conference held in Yaoundé Cameroon, from 2nd to 10th of October 2014. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. A date will be appointed for its debate. I do not see the chair for item No. 9. We will handle it next week. I also do not see the chair for item 10. Let us go to item No. 11. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO SET UP A SELECT COMMITTEE 
TO INVESTIGATE A COMPLAINT ON THE UNDER PERFORMANCE OF 
THE LAW DEVELOPMENT CENTRE AND OTHER RELATED ISSUES

6.56
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I would have loved so much to proceed with this motion, which has been pending, but probably due to technical errors, we do not have it uploaded. I was expecting your indulgence so that this could be one of the priorities next week. Madam Speaker, I kindly pray.

THE SPEAKER: But it has been on the Order Paper for some time.

MR OBOTH: That is right; over two months, I may say.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. For the other one, I do not know how much time hon. Werikhe requires to complete his presentation.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, mine is a big report and I think we cannot handle it within 60 minutes. I beg that we handle it maybe next week as one of the priorities.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, I think we now have to conclude today’s business. I want to thank you very much for the work done. However, we are about to go for recess, so I think next week we need to move a little faster. 

I appeal to the chairpersons when they are presenting reports not to read everything. Can you please summarise? If we receive a report in 45 minutes and then you must give members time to debate, it ends up taking up to two hours. So, please, make summaries of your presentations.

7.00
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg for your indulgence to allow me mention something regarding myself. There are series of conmen moving out there claiming that at one time I was in Ghana. They have conned members of the public - my voters, including members of staff of Parliament. They alleged that at one time I was in Ghana and they defrauded people of over Shs 20,000,000.

Another time they said that I was in South Sudan and that is the current rumour spreading around. These people hacked into my accounts; my Facebook account and yahoo account are all disabled. I am trying to see how to net these thieves. 

Madam Speaker, the most annoying thing is the fact that we registered our SIM cards. The money being sent to these people is sent to numbers that have not been registered. What is the Ministry of ICT really doing? I thought we sorted out and harmonised these positions once and for all.

So, I want to disclaim - I am not in any financial need, I am not in Ghana, I have never been to South Sudan, and whoever is sending money to these thugs is being defrauded. I am not really in any financial need. Thank you, members, for being there for me; you have sent a lot of money to the supposed Ibi, but it was not me receiving that money. I thank you very much. This is a notice to the public out there.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kabajjo, do you have a problem as well?

MR JAMES KABAJJO: Madam Chair, I would just like to give information concerning the issue of the registration of the SIM cards. 

The law under which SIM cards are registered falls under the Ministry of Internal Affairs. We have been interfacing with UCC and they always tell us that it is up to the Ministry of Internal Affairs to enforce the law on SIM cards which are not registered and disconnect them from the network. However, they also point out that we do not have standard registration in Uganda. It is only when the new national IDs come out that we shall have standard registration, where you can easily be identified. 

For the registration which took place, some of them depended on a letter from the chairman LC I and maybe some of them were even forged. So, those are the issues they raised. In this case, I would appeal to the Ministry of Internal Affairs to enforce that provision that SIM cards are registered and those which are not are disconnected from the telecommunication network. Thank you.

7.03
MR SIMON MULONGO (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you Madam Speaker. I rise on the point of concern about the ADB loan which was introduced to this House and the matter was referred to the Committee of Physical Infrastructure regarding the Road Sector Support Project 5, upgrading of Rukungiri-Kihihi-Ishasha/Kanungu and also Mbale-Bumbobi-Manafwa-Lwakhakha roads.

Madam Speaker, in June when this matter was referred to the committee, the committee visited these roads but there is no report that has come to this House. There is an expiration date within which the Government of Uganda should respond to this offer by the ADB. So we are getting concerned, including the Ministry of Finance officials, that the matter has delayed in this House and they do not know what to do next.

DR BARYOMUSI: Madam Speaker, I want to thank Hon. Mulongo for raising this issue. The ADB board passed this loan in May this year and we have been informed that they usually give six months; within six months, Parliament should approve that loan or else it may expire. 

We have been receiving calls from the Ministry of Finance, UNRA and Ministry of Works complaining about the delay in Parliament. Hon. Mulongo and I everyday talk to the members of the committee and we are getting a little bit desperate. We want them to tell us what exactly the problem is. Why are you not coming with the report? We would not want to start revolting as Members of Parliament against our own committees.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, maybe before you revolt, I just want to say something about the loan requests that are laid before this House. There has been a habit by the Minister of Finance to falsely report the date of laying these reports on the Table.  

They went to the President and said they brought a loan request here in May and yet the loan request came in July. So, I wrote to the President and even gave him the Hansard. I said the first loan request was laid on the Table at 4.17 p.m., the second one at 4.30p.m., the third one – They have defeated us and I have written to them and said please, the loan requests came in July. 

I know that some work is going on but also the lies about the dates on which they are laid here should end. I did not want to embarrass the minister but now you have brought up the matter. I have been writing to them and firing them and I also wrote to the President and told him this is not true. One day they reported us yet we had already passed the loan request. 

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, I sit on the Committee of National Economy and I think we have interfaced with the two colleagues. I think the report is ready. We are ready to present that report from next week. I am speaking on behalf of my chairperson who is not in this House but I think we are ready. I want to actually inform the House.

THE SPEAKER: You know, sometimes they even forget that when we are doing the budget, we do the work in the standing committee. We concentrate on the budget which is also government work. All that should be taken into account by the Ministry of Finance and any other complainants. 

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Ephraim Biraaro): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Allow me first and foremost to comment on what you have talked about - the apparent clash between Parliament and the Ministry of Finance. One time we were at Entebbe and there was an allegation that Parliament is sitting on Bills. When I brought it up with the President, he was concerned and the liar was exposed. The Minister of Finance conceded on the loan application and they took their share of blame that day.

Madam Speaker, the point upon which I sought to stand and seek your indulgence is about the Committee of Physical Infrastructure and the huge amount of backlog that we have in terms of petitions and inspection reports. On the Order Paper, we have got five reports to present to the House on business to follow, and this has been there for I think almost a month. 

Madam Speaker, I seek indulgence so that within next week - My desire was that before we break off for Christmas, we shall have presented at least these five so that we feel we have got a moral debt to generate more reports. So I seek indulgence so that within next week, we are given priority to present at least two.

The petitioners are also pressuring us. They have despaired and last week, I was embarrassed as a person when the Committee of National Economy was interrogating Dott Services about a report that was even uploaded on Members’ iPads. This is about Jinja –Kamuli-Bukungu and the eastern route. The Committee on National Economy was interrogating them but even the questions they asked were already answered within our report, which we have not yet presented. I seek your indulgence to include us among the priorities so that we present some of these reports next week and the week after. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we shall do something. We do not have Bills for next week; I think we will concentrate on the reports of the committees. 

The last business is to do with allocation of committees to hon. Amama Mbabazi. He will serve for on the sectoral Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges.

Honourable members, thank you so much for the work done. House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00p.m. 

(The House rose at 7.09p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 2 December 2014 at 2.00 p.m.)


