Tuesday, 24 November 2015

Parliament met at 3.35 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. We are late because we had to vet members of the Human Rights Commission, Equal Opportunities Commission, Chair of the Citizenship and Immigration Board and one or two others. Although we tried, we still had a balance. But that is why we are late today.

I would like to remind Members that as we discussed last time, this week will be our last sitting so let us try very hard to finish whatever business we have and then we can go out and come back for the Christmas sitting, which we discussed, to consider the Budget.

In the Gallery, we have the First Secretary to the Royal Norwegian Embassy. You are welcome. He has come to observe the proceedings of the House this afternoon.

There are also children here. When I find out where they are from, I will let you know. 

3.40
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Reading from the papers today, there was a ruling, which was made yesterday. I thought the Attorney-General would be here and we would benefit from him as to what the ruling means.

3.40
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Okupa has clearly observed that the Attorney-General is not in the House. Since we have a sitting tomorrow, I will make sure that I communicate to the Attorney-General to brief us. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: In the meantime, we await the official copy of the judgement. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE TAX EXPENDITURES FOR QUARTER ONE FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

3.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay the tax expenditures for quarter one, financial year 2015/2016, as required by law.

THE SPEAKER: They are sent to the Committee on Finance to peruse through and report back. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO DEVELOP A POLICY ON NATIONAL YOUTH SERVICE AND INTERNSHIP PROGRAMME

THE SPEAKER: As the honourable member comes, the pupils I was talking about upstairs are from New Hope Uganda represented by hon. Syda Bbumba and hon. Rosemary Namayanja Nsereko. They are from Nakaseke. You are welcome.

3.42
MS MONICAH AMONDING (NRM, Youth representative, Female): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This motion is moved under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament (2012).

“WHEREAS youth unemployment is one of the major challenges in the employment sector and in the development of the country’s economy as a whole and; 

WHEREAS a recent report launched by the International Labour Organisation and the Uganda Bureau of Statistics indicates that young people represent more than half of the unemployed in Uganda and many of those employed are in low quality jobs; 

APPRECIATING that Youth MPs working through the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Youth Affairs, in close partnership with the National Youth Council, have been promoting a youth internship and service programme as one means of addressing youth unemployment and supporting Kampala Capital City Authority and the International Youth Foundation to pilot such a programme, which will act as an example of a successful youth internship programme; 

NOTING THAT one of the commitments of the Declaration of the Special Summit of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region Heads of Government on the ‘Fight Against Youth Unemployment through Infrastructure Development and Investment Promotion’, which was signed by the President, was to the effect that -

‘To introduce a mandatory national youth service and internship programmes in member states focussing on short-term modules in technical skills, civic competences and patriotism’;

AWARE THAT the Parliamentary Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development in its report on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget estimates for the financial year 2014/2015 recommended that Government should support the internship programme initiated by the National Youth Council to prepare youths to cope with the employment challenge;
 
COGNISANT OF THE FACT THAT a national youth service internship programme would offer structured work-like placements for young people, designed to enhance their employability and would further complement other government initiatives such as the Youth Livelihood Programme;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that Government is urged to develop a policy on the National Youth Service and Internship Programme.”

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded. You only have seven minutes remaining.

MS AMODING: Madam Speaker, I would like to start with this quote by the new Prime Minister of Canada, His Excellency Justine Tudor who said, “It was through volunteerism that I learnt one of the greatest secrets of life; that our sense of self-worth is defined not by what we get from the world but what we give.”  

Madam Speaker, the context of this policy is that the development of the youth service and internship programme is already provided for in the existing legislation. If we look at the policies and the existing legislations of Uganda, particularly the National Employment Policy for Uganda, 2011, it talks about promoting employment skills, development, training and apprenticeships or internship, especially for the youth. 

In a section, which talks about promotion of youth employment, the policy refers to development and implementation of the National Action Plan of Employment (NAPE) which will, among other initiatives, promote job placements, volunteer schemes or internships to enable young people to acquire the requisite job training and hands-on experience.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, this policy has already been formulated and adopted and the outputs established are geared towards national service for all young people in Uganda.

One of the interventions in the NDP II is to institutionalise internship and apprenticeship for hands-on training in both private and public organisations. It is also hoped that the objectives of this national youth service and internship scheme would be provision of actual work experience, employability enhancement, building self-reliance and enterprise, providing services and undertaking projects that enhance citizenship building amongst the young people.

A national youth service scheme and internship programme can further enhance individuals’ successful progression from education to the world of work - from childhood to adulthood. We, therefore, hope that it can harness the youth resource in the country, build leadership potential and capacity amongst young people as well as enhance nation building, national cohesion and peace building.

From the perspective of the employers and from what has been happening, this has already been surveyed in a study conducted by the National Curriculum Centre in 2012 entitled, “Navigating Challenges, Charting Hope”. It was undertaken by the centre together with Youth Map Uganda and the study reported that employers believe that young people lack generic and soft skills and appropriate work place behaviours that are vital in today’s world of work. Therefore, these are the attributes young people can gain from youth service schemes or internship programmes. 

Thus, as employment opportunities are created, graduates from such programmes will provide employers with a pool of talent from which to recruit.

On the issue of nation building and citizenship, we believe that if such a policy is put in place, it will be vital in building character, citizenship, values, connectivity and patriotism as well as responsibility among young people. Young Ugandans placed in different service programmes will be able to learn and appreciate Ugandan’s diversity and appreciate the need for co-existence and harmonious living.

We have some examples of this work pioneered by KCCA, which is currently piloting a youth service programme entitled, “I Serve”, which not only supports its participants to become more employable but provides them with opportunities to contribute to their communities and their city. 

For example, the participants are documenting success stories of urban farmers to inspire others and are working with local CBOs to become more effective. They are also supporting market traders to improve record keeping.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, some of these youth internship programmes have given young people the skills and confidence to participate more effectively and also help build a generation of active and engaged citizens. This has been evidenced by KCCA’s programme.

In a wider context, we have examples from Kenya, Nigeria, South Africa, Ghana, Lesotho and others, some of which are very large programmes, which recruit tens of thousands of young participants annually. In a recent study entitled, “Youth Service Project on Employability, Entrepreneurship and Sustainable Livelihoods in Sub-Saharan Africa” by MasterCard Foundation, it was reported that 15 such schemes are making progress in youth and employment.

In line with development of this policy in Uganda, we hope that when this policy is put in place, it will ensure well designed and structured placements leading to positive outcomes for participants and host employers and agencies. 

We also hope that youths who are supported through such a programme will not only become more employable, but will also be more enterprising, will become job creators as well as better job seekers thus complementing the existing government initiatives such as the Youth Livelihood Programme, Skilling Uganda, among others.

We believe that harnessing the drive and creativity of young people will contribute to effective national development. It will also help in building working partnerships with employers to build the next generation of a high quality population and work force and ensuring that young people in Uganda have skills and experience to take their places in the growing economies.

Finally, young Ugandans who will be going through this programme will become more competitive on the job market at the local level, as well as the regional level, in view of the integration processes of the East African Community, to which Uganda is a party.

In conclusion, we believe that this national youth service programme will address a bigger national development policy and legislative framework that addresses young people’s needs in the country.

Therefore, by doing this, we believe that Government will get multiple benefits in various sectors. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the request is that the government be urged to develop a policy on national youth service and internship. I think no one has an objection to urge the government. That is what we are being asked to do. I put the question that the motion be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

3.54
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I have been interacting with the committee because the Bill was read for the first time and sent to the committee. I am told that they are not ready with the report. Therefore, we cannot proceed with this item. I request that we wait until the committee is ready then we do the second reading and then debate. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The procedural issue I am raising is that last week, the Kampala Lord Mayor, division mayors and councillors were nominated and this Bill is seeking to change the procedure of electing the Lord Mayor and mayors in Kampala and hopefully other municipalities like Mbale and Arua - although I never saw Mbale and Arua mentioned. 

Now, the minister is saying that she has been interacting with the committee and that they are working on a Bill yet nominations have taken place. Is she procedurally right to tell us that we should continue with an exercise, which we are sure has been overtaken by events?

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, we want the minister in charge of the Presidency here tomorrow to conclude this matter. He was not here for the laying of the Bill and he is not here for the second reading. Let him come and report to us tomorrow on this matter.

BILLS

COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATIONS BILL, 2015

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is the Chair here?

Clause 10

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 10 do stand part of the Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, clause 10 is talking about the tenure of board members. I would like to make an amendment that the tenure of board members of this board should be three years and renewable for only one term. Usually, board members serve for either two or three years but this one is giving four years. It is departing from the normal tenure of board members.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what do you say about the proposal?

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chairperson and honourable members, what I also know is that most boards’ tenures are of four years. I do not know which ones are for three years. Others are at five years. Therefore, I request that our proposal of four years remains.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I think the minister is not well versed with boards. There is a difference between board members and executives. Usually, the term for executives is three, four or five years. Board members, like in cooperatives, serve for two years. In URA, it is three years. In National Water, it is three years and these are government bodies. Maybe you need to do your research. Why should others have three years and this one has four years?

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I would like to say that we should make the tenure of board members the same across the board. If they stay for three years in other institutions, even this one should be three years and renewable only once, if they are supposed to be renewed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What does the chairperson of the committee say?

MR JAMES BABA: For the sake of progress, I concede. Let it be three years.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 10 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the committee would like to propose an amendment to clause 11(1)(g) by substituting for the entire paragraph the following, “(g) Appointing staff of the bureau” and inserting a new paragraph after (1) to read as: “(j) To perform such other functions as may be prescribed by law.”

(4) Deleting sub-clause (2). 

I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 11 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the committee would wish to redraft clause 12 as follows: “The meetings of the board shall be conducted in accordance with Schedule 2.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 12 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 16 do stand part of the Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have an issue with clause 16 regarding the appointment of the executive director. Clause 16(1) talks about terms and conditions. However, it does not talk about the duration of tenure of the executive director. Therefore, I would like the minister to help me understand how long he wants this chief executive to be in office.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Remuneration?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, this clause is saying, “The minister shall appoint an executive director on the recommendation of the board of directors and on terms and conditions specified in the instrument of his or her appointment.” The terms could be for 10 or 15 years. We need to know the duration of tenure of this executive director.

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chairperson, the duration will be specified in the terms and conditions of appointment.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have discovered that Wangolo is talking. That is why you had a problem in Bunyole West. (Laughter) 

Madam Chairperson, you cannot determine terms. It should first be in the law. That is why I am saying the chief executives are working for four years, renewable only once. If you say that the minister will determine, it means they can do anything. They can give one year or 10 years. 

In that regard, I would like to move an amendment that there shall be an executive director who will be appointed for a period of four years and maybe renewed only once.

Secondly, the minister shall be the one responsible for appointing, as you have said here. The justification for this is that this is a job for which somebody should be employed on contract basis that can be renewed basing on their performance. The law should also be there to protect this person so that when he is coming to work, he is not worried that maybe my term can be changed any time in the middle of my tenure.

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chairperson and honourable members, most top jobs in Government are now on contract basis, whether you are the chief executive of a government corporation or in a ministry as permanent secretary or director. All those appointments are now on contract basis and the terms and conditions are specified in the appointments.

Therefore, I would like to request hon. Nandala-Mafabi to allow the appointing authorities to do that when they are appointing these executives on the terms and conditions they will have specified in the appointments. I beg.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, I think what he wanted to know is whether this appointment is for one, two or even three years. I think that is what the issue is.

MR JAMES BABA: Yes, when this chief executive is interviewed and is found suitable, the letter of appointment will specify the terms either for four or five years through this law, if we pass it. What I am saying is that it is not necessary. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I do not see any problem with Parliament determining the duration of the contract of the executive director. It is well within our mandate to determine that by legislation.

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi raised a very important point that even if you are to employ your chief executives on contract, it is more comforting for them to know that, that contract is provided in the parent Act and that the duration of their service is protected by legislation not by an administrative instrument called the contract. 

I know, as a lawyer, that a contract may be binding but an employment contract is a very fluid field to tread. Honourable minister, I would request that you concede that we state the duration of the contract. They are giving you a very long period of four years, renewable once. Therefore, you will employ this wonderful gentleman or lady for a total of eight years. 

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, in addition to what hon. Odoi-Oywelowo was saying, I just want to point out to the minister that we have passed several laws here setting up several government bodies with chief executives and we have specified the number of years in the law. Therefore, I am not sure why, in this particular case, the honourable minister is objecting to specifying the number of years. 

Madam Chairperson, in addition, I would like to ask the chairperson of the committee whether he did not have any amendment. This is because the report I have on my iPad has amendments, which I was expecting him to raise and talk about.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, you know if we say that the terms will be stated in the contract, it means that one ED might be given three years and the next one seven years. 

MR JAMES BABA: Okay, appointments of four years, renewable once.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. I put the question that clause 16 be amended as proposed.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, I must apologise. We did not have an amendment on sub-clause 1, which is now amended and we do appreciate the amendment proposed by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. 

We have the following amendments to propose to the House: 
    1.  In reference to the word “board”, wherever it appears, we substitute it with the word, “bureau.” This is because we did establish the bureau and not the board. The institution is the bureau.
    2. Insert sub-clause 2 after sub-clause 1 to read and renumber the rest accordingly: “The executive director shall be a person of high moral character and proven integrity with the relevant qualifications and experience in public administration and management, law, economics or any other applicable qualification.”

In sub-clause 4 by substituting paragraph (d) with the following: “…is declared insolvent.” I beg to move, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question first that sub-clause 1 of clause 16 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that sub-clause 2 of clause 16 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.   

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that sub-clause 4 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.   

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that clause 16, as amended, do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)


MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to insert a clause before clause 17. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t we finish with clause 16 then you can come in? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, listen to my reasoning before we do that. We are now creating the Secretary to the Board but this chief executive has no assistant. The reason is that there must be a deputy or executive director to assist this chief in case he is not available. I would like to know if I can wait for this. However, I would have proposed that we insert a new clause here creating a deputy executive director. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think you can bring that as a new proposal. Let us deal with the old one first. I put the question that clause 16, as amended, stand part of the Bill.   

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: You can now make your proposal. We shall then hear from the minister afterwards. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to insert a new clause to create a post for deputy executive director who will deputise the chief executive officer and report to him or her. 

The justification is that the offices cannot be left without assistants. When this person is appointed, he or she should report to the executive director. We are not creating him so that he becomes a boss in his own organisation.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, what do you say about this proposal? 

MR JAMES BABA: I do not have any serious difficulties with that but there will be other management staff that can deputise the executive director when he is absent. I thought that the inclusion of a deputy director will put additional burden to the board but I have no serious objections to it. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have failed to understand what the minister – if you have accepted then we have to create terms similar to the ones of the executive director; four years renewable once. He must also have qualifications similar to those of the executive director. If that is okay, then I have no problem. 

MR JAMES BABA: The trouble would be that we are creating this new bureau and we will be appointing staff. If you appoint a director and his deputy at the same time, they will be leaving at the same time so where would the continuity be? Where would the historical memory for that organisation be? 

That is why I was requesting that we do not insist on this addition but that other management staff can take care of the responsibilities of the executive director when he is away.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, I think we are making a law that is susceptible to the administrative weaknesses or gaps that may be in existence. We have been having the Equal Opportunities Commission, for which ordinarily the law provides that it should have a chairperson and a vice chairperson on the board.

From the time we constituted the board, we have only operated for the last term without a Vice Chairperson of the commission and yet it is provided for in the law. We have a provision in the law of the standard student-teacher ratio in the country, but because of some gaps and the like, we have not satisfied the requirement. 

However, that does not negate the fact we must have the law straightened; the rest of the explanations can come later as to why Government failed to fill the gap. In a nutshell, what I am saying is, the position hon. Nandala is advancing is very welcome; we need to make the law right now and provide for a deputy.

If anything happens, say due to limited resources, and we are unable to get an authentic deputy, then we can assign somebody administratively to act as a deputy. That would be an administrative arrangement. For now, let us have a legal framework in place providing adequately for whatever we are foreseeing. Thank you very much.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I support the proposal by hon. Nandala on the basis of two things; number one, in Uganda, we have a very strong spirit of gender balance and almost all offices of significance in this country have this kind of requirement reflecting that the President has a deputy, the Speaker has a deputy, the Ministers with the Ministers of state can also be seen in that format.

Therefore, should the senior be a woman within the age bracket of 25 and 45 –(Interjections)- there could be need for a maternity leave which is mandatory by law. So, what happens in the case the executive director is on a maternity leave and there is no deputy? Therefore, I support the proposal to go by that, it costs Uganda nothing; we shall cross the bridge when we get there. Thank you.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I rise to express my objection to having a deputy executive director because we need to think of lean structures and not just create a deputy who will be redundant and just wait to work when the executive director is not around.

I think the secretary can ably perform the duties. In any case, if someone else is holding that office and for one reason or another, they are not in office, I do not think the secretary would fail to perform their duties for a day or two. The work can still be run and they can take the decisions.

I do not think that all the bodies that we have created in this nation do have deputies. Therefore, for this reason, I object to having a deputy to the executive director. Thank you.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the issue raised by hon. Nandala is supported by a number of colleagues and it is extremely sound. The committee discussed this matter but also looked at the demerits of the deputy to the ED, particularly relating to power centres. In the law, we provide for a full-fledged establishment of the chamber of the deputy and the restriction between the two can actually work against the very objectives of the organisation.

I know that we need somebody to act, but that can be done administratively by the ED for a period he or she would be away. We, therefore, considered a smooth and a harmonious running of the organisation which I would request my brother to consider, other than having a full-fledged deputy at this level.

We also need to look at financial implications as we establish these institutions in our country. We would like to cross-cut as much as possible. Therefore, Madam Chairperson, if hon. Nandala would consider this - the merit definitely holds to some extent, but we would do for the time being with just the ED.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to understand; if you look at the original draft of the Bill on page 11, it talks about the membership of the board. At that time, it included a chairperson, a vice chairperson - not more than three persons. I do not know whether that one changed. Did that change? May I hear from the honourable chairperson?

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, there is a difference between the board as the governing body - the directors, the chairperson and the members of the board; that was delineated from the board which was initially called the board, which is the administrative body or the management.

As it stands now, the management is referred to as a bureau which will have the executive director as the CEO and the senior management, different from the board which is an oversight body.

THE CHAIRPERSON: How many members will it have?

MR MULONGO: The bureau is the secretariat so to say and we have already amended that. Earlier on, the draft had mixed the two, calling the other one the board of directors and also this one still called a board. There was, therefore, a lot of mix up and we had to delineate the management from the top administration. 

In clause 11, we are referring to the board which is the supervisory board; the board of directors which is non- executive. However, the bureau is an executive one which is a secretariat headed by the executive director.

MS AOL: Madam Chairperson, even then, I think it is still very important to have the deputy executive director. If you look at structures like in schools, we have a board of governors and then we have what you call the bureau - the head teacher, the deputy. Therefore, we are saying that the executive director and the deputy are both important unless we are creating something which is very different from what already exists.

I feel both are important – may be their contracts can be given at different times - that is for continuity as it was brought up. It can be at different times so that when the contract of the executive director expires, the deputy executive director’s contract still runs, that could also work. That can be arranged, although it can also be at the same time which still does not matter. That is the way I see it and it has helped a lot of other structures to work. Thank you.

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I have been going through many authorities and bodies, but what we have is a Chairperson and the Vice Chairperson which is written in the law. However, when it comes to the executive director, normally the deputy is not there. You can see in Kampala Capital City Authority, Musisi has no deputy that is written in the law. The employees under the Executive Director are employed by the board and they can appoint one a deputy. It is not necessary to have it in the law. Thank you very much. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I am happy that hon. Simon Mulongo is saying it is very expensive to maintain these people. However, it also depends on what they are going to do. I will give the example of the ministers and the state ministers; some of them continue sleeping but they are there. 

If you are telling us that this institution does not work, then tell us the truth so that we know it does not work and we do not need to create big names like “executive director”; we can call him or her a secretary and we leave it at that. From what you have written, there is an executive director and a secretary to the board. Once you do that, it ceases to be a secretariat as you are saying because a secretariat is headed by a secretary.

Therefore, if we can, at an appropriate time, recommit and then delete this so that we have the secretary to the board and other staff, then that can be understood. However, the moment you create a chief executive officer, the chief executive officer must be deputized. This is common knowledge.

I have been looking at the laws we have made here before. If we say that this is costly, then we should delete it and maintain the title “secretary”.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, considering the views of Members, – and I would request that my minister considers this - we can establish a deputy but not in a manner of a fully-fledged chamber as proposed earlier. This is in order to avoid a likely conflict that may arise in administration in terms of power centres.

We can, therefore, say that there will be a deputy executive director who will be appointed by the minister, reporting to the executive director on terms and conditions as shall be determined by the minister, like it was earlier phrased in regard to the –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The information I would like to give to the chairperson of the committee is that in the law, it must be clear that the deputy will report to the executive director and it is the executive director who will assign him or her duties. The reason is that this person is subordinate and if she or he makes a mistake, the chief executive can discipline them.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chair, the committee will be very happy to move by that. However, we need to have it in writing so that it is smooth and flowing. It is to the effect that he or she is appointed by the minister, reports to the executive director and is assigned duties by the executive director on terms and conditions as shall be determined by the minister. If something like that is brought, I am sure it will be very welcomed.
 
MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I would like to get some clarification from the chairperson of the committee. You are saying the deputy to the executive director shall be appointed by the minister and the executive director shall also be appointed by the minister. I am wondering if it will not be proper for the deputy to be appointed by the board and the executive director appointed by the minister such that we can have different appointing centres for these two. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we stand this over while our people format it? Hon. Nandala-Mafabi and hon. Lubogo, can you format a proposal? He had some ideas; you could put them together. We shall defer that proposal for a new insertion; let us just hold it for a few minutes and then go to clause 17

Clause 17
MR MULONGO: Madam Chair, on clause 17, the committee proposes substitution of the entire clause to read as follows: 
“(1) There shall be a secretary to the Bureau who shall be appointed by the board on terms and conditions specified in the instrument over appointment.

(2) The secretary to the Bureau shall be the principal legal adviser to the Board and Bureau.

(3) The secretary to the Bureau shall perform such functions as the executive director may direct and in addition, shall be responsible for-
(a) arranging the business at meetings of the board of directors;
(b) taking the minutes of the meetings of the board of directors; and 
(c) keeping the records of the decisions and other policy records of the board of directors.

(3) In the performance of his or her duties, the secretary shall report to the Executive Director.

(4) The secretary to the Bureau shall possess the relevant professional qualifications.”

The justification is, to clarify the responsibilities of a secretary to the Bureau in relation to the duties of the Executive Director.

MR NANDALA-MAMFABI: Madam Chair, I think the committee has moved well. However, the amendment I would like to move is about the tenure. I think it is okay for this person to be appointed by the board for a period of four years, renewable once, and on terms and conditions specified in the instrument of appointment.

The justification is that such a person should be on contract so that it can – all board secretaries are on contract usually for three to four years.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chair, we have already agreed on the principle of ensuring this contract in the appointment instruments. This is well received - that we subject the appointment to a tenure of four years and also based on a performance contract.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 17 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, under clause 18(2), why do you want to subject these staff to the Ministry of Finance? The reasoning is that this board will make a budget with staff gaps vis-à-vis remunerations and once approved, that is it. Therefore, the moment you do this, when you go to the Ministry of Finance they will say they do not have the money and yet you need staff. 

I would like to, therefore, propose that we delete “in consultation with Ministry of Finance”. Maybe we can leave “in consultation with Ministry of Public Service” since the Ministry of Public Service deals with employment. Ministry of Finance should be deleted.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chair, we are happy to have Parliament come to the side of the committee because we had a little haggling with the Minister of Finance who wanted some restrictions to this effect. However, we will be happy to have it stop after “directors” and the rest goes. We concede, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 18 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19 

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes an amendment in the headnote, subsection (1) and subsection (2), to provide for “branch” instead of “regional”. In subsection (2)(a) we propose an amendment to substitute the phrase “guide and monitor” with the phrase “supervise”. Lastly, we propose to delete paragraph (2)(c).

Madam Chairperson, as a committee we believe that it is better to leave the discretionary powers of opening offices to the Bureau rather than legislate on it by this very Act. We did not see the justification of implanting the provision in the law that we must have regional offices. 

Further justification is that an appeals process has already been provided for in the latter sections of this Act, which we believe will be sufficient to cover paragraph (c). I beg to move, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you interested in restricting services to the people of Uganda? If you say they should only sit in the capital, it means other offices cannot be opened. 

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, we found it extremely financially heavy; according to the Bill, they would have regional offices and these regional offices were not necessarily based on specified regional administrative units so defined that they could be so many. We, therefore, felt that if they want regional-like offices, they could open them in certain areas as they will deem necessary. 

In any case, we have sub county and district offices, and at the centre the national office. Only those areas which they would deem necessary to have offices at regional level are where they will open them. This amendment gives the liberty to have regional offices as and when deemed necessary but not make it mandatory. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 19 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend clause 20 as follows:
i) In sub clause (2)(a) by substituting the phrase “Resident District Commissioner” with the phrase “Chief Administrative Officer”. This is meant to align the Bill with the national NGO policy that is in place. 

ii) In sub clause (2)(b) by substituting the phrase, “Chief Administrative Officer” with the phrase, “District Community Development Officer” as the secretary to the committee. 

iii) By substituting paragraph (c) with “District Health Officer”. 
(iv) By inserting two new paragraphs (f) and (g) to provide as follows: “(f) the District Education Officer.” “(g) the Secretary for Gender and Community Services.”

The justification is: to align the Bill with the NGO policy. 

v) By deleting clause 20(4)(1). The justification is that we would like to see a clear appellate process that has already been provided for separately under clause 45.

Madam Chairperson, this effectively removes the RDC from the chair of the district NGO monitoring committee and replaces him or her with the Chief Administrative Officer. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: As the minister comes up, I just want to advise that from your proposal, it was clause 20(4)(i) and not (1).

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, most obliged; it is (i). 

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chairperson, the other proposals are all okay except the one proposing that the Chief Administrative Officer chairs these meetings. The Chief Administrative Officer is an accounting officer in the district. The RDC, by virtue of a constitutional provision, has supervisory roles and oversight roles on the performance of Government and Civil Society Organisations (CSOs) including NGOs in that district. 

The RDC is in a better position, therefore, to oversee all these activities in the district. I, therefore, request that we retain this role with the RDC and not the CAO who is mostly an accounting officer. 

MS EKWAU: Madam Chairperson, I unilaterally agree with the position of the committee. The reason as to why we had problems with this Bill was that issue of bringing in offices like the RDC into this. 

We all know the roles the RDCs are playing in our constituencies. If you assessed the reasons as to why some of our colleagues failed in the primaries, it was due to the role of the RDCs. They have become more political than the chairpersons of our parties. 

With all honesty, whoever loves this country cannot leave this important role of deciding on an impartial body, which is bringing charity to your district - How can you leave this decision to someone who is playing at the heart of politics in the district? Honestly, I would implore this House and urge Members to go with the position of the committee and shun the position of the minister in the strongest terms possible. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to disagree with those who are supporting the position of the CAO to take over chairmanship from the RDC. The work of NGOs in a district depends on the stability of the district -(Interjections)– Yes! If there is no stability, no peace, I do not think these NGOs would be in the districts -(Interjections) - whether you like it or not. 

The RDCs are representatives of the Government and they do monitor but CAOs are just like accounting officers. (Interjection) Even when NGOs apply, some of those to recommend them are the RDCs. Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I seriously object to this position of changing from RDC to the CAO. (Interjections) Let me finish first; these people should wait -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Allow the Prime Minister to speak.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: They are impatient; you cannot speak for me. (Laughter) It is so awkward for people to insist that CAOs should replace RDCs; I seriously object to this proposal.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. I think we will be contradicting ourselves, looking at the different roles of these people; the CAO is in charge of all government activities in the district and in charge of the development and implementation of government programmes. Looking at the roles of the RDCs, they are political appointees in terms of developing the district. 

Let the RDCs stick to securing the district if indeed they are responsible for security, because the RDC is the chairperson of security in the district. We do not want any political inclinations when it comes to NGOs. They can give their services better when they are doing it on neutral ground. I would, therefore, support the position of the committee that the RDCs be kept out of this. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The spirit of the original Bill was that the Government looked at NGOs as potential enemies of the state, Uganda, but this Bill was revised to make sense as it is now. However, I can see the Rt Hon. Prime Minister seems to imply that the RDC is the only one who secures the district and the Chief Administrative Officer does not, that the RDC is the one who loves the Republic of Uganda more than the CAO. That is not right! 

We think that the RDCs have become notorious and partisan. Recently, you saw how an RDC was supervising the defacing of posters of a presidential candidate. They are in charge of the security of the district and that is enough. If there is an issue or any incident of insecurity, it will be reported and he or she will chair the meeting as the RDC in the district. Let us keep the work of the NGOs under the civil hands and not quasi-military hands.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to comment on this issue of the RDCs, and I also beg for your indulgence because at some point I will move an additional amendment.

Madam Chairperson, we are told that policy informs legislation when you are drafting. I think this is the only time we have really got it right in this House, that there is a policy already in place which is informing legislation. We need to applaud the committee for noticing the fact that there is a policy and, therefore, any subsequent legislation must be to execute the policy that is in place. If the policy is already telling us that it is the Chief Administrative Officer in charge, it would be irresponsible of us to come here and try to make it an RDC affair. It is wrong because you already have a policy. 

Honourable Prime Minister, it is a policy of your Government, you are the one who adopted it and now you want to come and take all of us for a ride by trying to change it. It is an Executive policy; you should be the one defending the policy position to have the Chief Administrative Officer to be the person chairing this NGO monitoring committee at the district level.

Secondly, at the start of this, as it has been said by the Leader of the Opposition, there was a lot of anxiety. We said we wanted to heal the mistrust and create an atmosphere where we are able to assure these NGOs that mean well that we are not witch-hunting them. Now we want to militarise the whole board - DISO, RDC, GISO, PISO, every one of them - as though at the national level, where the registration takes place, we do not have the same offices being represented. 

I would really like to advise the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister that it would do you no harm to defend your government policy; you are the ones who put it in place. In any case, it looks like you are only two, you and the minister. For us to make progress, therefore, you need to have a buy-in so that we continue dealing with this Bill normally. Otherwise, if we ask for a vote, you know where we are going. Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chairperson, I hope I am not being blackmailed by hon. Alaso. I agree that policy informs legislation; can we have a fall-back position or some role for the RDC? I will concede that the CAO chairs the district monitoring group, but we have a role for the RDC by virtue of the constitutional provision under Article 203(3) on the roles of the RDC in the district. 

Let me propose something for honourable members to consider. I propose that the RDC will perform the following functions while the Chief Administrative Officer chairs the district monitoring committees: The RDC shall monitor the activities of the NGO sector within the district and ensure compliance with the approved NGO policy, Act, regulations, guidelines as well as the framework of the district and country’s overall development policies and bylaws. That is one. Two, provide information to the NGO Bureau on the activities of the NGO sector within the district based on the guidelines issued by the Bureau. 

While we have the role of the CAO chairing, the RDC should have this monitoring role by virtue of his or her role provided for under the Constitution.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I have looked at the constitutional provision that the minister has read to us in regard to the roles of Resident District Commissioners and they are very global. What I would understand is that the RDC has too much power to the extent that at some point in the execution of these duties as stipulated in the Constitution, he will run into the business of the NGOs, whether as a representative of the President or as a person monitoring the district security committee. 

Is it procedurally okay for the honourable minister to come here and beg desperately that the RDCs must have some roles when the Constitution already gives the RDCs a clear role? Is it procedurally okay that he just begs, “Give the RDCs something to do”? Are the RDCs too short of work that even what the Constitution has given them is not enough for them?      

THE CHAIRPERSON: What hon. Alaso was saying is that the policy on page 44 gives the RDC the power to facilitate activities of the NGOs – registration, deregistration among others. Is that what you are talking about, that they already have it under the policy?

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I had not even looked at that provision of the policy in regard to the role that the RDC is required to do and I will take that as information. 

What I was referring to is the provisions of the Constitution itself that give the RDCs power to head the district security committees. So, if you think that a particular Non-Governmental Organisation is a security threat, that information will find the RDC as he or she chairs the security committee. It also gives them the power to carry out other functions as may be assigned by the President or by law. Therefore, that would have been covered and somehow, the RDC has a lot of work. 

Madam Chairperson, there are certain things that should be left to small people to also do. If you now pick the RDC from where he is to begin micromanaging and even chairing meetings, which the CAO – These NGOs bring in some money. Look at an NGO that deals with education and is constructing a classroom; the right person to know what is happening in the education sector, in the district budget is actually the Chief Administrative Officer who then compares what the district is doing with what the NGO is doing. Now you even want to give that small thing to the RDC who is a representative of the President. Really, that is micromanaging. Madam Chairperson, that is the procedural concern that I was raising.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: In addition to that, the RDC represents the President. I have been looking at clause 9 and I have not seen the President as the chair of the NGO board. So, why should it be at the district that the President chairs and not at the centre? 

We should, therefore, be careful and allow these institutions to operate. Let us leave these people called RDCs to do their other jobs. If you bring them here, then you are curtailing those organisations in the country. That is why I am saying that unless the President is the chairperson of the NGO Board, then the one who chairs at the district can be the RDC. 

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, I am happy that we are restricting the discussion about the RDCs’ role within the confines of the authority of the NGO law. 

As it may be appreciated, I have worked as an RDC before and I do appreciate the role of that office. This matter of the RDC chairing the district monitoring committee was perhaps the most contentious throughout our consultations. Most stakeholders viewed this as securitising the function of monitoring than actually allowing the normal oversight control of NGO activities in districts.

Madam Chair, the RDC is the one who registers these NGOs. There is no NGO that operates in a district without the leave of the RDC, and the policy articulates the function of the RDC to register and to also recommend deregistration. That is the RDC. Technically speaking, the person who registers and also who, by role of the Constitution, monitors – It is not us to tell the RDC to monitor; the RDC has express legal authority to monitor this and reports to an independent office called the Office of the President, which provides guidance to the ministries, agencies and so on. 

As hon. Nandala-Mafabi has put it, technically speaking, if you make the RDC chair this district committee it means that he is in effect reporting to two offices, the Office of the NGO Bureau and at the Office of the President. Now, that is a contradiction that we may create if we allow the RDC to be the one chairing this.

The CAOs, under whom the Community Development Officers’ (CDOs) mandate falls, are the ones who are responsible for the NGO function in the district. Therefore, if he chairs, he has ready material and information that he can use to guide the NGO performance. The RDC can only come in if there is an excess of an NGO that borders on issues of national interest and security, which is his well-established role in the law.

For that matter, in terms of technicalities, law and policy, the committee agreed with the stakeholders that the RDCs continue with their normal work as established under the policy and also as given under the Constitution but we allow the Chief Administrative Officer to be the one to chair the monitoring committee of the district. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 20 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS ALASO: Madam Chair, I have a further amendment on clause 20. I have a serious concern with clause 20 (4) (j) on functions of the district Non-Governmental Organisation monitoring committee: “to perform any other function that the Board shall deem fit for purposes of giving effect to this Act.”  

I would like to be excused if I do not understand what this means but I thought that this could border on very wide ranging powers. Nobody actually knows what “any other function” means. My fear is that such wide latitude could be arbitrarily used. If there is anything that has been omitted, is it possible to pick it and specify it here rather than just giving such wide ranging powers which could cause problems? This is why I think that if I get to buy into this here, I would like to propose that (j) be deleted.

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chairperson, this list simply cannot be exhaustive and that is why this provision of (j) has been put there, for the board to determine what it deems fit –(Interjections)- Circumstances will arise that will need the attention of the board and the board should be given the leverage to determine them within the purview of this Act. That is what this means. We cannot list all the functions here. We have done this in other legislations before; it is not something new.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, what happens is that the board determines downwards and the people down do not determine. Therefore, the function of the board is that it will always make regulations, policies and others things that should be followed. 

To say that the board will perform any other function that it shall deem fit - what are these functions that are deemed fit? If the board believes that there is something that it needs to do, it must originate it from the top but not for them to do it at this stage. Therefore, it is misplaced and it has already been covered under the board in a better way than bringing it here. Therefore, I second hon. Alaso in deleting this 20 (4)(j) and I shall also move my amendment.  

MR MULONGO: The paragraph, as argued by the minister, simply acknowledges the fact that the list can never be exhaustive. The issue of necessity requires that it must be within the spirit and the letter of the law. I would not expect the board to come up with a strange commission of a function that is about fishing or doing some other thing. Therefore, it must be within the purview of the law. 

For that matter, it is only good that the board is given that latitude to be able to bring on board anything they feel was left out and was seen as necessary at that material time. I beg that the hon. Alaso and my good brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, allow us to move and this one is retained.

MS AOL: Madam Chairperson, if we leave this open, it is an avenue for smuggling in issues which may not be very nice for the NGOs. I remember at a certain time when we talked about “miscellaneous”, in the NGO sector it was put off because it can be very detrimental. Why don’t we just put this off? I believe that in case anything is left out, it can fit within the provisions here, if it is something good for these NGOs.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. First of all, (j) is not open-ended: “To perform any other function that the Board shall deem fit for purposes of giving effect to this Act.” Only what the board deems fit for purposes of giving effect to the Act is covered under (j). That basically means that if there is any other function that is not included from (a) to (g) –(Interjection)- I am coming to that, hon. Alice Alaso. 

Madam Chairperson, the problem with hon. Alaso is that we went to school together and she was in Box and I was in Lumumba and we used to go out jogging together; so, she keeps on -(Laughter)- That is the first point; it is not open ended. It is for purposes of giving effect to –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I do not want to put hon. Odoi-Oywelowo to order but for the records of this House, I have never stayed in Box. I have actually been an Afro-Stonian. I am an Africana, for all it takes, and a lady at that. Thank you very much.

MS ODOI-OYWELOWO: She did not refute the fact that we used to go jogging together. (Laughter) Secondly, in statutory interpretation the rule to apply here is the ejusdem generis rule. When you want to understand what (j) is talking about, you look at what is contained in (a) to (g). For matters related to what is contained in (a) to (g) that are not covered, you fall to (j). Therefore, I think the provision in (j) is harmless. I do not think it is subject to abuse.

What I am actually saying is that you cannot import what is alien to the Act and argue that it must be deemed fit by the board and therefore (j) covers it. It cannot be; it is either in the Act or it is what is covered in (a) to (g). I plead with Alice and she has conceded and dropped her proposal.

MS KABUULE: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. I concur with hon. Odoi-Oywelowo that when we are talking about monitoring, because this is a monitoring committee, it is very difficult for you to limit your operations to specifics. As you come out to monitor, you expect that something incidental will come up and if you limit yourself to specifics, then you will have limited yourself to only what you will have outlined. I concur that we leave (j) the way it stands just in case there are some issues which are incidental and are not catered for as they carry out their monitoring.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 20 be amended as proposed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have another amendment. (Interjections) We are making the law; your job is to say “aye” but I do not know how many “ayes” they will count in the book.

Clause 20(2)(d): “the District Internal Security Officer”. Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank the past regimes because the people who were in intelligence were never known. An intelligence officer would walk and nobody would know, so that they get information. However, for us in this Government, we make our intelligence officers known and when they are in bars they say that they are intelligence officers. What intelligence would you carry out?

THE CHAIRPERSON: What amendment is that?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to delete “the District Intelligence Security Officer” because he has the mandate to do intelligence on anything and report, but if you make him part of this committee, you are even handcuffing him. Any decision which would have been turned down, they will say that he was part and parcel of the decision. Therefore, we want the intelligence to be separate from this process. Madam Chairperson, that is the amendment I would like to move.

MR JAMES BABA: This Government has demystified the gun; it has made the soldier a publically acknowledged person. It has made transparent the way intelligence operates, the way security people operate. I do not see any problem with this. This is the way we want to operate - in openness - and we think that the district security officer should be part of this committee.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The reason we are raising this is that, supposing an issue arises, they will say that the district intelligence officer was part and parcel of this. If you participate in a decision, you cannot again backtrack on it. The best person to do intelligence on organisations is the district intelligence officer. In fact, that is their job. Why do you want to make them part of the decision-making and at the same time do the intelligence?  In most cases if you want -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is the district intelligence officer?

MR NANDALA: In clause 20(2) (d).

MR ISIKO: We are handling a monitoring committee and intelligence officers are part of those people who monitor. The beginning of monitoring is collecting information and sometimes they pre-empt what might take place. I propose that we leave them in this clause. The intelligence officer is very important in a monitoring committee at a level of decision-making.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I rise to support the proposal as it is. We all agreed that it was wrong to include the RDC. However, now the RDC will be represented on the committee by the intelligence officer, who will be able to feed the RDC with whatever information he has about the NGOs as they apply for licences and other issues, so that the district committee has full information to operate on as they deal with these NGOs.

I think it is for the good of everyone that the security information that may have been obtained is used in the management, monitoring and control of the activities of the NGOs. It is for this reason that I support that the intelligence officer remains on the district committee. Thank you.

MS OGWAL: I seek clarification from the chairman of the committee. I would like to know whether before an NGO becomes operational it is cleared by security agencies. I am assuming that before an NGO becomes operational, it has already gone through the process of screening, knowing if there is any security problem associated with that particular NGO and so on. Why would you like to bring an intelligence officer at the level of monitoring?

I believe once you expose the identity of the intelligence officers then you do not get what you want. It is important that the intelligence officers do the work as intelligence officers faceless; they are there but faceless. Why do we want to sound alarm bells and say, “be careful, an intelligence officer is here”?

We rather you allow these people to operate openly, properly; but there must be an intelligence officer who can track, give information without alerting those who are involved and then we will get quality information. The way we are parading our intelligence is as if we are just making a joke or creating petty jobs for people who are idle and disorderly. Thank you.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the committee did not see the point that hon. Nandala-Mafabi is raising because we believe that the monitoring committee should make decisions that affect the NGOs’ performance in the district based on factual, accurate and reliable information. One of the critical sources of information that is dependable is the DISO. The DISO becomes a big resource base for information for the monitoring committee. 

Just to inform hon. Cecilia Ogwal, DISOs and GISOs are declared officers. They are not necessarily supposed to operate in concealment. The people who operate in concealment are agents. These are people whose identity can never be known. They operate undercover and avail information to those very lines of offices. The GISOs operate openly. They are declared officers and as such they have established and well designated offices with signposts. In other words, you go to a GISO at a sub county and a DISO well knowing that you are going to visit a person who deals with information related to national security.

In this case here, if I get back to this, the GISO then becomes a critical resource of information provision. The RDC can only make use of elements of information from the DISOs. The GISOs and DISOs do not necessarily report to the RDC; they report to the Director General of Internal Security Organisation but the RDC makes use of the information that can be availed to him. There is an aspect of information that can never reach the RDC. 

Therefore, in this case, in terms of the NGOs, the RDC clears them and depends on information from operatives, who are the GISOs and others, who report to him to say, for example, “this NGO has proper intentions and we have already seen them on the ground, they should be cleared to operate.” However, we also have NGOs that are a problem. There are those that come and dupe people. For example, those that collect money in a kind of SACCO and they disappear with the money - (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Suppose the RDC or the GISO are involved in fraud with the NGO, can you also put a provision so that they are penalised? I say this because in Tororo, the RDC cleared an NGO called UDO, which defrauded people. All the MPs and I told the RDC that, that was fraud but she went around and launched the NGO that defrauded people and walked away. This is because people trust in the RDC. This NGO called UDO has defrauded people throughout the country. Therefore, what protection do we have against a corrupt RDC?

THE CHAIRPERSON: You arrived late. What you are addressing has already been handled. However, honourable members, I think that if the intending errant person knows that they are going to deal with the DISO in their work, I think they will be cautious. 

I think for protecting our people, it will give caution because you will know this DISO is on this committee. I think let us allow the DISO to remain on the committee for the protection of our people.

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 20 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that we amend clause 21 as follows: 
1. In paragraph (2)(a) by substituting “Resident District Commissioner” with “Senior Assistant Secretary”;

2. In paragraph (2)(b) by substituting “Senior Assistant Secretary” with “Community Development Officer”;

3. In paragraph (c) by substituting the entire paragraph as follows: “(c) sub county health inspector.”

The justification is to align the section with the national NGO policy.

MS ALASO: Madam Chair, I just want to be sure that I understood the chairperson. Did you say that in (b) you substitute with Community Development Officer (CDO)? It should be Assistant Community Development Officer if it is at sub county level because CDOs are the ones at the district. Maybe we just need to be guided by the structure of the Ministry of Gender. I am not also very sure but we need to be helped; anyway, the former minister is here.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, I stand to be corrected but I know they are referred to as sub county CDOs not necessarily assistants. However, effectively, we would like to see the CDOs at sub counties. Those are the ones who are provided for -(Interjection)- Then we would oblige to the correction that it is sub county CDOs.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 21 be amended as proposed.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22

MR MULONGO: The committee proposes to amend clause 22 (2) by redrafting it to read as follows: 
“All non-tax revenue raised by the Bureau shall be remitted to the Consolidated Fund.” This is to align it with the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. We believe that it should be strictly in exception for us to allow the NTR to be raised and used by the bureau. We believe the principle of pooling resources into the Consolidated Fund should remain in operation and only in exceptional circumstances should we grant this kind of provision.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, that is very good. However, if you are amending clause 22(2) that way, then even clause 22(1) should be amended that “funds of the board shall consist of the money appropriated by Parliament”. This is because they have no authority to use any of this money at source. Therefore, let us delete 22(1)(a), (b) and (c).

MR EKANYA: When you are doing paperwork, you need to pay some fees. However, the fees should be paid to the Uganda Revenue Authority’s account so that it is clear. If we leave it like that, don’t you think it will lack clarity? Take the example of the local council nominations which have been going on. The fees have been going to some registrars. In some districts, it was being received by the district administration while in some it went to the Electoral Commission and URA. This was because of the ambiguity in the law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You mean if we say “Consolidated Fund” there are those who will not follow it?

MR NANDALA-MAABI: Madam Chairperson, that is why the committee has done it very well. Clause 22(1)(a), (b) and (c) is now in the Consolidated Fund. However, the funds available for the board to use will be appropriated by Parliament. Even if they want a loan, the minister will have to bring it here and we shall approve the loan for them. The same applies to the grants. It is covered under 22(1)(a). The remaining two is what we are talking of - the money they collect – the fees and others, which the committee has said all of it must go to the Consolidated Fund. That is perfect and is why I am saying we delete (b) and (c).

MR BABA: Madam Chairperson, when this Bill was presented for first reading, a certificate of financial implication was laid here in the House. I am ready to lay it again. It was signed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Matia Kasaija. It is dated 8 May 2015. 

With respect to funding, this is what the minister said: “Government shall provide the funds already in the MTEF, which is Shs 341 million, to the NGO Board and the balance of the funding requirement will be sourced from the non-tax revenue which will be generated by the NGO Board.” This is the Certificate of Financial Implication issued by the Minister of Finance. It is a requirement for all Bills presented before Parliament, which require funding.

Therefore, this proposal was made on the authority of the Minister of Finance. I beg to lay it again, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, I think since we enacted the Public Finance Management Act, we have progressively moved to Parliament being the main authority for any funds or loans and donations. All the other laws we have been doing in the last four or five months have been along those lines – everything goes to the Consolidated Fund and the Government is supposed to come here to seek an appropriation and we authorise. That is what we have been doing here in the last few months.

MR BABA: What do I do with the certificate? It is here. It is the basis on which I brought this Bill to the House and it is property of Parliament.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, the honourable minister is raising a point that I think we need to consider further. If it was established as a fact in the Certificate of Financial Implication that the NTR - non-tax revenue – would be retained and then you look at the provision as it is, they say that any fees or other monies received by the board from service rendered by the board under this Act shall be retained by the board in a fund established for the purpose in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 for purposes of defraying the expenses of the board and for the effective implementation of this Act.

I am tempted to ask and permit me to say it loudly; what is the experience of the other boards? We are establishing a bureau. How is this bureau going to run? They collect money and take to the Consolidated Fund. If they need any small thing, they have to make a requisition. I need to be helped. I thought this was going to cure that. [Mr EKANYA: “Can I help you?”] Now that the Shadow Minister of Finance wants to help me, let me be helped.

MR EKANYA: Hon. Oboth is my agemate and we always help each other. The purpose of Parliament is legislation. Hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs, our role is to legislate a law that will help because the NGO Board will have a workplan and a procurement plan. They will bring them here and we shall appropriate. If we allow them to collect money outside what we have appropriated, they will have excess and you know we have a small basket. Even the certificate of financial implication is within the MTEF of five years. 

That is why we do annual budget out of the MTEF. MTEF is not cast in stone. Next financial year, we shall pass an Act varying the certificate of financial implications. Therefore, the figure will increase to vary that certificate.

My brother, hon. Oboth, I think it is good practice that we really put all the money - and this money should be collected by the Uganda Revenue Authority - to the Consolidated Fund account to avoid some people dipping their hands into national assets. That is why you have been a good state attorney in eastern Uganda.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please conclude, hon. Oboth.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I believe that hon. Ekanya has tried to soothe my ego and persuade me. If the minister is aware that this is the practice, why is the minister insisting that the bureau should be different? The chairperson did not help us in the justification. Here it is “to align the provision with the Public Finance Management Act” that justification was what was not helping me. 

If it was “aligning” and the proposal in the Bill was saying that whatever the funds will be used for will be in accordance with that. I thought when the provision states that it will be “in accordance” it means according to the law. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to give you better information. Madam Chairperson, in appropriating money, Parliament can say we have appropriated to give you Shs 10 billion and of this, we are giving you Shs 6 billion from Bank of Uganda. Of what you collect, retain Shs 4 billion to do your activities. There they have already got authority from here – appropriation will have already been done.

My brother, Oboth-Oboth, what you are raising is covered. Even the law that the minister is talking about is covered. 

The moment they bring the budget and it is approved, the minister will say, “We are giving Shs 306 million but whatever you collect, you will use up to a certain amount to cover your expenditure and the balance should then be remitted to the Consolidated Fund.” 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, if that is the case, then I will concede and adopt the advice of hon. Ekanya and fortified by the secretary general of the shadow government.

MR BABA: I have not quite got hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s point. The Ministry of Finance is clear that if the NGO Board retains part of the NTR, it will reduce pressure on the Consolidated Fund according to his letter of financial implication.  

Therefore, that is what we went by. We had long interactions with the Ministry of Finance and the minister himself. He was convinced that this NGO board really needed to retain some of the NTR collections for purposes fully of operationalising the work of the NGO board and the bureau. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there a possible percentage that they can retain? Do we know what they can take? Can they take 50 per cent or 20 per cent? How much must the NTR amount to? 

MR BABA: About Shs 9.5 billion is the amount that the Minister of Finance is indicating. It is the amount which the NGO board can retain in addition to what will be appropriated to make this board operational. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The minister is making a mistake. When you were an ambassador, I remember, they would write to you that the budget they have approved is a certain amount but you can use the money you are collecting to cover the gap. That one has already been appropriated. Right now, even the minister’s letter is in error. If he allows you to retain, then you retain everything. Supposing you do not collect, will the NGO close? It must operate. 

Therefore, the Public Finance and Accountability Act says that you should carry out your plans, bring and we appropriate here. The way the management of money and cash will now come up is what the Secretary to Treasury will say, “We are given Shs 10 billion. You collect Shs 5 billion and spend but remit the balance.” It is the same letter, which the minister has given you. So, why are you worried? 

MR BABA: In that case, why don’t we specifically set what you are stating in the law?

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, it is unfortunate that we are beginning to water down the Public Finance Management Act. That law is very comprehensive. It talks about the economy, physical responsibility and reports the minister is supposed to bring here. 

The other day we amended and allowed a supplementary. If the NGO board has run short of money, you can get money. We now talk of a single treasury. If you have institutions that do not use their money, other Government agencies can have it. Let us operate. 

Today we are here. Tomorrow, you might have other Members of Parliament. During appropriation, they will not even know that the NGO board has a right to retain, collect money and keep it. They will come here and say, “You know, they have only been given Shs 1 trillion” and hide the other one. That is what has been happening with many agencies in Government. They do not declare the non-tax revenue.

The passport money was billions of shillings; when we pushed it to the Registrar of the Bureau of Companies they were collecting a lot of money until we pushed all the money in one basket. Therefore, this practice is really the best for the NGO. Let all the money be collected by URA, go to the Consolidated Fund and we appropriate. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: My difficulty would be giving different treatment to different authorities. Since we passed the Public Finance Management Act, we have consistently gone towards collect, come to Parliament for your needs, we appropriate, you take your money, and go. 

Therefore, I do not know how I will justify that in the other one we refused and I was in the Chair, but this one I have agreed and I am in the same Chair. It is also giving me problems. 

MR OBOTH:  I would like to try and persuade hon. James Baba to concede in this matter in relation to the same provision that says it will be in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act. 

We have talked about a leeway for you to have some retention for expenses of the bureau. I think leave the interpretation for those who will be implementing so that you do not prolong this debate. You can diplomatically concede. 

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the committee had these very difficulties. First of all, the so-called expenses by the bureau to be defrayed by this retention were not given to us. You do not know which expenses these ones will be. 

What hon. Nandala-Mafabi raised is also very critical. Suppose they under-collect, the ministry will say, “We cannot give you money because we gave you authority to retain.” The best practice is that we pull all the money into the Consolidated Fund and transparently appropriate here. We know who has gotten what and how they can in a disciplined way expend that money. 

Therefore, I would like to urge my senior brother, the honourable ambassador, to concede and we proceed.

MR BABA: This is not a question of the honourable ambassador or anything of that sort. (Laughter) It is a question of resources for operations of the NGOs. I think it is fine to be consistent that all money is going to the Consolidated Fund and we all come here for appropriation. Please, let it be on record that the House will support the request by the NGO board whenever it is necessary for them to have more funding. I hope this can go down on the record. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, you had proposed to delete 22(b) and (c). 

MR MULONGO: Yes, we had proposed that we delete and that - but hon. Nandala-Mafabi is proposing that (2) should not arise because we had proposed that 22(2) would be re-drafted to say that all the NTR raised shall be remitted to the Consolidated Fund. However, hon. Nandala-Mafabi was saying that if we retain this, the authority was still useful – as the only amendment. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Hon. Mulongo, I agreed with your proposal. However, I was saying (b) and (c) of (1) should be removed. This is because you have covered it under 22(2), which is the one you amended. The one you read takes care of that.  

MR CHAIRPERSON: I think you only need to get the-

MR EKANYA: I think there is a provision of the law - even grants and donations can only be allowed by the Ministry of Finance for purposes of micro-economic issues. In the past, some governments would give a grant that would have financial implications on the economy. In fact (b), (c) (2) and even 23 are all redundant. 

MR MULONGO: Madam Chair, we now propose that clause 22(1) (b) and (c), and (2) be deleted and we have a new (2) to read that “All non-tax revenue raised by the bureau shall be remitted to the Consolidated Fund.”

 THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 22 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 23

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, again here, the estimates are now supposed to come to Parliament under the Public Finance and Accountability Act. The first one is okay; the second is also okay, but then for onward submission to Parliament for approval. The justification is to align it with Public Finance and Accountability Act. However, if we leave it like this, it means they will never come to Parliament.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the agencies and departments under ministries are supposed to consolidate their estimates as a ministry for attention of Parliament. If we say the bureau submits to Parliament directly, it is likely to contradict mistrust. I do not know if hon. Nandala sees this.

We allowed it to pass that way to ensure that the ministries take responsibility of consolidating all the departments and agencies under it and then bring it to Parliament.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if you read clause (2), line three, it states that “…the minister for his/her approval.” If the minister approves, then there is no need to - what we are saying is that the money, which will be given to this NGO Board is appropriated by Parliament and for Parliament to be able to appropriate, it must see its estimates submitted here and these estimates will be prepared by the board, submitted to the minister and then he will be the one to submit it to Parliament. Whichever way, he does it, if it is consolidating in a certain ministry, no problem, but it is not the minister to approve. It is Parliament to approve.

MR OBOTH: Again, with the issue raised by hon. Nandala- Mafabi, a bearing on the previous clause that was deleted, the presumption was that some monies would be available as retained by the bureau or the board. That is why the minister had authority to approve such monies.

Now that the previous clause has been deleted, it makes no drafting sense to leave it as it is. I would go by hon. Nandala’s proposal; to have it approved by Parliament because all monies will be from the Consolidated Fund. Owing to the fact that it is done by all other agencies; they make their budget, submit to the ministry, the ministry submits to this House the estimates and the approval is done once and for all.  Therefore, hon. Mulongo, this is another one that you may have to be diplomatic about and concede, so that we do not move backwards.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chair, since the process for appropriation as a cycle is well established under the Finance Management Act and we believe this is supposed to strictly follow that, we concede this approval of Parliament. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Should we delete 22? 

MR MULONGO: Instead of “minister”, we take “Parliament.” In 23(2), the approval is by Parliament and not the minister. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 23 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 24

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that we delete in clause 24, sub-clauses (2) and (3). This is because the committee believes these were internal details of the bureau that need not to be legislated upon by Parliament. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that sub-clauses (2) and (3) of Clause 24 be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that we redraft clause 25 to read, “The financial year of the bureau shall be the same as the financial year of Government.” Just for clarity. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 25 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, as amended, agreed to.
Clause 26

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if you read clause 26(2) it states, “Subject to any direction given by the minister, the board shall call to be prepared as submitted.” What they are trying to say is that it is subject to the direction given by the minister. 

The balance sheet, income and expenditure are mandatory. There is no direction of the minister here. Therefore, the board shall not be in subject. We delete from “subject” up to “the minister” and then say that, “The board shall prepare and submit to the Ministry responsible for Finance of which we have the following...” It is mandatory. 

After deleting up to the minister, then where there is “board” we capitalise it and say, “The Board shall cause to be prepared and submitted.” 

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, granted that this board is appointed by the minister and its operations are overseen and controlled by the minister. If we just leave out “the minister” and the law mandates the board, it is like the board can operate without oversight of the minister. 

We gave the minister powers over the board. Therefore, it is him or her who should fully cause - even if the law in itself recognises that it is the board which will ensure that such a function of keeping proper books of accounts and records of finance accountabilities is done by the bureau. I do not get that point of leaving out; eliminating the ministry. 

MR OBOTH: I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee, hon. Mulongo. I would like to know whether you need any kind of direction from the minister for statements of accounts to be prepared and submitted to balance it; statement of income and expenditure or any other information in respect of financial affairs of the board. 

Must you really put this; that “subject to any direction”? If you want the direction to be made in this regard, why don’t you just say that; because these boards must work with the ministry and the minister who appointed them? 

The point hon. Nandala-Mafabi is stating is quite clear that it is an obligation on the board to cause to be prepared and be submitted these reports. I think that could be okay, but not subjecting the preparations, submissions of financial statements or statements of accounts to direction of any kind at any time by the minister.

The minister is on policy direction - directives based on policies. Therefore, if you take Ministry of Finance –(Mr Mulongo rose_)- do you really want to labour on this?

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, this is not a diplomatic gesture to concede. The committee has seen the point amplified by the honourable colleague, but we can leave out “the minister” as proposed by hon. Nandala.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What causes suspicion is what the minister might direct. He might say, “This year, do not file accounts.” That is a directive and we are giving him power to say, “You may or you may not.” But he still has a duty as a supervisor. We can say the minister shall cause the Board to prepare and to submit. He will be fulfilling his work.

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, I think if you delete “subject to any direction given by the minister” and leave it as, “The Board shall cause to be prepared and submit to the minister…” that is adequate because once the accounts are prepared, they are submitted to the minister. He can then perform his oversight function and later on, those same accounts will be submitted by the minister to the Auditor-General or wherever they are supposed to go.

The minister will be properly covered if you delete “subject to any direction given by the minister.” What remains will cover the minister’s role properly without changing anything. I submit.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the import of the amendment is to ensure that the board causes preparation and submission of financial statements. We do not have to wait for the minister to give directives. Therefore, (2) should read, “The board shall cause to be prepared….” We can delete “subject to any direction given by the minister” as proposed by hon. Nandala

MR BABA: Madam Chair, why should the board submit to the minister responsible for Finance and not go through the minister responsible for the sector? -(Interjections)– No, I wrote subject to my direction and you want to remove it. (Laughter) I need to have supervisory powers before the board goes to the Ministry of Finance. 

Supposing the Minister of Finance calls me and says, “What is happening to your estimates?” yet it has not gone through me. I must be aware. The minister responsible for the sector must be aware. Maybe we can say, “The board shall cause to be prepared and submitted, in consultation with the minister and the minister responsible for Finance.” The two ministers must be held responsible. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to give the minister information and I pray he remains the Minister of Internal Affairs. The Constitution says the person accountable to Parliament is the accounting officer. Now, you are bringing yourself to account for funds of the organisations. If I am an accounting officer of some NGO board and there are errors, I will say the minister or the board did not clear. If hon. Nandala and I were chairpersons of the PAC, we would grill you thoroughly because you have brought yourself to accountability issues.

To me, all this is redundant; the Public Finance and Management Act and the Constitution - the internal Auditor-General always organises quarterly internal audit reports which must take place in any agency that receives Government resources. You cannot hide any information whether the minister has authorised or not, you must declare. The provision of the law is there. Any minister bringing himself to financial accountability – know that you are bringing yourself to IGG, Police and PAC. I hope you will be there.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We have to help the minister to escape.   What hon. Ekanya has raised - the Chief Executive Officer is now going to be the accounting officer and the person who appraises the accounting officer is the Secretary to the Treasury. You can be a Permanent Secretary but you may not be the accounting officer.

The accounting officer’s responsibility is to prepare the accounts and submit them to the Secretary to the Treasury.  They do not come here; they should have gone to the Secretary to the Treasury. The Auditor-General then comes to audit and when they audit, the final audit report is issued and the Auditor-General’s report does not go to any of those, it comes to the Speaker of Parliament because he/she is the officer of Parliament.

What goes to the Secretary to the Treasury is the accounts. The audit report comes to Parliament. The escape route I would like to give to the minister is that - you can say, “The board shall cause to be prepared and submitted to the minister responsible and to the Secretary to the Treasury.” That way, you have escaped.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Nandala-Mafabi, can you format the text?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: “The board shall cause to be prepared and submitted to the Minister and Secretary to the Treasury in respect of each financial year, statement of accounts, which shall include…” as detailed below.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, they will be supplying one to the minister and one to Secretary to the Treasury.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The rationale for the minister is that - I am assuming the sector account will go to hon. Baba - he must know how the sectors have operated. The Secretary to the Treasury is there because he is the one who sends money, account for how the money has been spent and the activities they have done. The Auditor-General will then go to audit for us – we have seen sections, which deal with the Auditor-General. Basically, that is it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 26 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 27

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend clause 27 by: 
    i) Inserting an new sub clause (4) to provide as follows:
“For avoidance of doubt, the funds shall serve the purpose of strategic intervention and affirmative action as the case may be; its presence shall not in any way prejudice organisations or CBOs from acquiring funds, grants, gifts or donations from other sources. This is aimed as providing allowance for organisations and CBOs acquiring their own funding.”

(ii) In sub clause (3), substitute for the word ‘board’ with the word ‘bureau.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Again, using the Public Finance and Management Act, why should we establish a fund? They are saying it will consist of money appropriated from Parliament, gifts and others. The one we deleted the other side; this we are trying to bring is not necessary. 27 should be deleted because we have already covered where the fund gets money and where it remits whatever it collects. As it stands here, it is not useful.

MR EKANYA: Establishment of funds of organisations, is it for the NGO board or like Plan International or World Vision.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the function of NGOs to supplement and complement delivery of public service is well understood and appreciated. But because of resource constraints most Community Based Organisations and local national NGOs are finance trapped and many times fall victim of external forces and so, they get funding from outside and drive the agenda that is not necessarily national. And some of them have very good objectives.

There are also those that established themselves with very good objectives but they also end up having constraints relating to finance. 

The purpose here was to provide for a fund that can help to inject and support or raise on feet NGOs or CBOs that are well intended, with proper practice that can continue to support their activities.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, hon. Mulongo for yielding the Floor and thank you, Madam Chairperson. If I understand hon. Mulongo correctly, he is saying that Government will start financing NGOs. They are NGOs; why should Government fund them? Does it make any sense? Your justification for the creation of this fund falls by the wayside. But we have also had another big problem; remember when we were discussing the Public Finance Management Act; the Government insisted that we should refrain from creating stand-alone funds. We should have all our money in the Consolidated Fund and appropriate it there.

Now, you come to us to defeat that purpose by suggesting we create a fund to finance NGOs. Don’t you think we should delete the whole of it?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to remind you that when we were discussing the Gaming and Lotteries Bill, there was a provision for a donation fund; it took us almost two hours and we said, “No, there will be no donation fund.” Different principles, different laws - I do not know.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, I really appreciate what hon. Odoi is saying, but this is a mixed economy. It is not strange that governments can have funds to support NGOs. We have benchmarked, we have practices elsewhere, where NGOs are partly funded -(Interruption)

MR KASULE: Thank you, hon. Mulongo, for yielding the Floor. Madam Chairperson, these NGOs commonly get funds from other governments. It is as if we are confining the Government of Uganda never to help NGOs. They are NGOs by creation but can be supported by governments from outside and within.

After sometime, we shall develop capacity just as we can help other countries. One time, we helped Burundi. We can help our own organisations, some of these international organisations are doing work here because we want their modalities of work. Give them money to serve our people for good service delivery. We can give them this benefit of doubt.

MR MULONGO: Thank you, for information my colleague. The issue as stated in the amendment is to ensure some interventions where the bureau can deem necessary.

You may have an NGO in which there are contributions by locals, maybe it is on the verge of collapse and will have certain consequences on the membership. The government through the bureau coming in to intervene to help them out helps the citizens.

We have seen where a private sector that purely raises its own capital, operates far from Government support. Reaches a point of collapse and Government comes on to intervene. If this can happen with the private sector, with companies out there, why not NGOs that are not for profit making, that are helping our people, that hold a life of sorts in support of the population down there at the grass roots in Kidera.

This means that Government coming in to intervene helps them remain standing on the road. To us, it is strategic, nationally speaking that we should not allow the external forces to all the time drive the NGO sector. We can have our own drive as a country.

Secondly, in any case, the consequences of crisis of these NGOs should not be the best interest of the government. By having a fund of this type, which is pooled through many forms, grants, donations, gifts and so on, enables the government to intervene through the bureau as appropriate when necessary.

Madam Chairperson, the committee looked at all these, accessed the cases for and against and believe that such a fund is still necessary.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, for the first time hon. Mulongo was not yielding; I do not know whether he was reading my mind. I do not know what kind of safeguards you are going to put in this law; one, to stop abuse, two to make sure that the criteria for the intervention is uniform and three, to distinguish between NGO and Government as hon. Fox Odoi has said. 

The moment you are going to deep your hands and give money to a certain CBO, actually you reduced it to some CBO, intervening - NGOs and CBOs are doing very good jobs. They are intervening where Government is not able to, they are bridging the gap.

However, if Government on her own gets to know that - this one like World Vision, I know that they are in partnership with some other governments including foreign to do certain things. For us here to put it in our law, you will basically go to the Constitutional Court.


Other CBOs will be telling you, “You have a provision in your law to give us money. We need this money.” Why can’t it be a matter that can be put either under some regulation - if you know that NGOs work better, like they have better methods of working interventions - my fear is that the intention is very good, but the spirit can be misconstrued -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Right now, without even the law, there is goodwill; Uganda Martyrs Shrine - Anglicans, Muslims, Government has given them money. We have been using NGOs to distribute mosquito nets. So, why do you need to legislate? The minister responsible will say, “You know, we have this NGO doing this, in our plan we are going to support them to do this and that” Do not legislate everything, my brother.

MS EKWAU IBI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I share the arguments of hon. Oboth and Fox Odoi. It is not that Government does not want to offer some of these services, but the resource envelope we are talking about honestly - I will give an example of Mengo Hospital, which has been able to thrive from 1912 to-date because it is managing its own affairs. Look at your Mulago Hospital, how long did it take you to even paint it if it was not for CHOGM and the coming of the Queen.

Madam Chairperson, it is not that we are tying Government into things – it is like forcing a five year old girl to carry a jerry can of water, which she cannot manage. We are looking at Government to help on social services; it is our wish that it helps, but the burden is too much. So, by you again expecting Government to do, you are even removing the efficiency of the NGOs. Unless you want to cripple all the services.

At the moment where Government has failed the NGOs have come in and they have performed to perfection in some cases; forget about these briefcase ones. If you got NGOs that are serious, they have done very well. 

Hon. Mulongo we know your arguments are always right - just concede, drop this and we move forward. You are not going to have – help us with the agricultural sector; education - bring it back to board and do perfect things and we move, but leave the NGOs to help where Government has failed. Otherwise, the resource envelope is not enough.

Madam Chairperson, the House should buy into this argument and we move forward.

MS AOL: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would also like to add that with our Uganda where sometimes we are very corrupt, you will find even the technical people create their own CBOs to tap resources, which should not be tapped by them. Those who work in community development offices then will start creating CBOs or NGOs to be able to tap what is from the government. It has sometimes happened. So, let us not bring it to be legitimate; they will then think that it is right. That is what I think I should add.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I am still trying to identify the best way to move on this on. The Minister of Finance is not here; I wanted to know whether this arrangement cannot be put in the Budget not by sector.
 
If we have that money in the Budget, why do you need this special one? Let us give ourselves time to sleep on it and I hope the Minister of Finance will be here tomorrow. Let us think about all the other areas where we have got stuck and try to complete this one tomorrow.

I would like the minister to move that the House do resume.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
6.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam 
Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, 
“The Non-Governmental Organisations Bill, 2015” and passed clauses 10 to 26 with deletions and 
amendments and deferred clause 27. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM 
THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam 
Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you for the work done and to say that we shall reconvene tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. 

I, however, wanted to advise that the Vision Group is selling souvenir Holy Rosaries to commemorate the visit of the third Pope to this country. Proceeds from the sales will go towards refurbishment of 
the Namugongo Martyrs Shrines. The Rosaries cost Shs 100,000 each. Parliament has joined the fundraising drive and it is currently encouraging the staff and Members to buy as many as they 
can. Please, purchase the Rosaries and contribute towards the development of the tourism industry in Uganda.

Next week, we shall be carrying out the annual health week of Parliament under the theme: “Our commitment working towards zero” from Tuesday 8 to Friday 11 December 2015. The week-long activity will kick off with a health walk to be flagged off at 9.00 a.m. on the 8th December and other activities like cancer screening, blood donation, male circumcision, eye checks and other health related activities will be taking place. You are invited if you are in town to attend the health week. Thank you.

(The House rose at 6.25 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 25 November 2015 at 2.00 p.m.)
  



