PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - SECOND MEETINGTHURSDAY , 10 NOVEMBER 2022PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6185Thursday, 10 November 2022National Budget Framework Paper early. It will also allow us to go and have our recess other than interrupting it - you come back and then go - which tends to be a little costly for the institution and for you.The shadow minister will also have a response to whatever is presented and then we will refer it to the committees early enough.I want to give a warning this time round: we are not going to receive the budget on the final day like in the last financial year. We will not do that. We want to study the budget properly before it is presented in the House. That is why you find that there is a tendency of the finance ministry extracting wrong figures and sending them to institutions, different from what Parliament appropriated. Therefore, we must study this budget before we approve it. We are not going to rubberstamp anything.I want to thank you so much for coming. Can we have matters of national importance? (Hon. Silwany rose_) Is it on the communication?2.04MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for your communication, especially concerning the way we receive budgets on the deadline. It was not only during the last financial year or the last budgeting cycle; it has become a tendency that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will come in the IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 6TH SITTING - SECOND MEETINGParliament met at 2.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to welcome you to this afternoon sitting. As we progress towards the next recess, I am cognisant of the fact that section 9(5) of the Public Finance Management Act requires the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to table before this House, by 31 December, the National Budget Framework Paper for the following financial year.I, therefore, urge the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, to ensure that the National Budget Framework Paper is tabled in the House by the 15th so that we do not go for recess and come back just to receive the National Budget Framework Paper, then go back for recess. Therefore, it should be presented on 15 December 2022 and that is in line with our parliamentary calendar.The finance ministry, in absentia - I hope they get the information - will have to present the National Budget Framework Paper by the 15th. The timely tabling of this is a very good thing for both of us; it will allow us to study the PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6186PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [Mr Silwany] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRdying minute. This is almost the fifth time that I have been here in Parliament and this has been happening, Madam Speaker. This time round, I seek your indulgence to ask the ministry to come to the Floor of Parliament early enough and commit themselves that they are going to deliver this early so that we scrutinise the budget, get the clear priorities of the country as Parliament of Uganda, and then we do thorough work. Otherwise, Madam Speaker, if you just -THE SPEAKER: But do we have ministers of finance in this country?MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I am seeking your indulgence on that; that you ask the finance minister to come and commit himself here on the Floor of Parliament, so that we move when sure they are going to do what you are saying. You always make directives here but they do otherwise. THE SPEAKER: We are giving directives to a desk without anybody. Hon. Bahati is always there as a Member of Parliament. (Applause) They should not pretend that Hon. Bahati will cover them. Hon. Bahati, you are there in your own capacity. Have they asked you to cover them? (Laughter)MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I would like to mention that the ministers of finance - while you were speaking, I sent a message - are on the way and they will be able to make that commitment.THE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter.MR ISINGOMA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. During the last meeting of this session, I stood here on the Floor of Parliament and raised a matter to do with the delayed institution of the Local Government Finance Commission.We got an explanation - at that time - from the minister that everything was being done to expedite the formulation of the Local Government Finance Commission. THE SPEAKER: Hon. “Obama” –MR ISINGOMA: I am rising, Madam Speaker, under rule 220 of our Rules of Procedure.THE SPEAKER: Hon. “Obama”, we do not want to lose what has been raised. Can we first have this responded to? Government Chief Whip, I know your job is a very tiresome one; it is a very hectic and trying job but you should always be the first in this House. Government Chief Whip, you should always be the first in this House to be able to answer everything. Unfortunately, I am the first so I take over your job and that of others.Honourable minister of finance, what was in my communication is that under our Parliament calendar, we are expected to be on recess by the 31st of December. However, under the Public Finance Management Act, you are supposed to lay before the House the National Budget Framework Paper.We are now asking you that the National Budget Framework Paper must be laid on the Floor by 15 December for you not to disorganise the budget calendar. We need a commitment from you that by 15 December, we will have the National Budget Framework Paper laid on the Table so that it helps the shadow ministers to respond and the sectoral committees to look at them.2.10THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIV ATISATION AND INVESTMENT) (Ms Evelyn Anite): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are law abiding citizens and very committed to our job. I, therefore, would like to commit, on behalf of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, that we will indeed lay the National Budget Framework Paper before 15 December.THE SPEAKER: In the last financial year when we were passing the budget, the corrigenda came in the evening; a day before 6187THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 10 NOVEMBER 2022the budget was passed. We are saying, this time round, do not sneak in the corrigenda in the night, when the budget is to be passed the next day. If you do that, we shall not pass it. We need a commitment that the corrigenda will come early. We will have the budget for scrutiny for about a week before we pass it. If there won’t be corrigenda, kindly tell us. MS ANITE: Madam Speaker, we do not encourage sneaking or going behind Parliament’s back. Sometimes the corrigenda is not occasioned by things we envisage. However, I commit that we will try our level best to work within the law and ensure that we do not bring corrigenda.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Solomon, your question has been answered. There was a procedural matter from Hon. Isingoma.MR ISINGOMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for recognising me. I am rising on a matter to do with the delayed formulation of the Local Government Finance Commission. THE SPEAKER: Is it arising out of my communication? MR ISINGOMA: No, Madam Speaker. I am rising under Rule 220 of our Rules of Procedure. In our last meeting, I raised this matter on the Floor and the minister responded and confirmed to the House that everything possible was being done to expedite the formulation of the Local Government Finance Commission. However, to date, no Local Government Finance Commission has been formed. Madam Speaker, there is a crisis at the commission because the employees are working without contracts and there is no one to issue the contracts, other than the commission. So, we have got a disaster waiting in that commission. The Minister of Local Government, Hon. Magyezi, was here. I know he is very rare in this House but I saw him two days ago. I wonder whether it will not be procedurally right to call upon the minister to give us an Action-Taken Report on this matter before it escalates into a crisis. This week, it is exactly one year since the last Local Government Finance Commission expired. In a whole year with 366 days, there is no Local Government Finance Commission. In that commission, it is now everyone for himself or herself and God for all. Madam Speaker, it is really a pathetic situation. Therefore, we cannot sit in this House and watch when the situation is bad at the Local Government Finance Commission. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Government Chief Whip, we have made many decisions and made many resolutions in this House. We have adopted a number of reports with resolutions without feedback; no action has taken place. I have always given an example of the Committee on Tourism, Trade, and Industry. There was an issue on lands and now, there is an issue being raised by Hon. Patrick but nothing has taken place. So, what do we do? What next? Do we just sit here, debate, and no action is taken, and then move on that we are working?2.15THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, if my memory serves me right, I know that the Local Government Finance Commission is one of the constitutional commissions and it falls under the mandate of the Ministry of Local Government.Madam Speaker, with your permission, I undertake to draw this to the attention of the Minister of Local Government. If you grant us some time, they can come and explain to the Parliament what happened with the establishment of the membership of the Local Government Finance Commission, as required by the Constitution.THE SPEAKER: Honourable Government Chief Whip, what about other reports that were 6188PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [The Speaker]adopted by this House? When do we get an action taken report? For instance, the reports on Soroti Fruit Factory, Atiak – Hon. Mpaka, please come and remind us about your reports. Let us finish with the actions. 2.16MR MWINE MPAKA (NRM, Mbarara South Division, Mbarara City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There was a report on the rice, the Soroti Fruit Factory and on the fuel crisis. THE SPEAKER: There were also reports on the Naguru-Nakawa land, Kasole, coffee, Lubowa – a number of reports. Please go and check your records. You will get them. We need the actions that have been taken.MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, the Action Taken Report is a mandate of the Leader of Government Business in Parliament. My office undertakes, if granted time, to prepare these reports and the Leader of Government Business, who is the Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda, will be able to update Parliament within two weeks.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. If we do not hear from you, we will put it in writing to you and we will be acting under rule 220. MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter concerning the absence of the Office of the Leader of Government Business. According to the Commonwealth governance system, it is always a must for the Office of the Leader of Government to be in office. Luckily, we are blessed to have about four or five prime ministers in Uganda. We have prime ministers in charge of A, B, C, and D, in charge of burials, in charge of this and that. (Laughter)I do not know whether we are proceeding well to the extent that now the Government Chief Whip is giving the Leader of Government Business timelines within to come and give statements on the Floor of Parliament when we have about four full Prime Ministers. In fact, we have the biggest Cabinet in Sub-Saharan Africa. Madam Speaker, I do not know whether we are proceeding well.THE SPEAKER: Can I get a point of clarification from the Government? Government Chief Whip, please clarify because you are supposed to whip everybody.MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, for the record, we do not have a Prime Minister in charge of A, B, C, D. (Laughter) We have the Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda, who was appointed under Article 108 of the Constitution, and constitutionally, she is the Leader of Government Business. We have three Deputy Prime Ministers.Whether the Prime Minister is in or not, the office is here. The person missing here is the Rt Hon. Nabbanja, but the Office of the Prime Minister is represented in Parliament.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Obua, there is a point of order. At the same time, you said: “I am going to inform the Prime Minister.” Just accept that the Prime Minister is not here. (Applause) Even a blind person can see that. Maybe Hon. Anite has been delegated; Hon. Anite, have you been delegated?MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, I have seen, on a number of occasions, when the Leader of the Opposition is not in and the whip is, even the Speaker says, “Leader of the Opposition.”THE SPEAKER: I am always informed. He puts it in writing: “I will be away. Hon. Nambeshe will be the Leader of the Opposition today.” (Applause) I have been in my office the whole day. You never came and told me they had delegated you.MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, I can state without any contradiction, that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister will be in, in person, but as of now, her office is represented by the Government Chief Whip.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my brother, the Government Chief Whip, says she is represented. Now, I am wondering who will COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6189THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 10 NOVEMBER 2022handle the Prime Minister’s Time. I hope you will. (Laughter)MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, I have stated in the affirmative that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister will be here; but for now, the office is represented by the Government Chief Whip.THE SPEAKER: I am also happy that you can only inform me that you have been delegated to do the work in the House. As an institution of Parliament and the Executive, we should be able to work together. If you have been delegated or you are delegating somebody, kindly - it is out of courtesy that you inform – (Thereupon the Prime Minister, Ms Robinah Nabbanja, entered the Chamber.) (Applause) I know the Prime Minister is going to apologise to me for coming in late. (Laughter)2.23THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS  (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Madam Speaker, I have come. I apologise. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for that gesture and for coming. (Member rose_) Yes, procedure? Is it on the same issue? No, I have already received an apology. She has come. The Prime Minister is here, in full. No more questions. Can we move on to matters of national importance? 2.24DR NICHOLAS KAMARA (FDC, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the Government’s proposal to hike national identification card fees. The Ministry of Internal Affairs, under the National Identification and Registration Authority, plans to carry out mass enrolment and renewal of national identity (ID) cards from June 2023 to August 2024. Madam Speaker, in the process, Government seeks to introduce express first time enrolment and renewal, where IDs will be processed in two days at the cost of Shs 50,000. The Government has hiked fees for replacement and change of ID particulars to Shs 200,000, from Shs 50,000. Madam Speaker, there is no known basis or criteria upon which the fees for replacement and change of national ID particulars have been hiked from Shs 50,000 to Shs 200,000, which I think is very high and not affordable to an ordinary Ugandan. My prayer is simple, that the Ministry of Internal Affairs briefs us on the viability of the proposals during these tough economic times. I beg to submit.2.26THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS  (Gen. David Muhoozi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take cognisance of the concern of Hon. Kamara. However, I want to say that this idea of mass enrolment was presented before this House and I hope he was here. If he was not, it is already in the law - the Registration of Persons Act. It is not a new idea, but it is not cast in stone. We can review it and see what position we can reach with Parliament.THE SPEAKER: What is specifically in the law: their pricing? How much is it?GEN. MUHOOZI: What is in the law is that for the express processing of an ID, you incur a fee – and for an identity card, which is lost. THE SPEAKER: What he is raising is that in these hard times, people are not able to pay Shs 50,000. Since you have said it is not cast in stone, can we review the prices? Is it possible? That is what he is asking.GEN. MUHOOZI: Let me consult and come back with a more informed position.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 2.28MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (NRM, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A similar scenario was raised and the Committee on Defence and 6190PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEInternal Affairs met with NIRA. I think the minister, at that time, was not around. Actually, the senior minister was with us. That issue was raised and the committee vehemently rejected it. They said that it was just a proposal, which they were bringing up, but we said: “You cannot bring that proposal of Shs 200,000.” They said they would review it. I think our report will soon come to the Floor of Parliament because we tackled that issue during our committee meeting. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, let us wait for the committee’s recommendations on that matter – since the committee rejected it. I think that will be the right time for us to debate and come up with what we think is affordable to the local people.2.29MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. An issue has just been brought to my attention by a concerned student at Kampala International University. This is an internal memo written to female nurses and midwives, requiring them to go for pregnancy tests and pay Shs 5,000 to the accounts office before they sit the national examinations. This is discrimination of the highest order, if true. Madam Speaker, I request the Minister of Education and Sports - these are adults - to follow up this matter. It states that failure to do so, one will not sit for the exams - the Uganda Nurses and Midwives Examinations. Thank you. This memo is dated 9 November 2022. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay this. THE SPEAKER: What is the authenticity of that document? Who wrote the document?MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, it is signed by the acting dean of the School of Nursing Sciences in Kampala International University. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know that there is a lot of competition. Someone else can make that allegation just to destroy the name of KIU. Now, before we accept that document, can we ask the Minister of Education and Sports to get the document and verify if it is indeed from KIU? The Prime Minister is also here.2.31THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Madam Speaker, the matter in question is regrettable in the sense that if the female students are discriminated against to that level, then, there is a problem. I promise you that Government is going to handle the matter. THE SPEAKER: If it is true, then, it is very wrong. Honourable Members, if it is true, it is unfortunate. Can the minister go and confirm whether that document is true? 2.32THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr Peter Ogwang): Thank you, Madam Speaker. With your indulgence, permit me one minute to make a call to the Commissioner, Higher Education and then report back to Parliament. I thank you. THE SPEAKER: Why would one stop women from conceiving? (Laughter) Honourable members, when you read the Bible, it says, “Go and produce and fill the world.” Therefore, why would you discriminate against women?2.32MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Madam Speaker, I think that when we raise issues here, they should be clear enough. I am seeking clarification from Hon. Sarah Opendi so that the House can understand her concern. Is it about the need to pay that Shs 5,000 to test or to test if they are pregnant? If we are reasoning in terms of discrimination, men cannot get pregnant. If you are testing for pregnancy, it can only apply - [Ms Nyakikongoro] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6191THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 10 NOVEMBER 2022THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, have you ever seen a woman impregnating a fellow woman? The issue is not the Shs 5,000 but that one will not be allowed to do exams if one has conceived. MR ODUR: That is what I am coming to. We have just concluded PLE and all the schools allowed pregnant girls to sit for the exams. I thought the directive for the investigation to take place would inform this House. Maybe that institution wants to make an arrangement for pregnant mothers to sit in a particular place or something like that.  (Laughter) When we sit here – THE SPEAKER: Honourable members – Hajjat Aber, do you have something to say?2.34MS LILLIAN ABER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Madam Speaker, for us Hajjats, in such a situation, we would really feel uneasy and discriminated against. Now, on behalf of all the Hajjats in this country - On this matter, specifically pertaining to the letter, the first thing is that we should ascertain the authenticity of the letter, like you have guided. Secondly, we should have a written response over this to the Parliament of Uganda so that it goes on record. This way, no other institution will do that again. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can you sit down? The Prime Minister has already committed herself on this matter. I have also asked the Minister of Education and Sports to ascertain the authenticity of the letter. You know there is a lot of competition. We need to find out the motive of this letter. You might find that somebody else wants to spoil the good name of KIU, and yet KIU might not have even authored that letter. We need to find out all that information and we will act on it.MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, we need to be very careful with issues of faith. As Muslims, we do not encourage children to get pregnant before marriage. Nobody should ever - whether you are wearing a Muslim-like dress – say, “The Hajjat is unhappy” because a school is checking for pregnancy. In our faith, it is Haram; you simply cannot do that. Therefore –(Interruption) MR BASALIRWA: The information I would like to give is that in fact, should you get pregnant outside marriage, you are given 100 strokes of the cane. MR SSEMUJJU: People are going to read the records of Parliament and find someone claiming to be a Hajjat saying that Muslims encourage children to get pregnant. The procedural issue I am raising refers to that particular reference - because it touches faith – if it should not be expunged from the records of Parliament. THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju of Kira Municipality, that university does not only have Muslims. You do not speak for everybody because I am also a Hajjat. (Laughter) The internal memo was authored by the Acting Dean of the School of Nursing Sciences in Kampala International University. I am imagining that after hearing this debate here, a letter of withdrawal has been written now. It has just been sent now. This one was signed by the Deputy Vice Chancellor, KIU Western campus.However, this is very unfortunate. We condemn this action and we shall not allow it to happen. (Applause) These are not kids. By the time you go for nursing, you are above 18 years. Even if they were young, we have primary seven kids that have gotten pregnant against the policy. When you start discriminating against women, and yet you are the same men impregnating these women – why should you stop people from doing exams? This must stop.2.39MS HELLEN WANDERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you,Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance regarding the heavy downpour that 6192PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEaffected four villages in Sikuda Subcounty in Busia District on 2 November 2022. Madam Speaker, on this day, Busia District experienced a heavy downpour and over 50 acres of various crops were destroyed, as well as more than 30 households totally left homeless.Madam Speaker, so far, the Uganda Red Cross has provided temporary shelters to a few affected families. It is good, but not sufficient. My prayer is that the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees should intervene and urgently provide relief items to the people of Busia District. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Prime Minister.2.40THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Madam Speaker and colleagues, I request the Member to get us a report from the District Disaster Committee and then we see how best we can come in.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Auma, can you get a report from the District Disaster Committee and present it to the OPM and then it will be acted upon? MS WANDERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have it on my phone, let me print it and bring it right now. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable media -2.41MR JOSEPH KOMOL (NRM, Dodoth North County, Kaabong): I rise on a matter of urgent national importance regarding the state of the roads in the new town councils of Kalapata and Kathile.  Madam Speaker, the road network in these town councils is in bad shape and needs serious attention, yet roads in town councils, if well connected, will attract development and facilitate good service delivery and businesses.The Ministry of Works and Transport is mandated to ensure maintenance and improve connectivity of the roads in these sectors. In the recent second quarter release of funding to subcounties and town councils by the Uganda Road Fund, dated 17 October 2022, the two town councils did not get any money despite the bad roads.Madam Speaker, apart from the town councils, also four other sub counties across the district of Kaabong have not been funded. All these town councils and subcounties have poor road networks. I would like to say it was not right for the Uganda Road Fund to leave them unfunded. The other four subcounties are Morukori Subcounty, Lotim Subcounty, Lolelia Subcounty and Lobongai Subcounty.My prayer is that the Minister of Works and Transport should ensure that the unfunded town councils and subcounties also be funded. Thank you very much.2.44THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Rt Hon. Speaker and colleagues, it is true, the new town councils and new subcounties had not yet been coded by the Uganda Road Fund. In a meeting we had with the Head of State, he directed that in the second quarter, the money - because they were wondering whether they would use the money for the old subcounties. They then said that at least let them get something. In the 1st and 2nd quarters – between January and June - those new subcounties will be getting money because they are being coded right now.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Allan.2.45MR ALLAN MAYANJA (NUP, Nakaseke Central County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise under rule 49 on an urgent matter concerning the persistent [Ms Wandera] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6193THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 10 NOVEMBER 2022arbitrary arrests, disappearances and torture of Ugandans at the hands of security operatives.Madam Speaker, at least 10 people namely: Jakana Yusuf, Kassim Kyanjo, Rehema Nankungu, Ismail Ssenkubuge to mention, but a few in Kalege Village Semuto Subcounty in Nakaseke District, who are close relatives to former minister Al Hajji Abdul Nadduli, were picked up by people who are reportedly security operatives, in the wee hours of Tuesday, 8 November 2022, over unknown charges.Madam Speaker, according to the leaders and the relatives of these people, the security operatives drove in three vehicles known as drones, broke into the houses and beat up the family members, in the course of the arrests at 3.00 a.m. When the family members tried to inquire about the reasons for the arrests, they were roughed up by the security operatives.Madam Speaker, these rampant arbitrary arrests all over the country are against Article 24 of our Constitution and Article 3 and 9 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Therefore, we must condemn them because it is a sign of human rights violation. Otherwise, Ugandans will think of us as careless leaders. I, therefore, pray that the Minister of Internal Affairs presents a statement to ascertain the actual reasons for these arrests and why security agencies do not summon suspects first, rather than invading people’s homes in the wee hours, abduct people, torture and detain them in unknown places - (Interruption)THE SPEAKER: There is a point of order.MS PACUTO: Madam Speaker, I agree that is a serious matter. I am rising to call my colleague to order because of the statement that he has made and it is on record. The whole world is watching us deliberating and accepting that we are careless leaders; is he in order to refer to us here as careless leaders? He is still putting his case, but he has already judged us, Madam Speaker. Is he in order?  THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are very responsible Members of Parliament; we are not careless at all. Maybe he meant the action. The action was done in a careless way, but not the Members being careless. The Members we have in this House are very responsible people and they represent all the people of Uganda. However, the action could have been done in a careless way.MR MAYANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance.THE SPEAKER: So, the Members are not careless, but the action was careless.MR MAYANJA: Yes, Madam Speaker, the Members and even the leaders are not careless. However, when Ugandans do not see us condemning such acts, it makes us look careless. Therefore, we need to condemn -THE SPEAKER: No, Hon. Mayanja. Ugandans are not looking at us as people who are careless. The action is what we agreed is done in a careless way. I am not careless; how can a Speaker be careless? First withdraw that statement. MR MAYANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. I hereby, according to your guidance, withdraw the statement. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: We have a majegere here; once you say something, she will condemn and take action. Wamma majegere –(Laughter)2.50THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Madam Speaker, we have an able leader here; the General. Once a General, you are a General for life and I know he is able; he will give us the explanation. THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  6194PRIME MINISTER’S TIME2.51THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Madam Speaker, this is a matter that has been in and out of this House. I will start with the general principles that we should abide by; where there is crime, arrests are inevitable but arrests have to be conducted in a lawful way. That said, I will take particular interest in the names given and revert with a more informed position about why those people were arrested, where they are and the cases for which they are held. THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this issue has been in this House for too long. Can we really, for the last time, have a session on these issues and have all the names. We can have a private session first before we come to the House and report to the House on the actions that we have taken. GEN. MUHOOZI: Madam Speaker, there is actually a list, which was submitted by the Leader of the Opposition to which we have made a response through our leader, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, but if needed, with your permission, we can have that session to discuss the matter and dispose of it.THE SPEAKER: Can we also have the names and particulars of the 10 you are talking about? Kindly pass it over and give me a copy and we see what we can do with that. Of course if the arrest was unlawful, then action will be taken on those persons. We need to find out what could have happened to those people; what did they do, so that we can condemn whoever is responsible. 2.53MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When ministers come to speak here, they must make a commitment that some of these things will not happen. When a minister comes and says, “I am going to investigate” and after two weeks another person is abducted and tortured, and after a month the same thing happens - We have been debating this matter the entire session of the 11th Parliament.The minister should tell us that Government is committed to ensuring that they abide by the principles that the honourable minister has talked about; that you are not going to arrest somebody unlawfully and in case you have arrested them, you will ensure that you have produced them in court within 48 hours. If you cannot do that, ensure that their rights are protected. What the Member has raised is, an arrest takes place, the next-of-kin are not informed, the people arresting do not even identify themselves; they move in vehicles that are not marked, the places of detention are not gazetted and people come back with wounds in their feet and backs and they have been tortured. That is what Government should commit itself to. I know that the minister is a very astute lawyer; he knows these principles and it would not be very difficult for him to come and commit here.2.55MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to raise a matter of urgent national importance. Madam Speaker, I am aware that the Government of Uganda, through the Ministry of Health, has a programme called the National Community Awareness screening, testing, prevention and treatment of TB and leprosy. It is actually called “cat TB”. This programme is in my district of Amuru although I have asked around and many Members do not know about this programme. The reason I rise today is in regard to the statistics that have been got from my district. This may be different from other districts. There was an activity done where samples were collected during the last quarter, that is July to September. There were 178 positive TB cases identified in Amuru, of which two were confirmed to be multi-drug resistant TB cases, while four were intermittent MDR cases. COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6195THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 10 NOVEMBER 2022The reason I am raising this is, these statistics are three times higher than what was previously done and this was just for a small sample. A district like Amuru is facing challenges of having equipment like the X-ray machines where these confirmatory tests can be done. We know how contagious TB is. Some of the tests conducted actually found that even school-going children had these cases and we know that it is very contagious. My prayer is, can the Ministry of Health, first of all, update this House about this campaign and how we are faring because I know that the major objective is that by 2030, we will have reached a stage where we will have no more TB. So, can the ministry update this House and the Members on how far we are going with this, which areas are most affected and what interventions are being done to ensure that districts such as Amuru, which has no single X-ray machine, are helped so that we manage the issue of TB in the country.Otherwise, we may be fighting Ebola but what will be killing people more will be TB and other things. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I hope that I can be helped. THE SPEAKER: Government?2.58THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, just yesterday, I got an update report from the Ministry of Health on TB and leprosy in the country. What she is saying is true; the campaign that is ongoing is for us to end TB and leprosy by the year 2030 and a number of hospitals and health centres IV have been provided with X-ray machines. I want to allay the fears of our sister; there is another consignment that is coming. I believe Amuru – now that you have told us - but you are near Gulu and I believe some of those TB cases are diagnosed from Gulu. I want to allay the fears of Members that it is on our agenda and we are moving forward. We are also in the process of increasing Government funding. We shall bring those papers here for you to see. We are progressing very well.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Those who have not spoken on matters of national importance will speak tomorrow - Our tomorrow is Tuesday. Can we hear from the Minister for Education and Sports? He had gone to seek clarification.3.11THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to confirm the statement that Hon. Sarah Opendi made to the House; it is true. Kampala International University Western Campus is the author of that internal memo. As a ministry, the moment we got that information, we were able to communicate with the university. As I speak, that decision has been reversed by the ministry and such actions are not going to continue. This goes to all public universities in the country. Thank you. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Universities should take note of this. That is a wrong action and it must not be repeated.LAYING OF PAPERSREPORT OF THE DELEGATION OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON A STUDY VISIT TO THE EAST AFRICAN LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY (EALA)THE SPEAKER: Chairperson Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs?3.10MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (NRM, Woman Representative, Sheema): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the delegation of the sectoral 6196PRIME MINISTER’S TIMECommittee on Defence and Internal Affairs on a study tour to the East Africa Legislative Assembly on regional security matters from the 18th to the 23rd of September 2022 in Arusha. I beg to lay. The minutes are attached.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The report is for information for all Members. It will be deposited in the library. You can have a chance to look at it and read whatever you want to read from it.PRESENTATION OF PETITIONS OF:I) THE BUDUDA LANDSLIDE VICTIMS WHO WERE RESETTLED IN KIRYANDONGO DISTRICT.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kahunde. Next.II) THE MEMBERS OF THE PRE-PRIMARY TEACHERS TRAINING INSTITUTIONS - UGANDA (PPTTIA)THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nakut. She is also not in. Next.MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS ON THE 21ST, 22ND, 23RD AND 24TH ANNUAL REPORTS OF THE UGANDA HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION FOR THE YEAR 2018 TO 2021THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a report that was laid on the Table yesterday. I hope the chairperson and the vice chairperson are in. As we wait for them, can we go to the next item?MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSI) ON THE STATUS OF RELEASES OF THE BUDGET FOR THE SPORTS SUB-SECTOR FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you recall, yesterday the Executive made an extensive submission on this matter. We, however, noted that there was a need to harmonise the views that were brought by the Executive and that prompted us to have a meeting today, among the sports minister, the finance minister, the National Council of Sports, my office and the Deputy Speaker. In that meeting, we looked at what was presented before the committee. Of course, there were a lot of discrepancies we were not happy with. The minister is going to present a report to the House. Before the minister makes a report to the House, today is our Deputy Speaker’s birthday. We wish him a happy birthday. (Applause)(Whereupon honourable members broke into song.)THE SPEAKER: We do not sing in the House. Honourable members, I want to emphasise that Government is duty-bound to prioritise sectors that are very important, especially sports. Planning and budgeting for this sector is very crucial. Government should also be open with the Legislature as far as revenue challenges are concerned. Yesterday, we said we should be open to each other. If we do not have money, we do not. The minister just said there was no money and that was it. We know there is no money but we will always get an alternative to it. Then, the beneficiaries should also be communicated to. There must be transparency in case there is anything little to be given out. There must be transparency in the institutions that are giving the money. We need to find out what is happening. Honourable minister, can you make your presentation? We will hear from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and then the Minister of Education and Sports.MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, our rules require ministers to attend Parliament. I have noticed that our senior Minister of Internal Affairs, Gen. Otafiire, is never here. He has MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS [Ms Nyakikongoro]6197THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 10 NOVEMBER 2022abandoned Parliament to his junior minister. The one for education and sports has never been here. Even these days, the one of finance has also learned bad manners. The one of health - I see Hon. Muhanga these days more. The procedural issue I am raising - and I am sorry if I was not around Madam Speaker when you allowed ministers to begin sending their juniors. Maybe they think Parliament is junior work. That is the procedural issue I am raising. Otherwise, the Prime Minister - a whole supervisor - is here yet the other ministers she is supposed to supervise are not here.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju Ibrahim, one, no one is a junior. These people represent constituencies. They were given more powers to be ministers. They are all ministers; whether a cabinet minister or not. Two, we allowed Members to be on Zoom. If you do not mind, can come and see the First Lady on Zoom here. I am watching her. It is just that there is nothing she is contributing but she is on Zoom. Come and see, Hon. Ssemujju. Gen. Otafiire is also online. (Laughter) If you are not Hajj enough, please come. Remember, a Hajj is not supposed to move close to a woman. (Laughter)Honourable members, Members are watching on Zoom; they are online. All these are very senior ministers; you have seen. That is why I like Hon. Asuman Basalirwa; he is always truthful. (Laughter) Haven’t you seen?Members are online and these people are not junior, as you say. Some of them are even more experienced than all of us. The Parliament that I lead is not junior. This is the only Parliament that can make a decision – whether you want it or not – and it will be followed to the letter. (Applause)It is the only institution that makes decisions for this country. So, we are not junior. Can we have the minister? MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I am sorry. I get this information from their vehicles. You see a vehicle where there is “Cabinet Minister” and another one, “Minister of State”. They even label themselves: “This is senior; this is junior”. However, I am sorry if I have offended anyone. (Laughter) THE SPEAKER: You see, if you do not hear Hon. Ssemujju talk, the House is boring. (Applause)MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, with due respect to my good friend, I have been here with him; we are going to make 15 years. Hon. Ssemujju, you joined Parliament –(Interruption)I am privileged to have joined Cabinet before he comes to Government. So, for that matter, I have more experience now in matters of Government than Hon. Ssemujju. (Applause)Is he in order to begin imputing that my being in Cabinet and being here, first of all, as the minister and, secondly, representing my senior minister –(Interjection) - Yes, because by appointment, there is a Cabinet minister and a minister of state. Is he in order to impute that –(Interjection) - Madam Speaker, I need to be protected. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had already made a ruling. The First Lady is online.MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, while she is online, I am here to answer any other matter relating to the sector. Is Hon. Ssemujju in order to impute that our being here as junior ministers does not qualify us to be ministers?THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are wasting a lot of your time discussing what is junior or what is – Hon. Anite Kajik? 3.12THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FI-NANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIV ATISATION AND INVESTMENT) (Ms Evelyn Anite): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for that intro-duction. My name is Evelyn Anite Kajik. Hon. Ssemujju knows that I am senior. (Laughter) I 6198PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEwould like to respond to your call for us to give a statement.I want to start by appreciating you for the meeting you convened this morning to reconcile our figures. Indeed, when you chaired the House yesterday, we had variations in our figures. The figure that the minister of state for sports presented varied from the figure that I presented, as well as the figure that was presented by the FUFA President, Hon. Magogo.That said, allow me, first, to put the record correct by requesting that the figure that I presented yesterday on the status of the release of the budget for the sports subsector for Financial Year 2022/2023, which was totalling Shs 19.23 billion, be expunged so that I can present the correct reconciled figure.THE SPEAKER: Clerk?MS ANITE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we do that – (Hon. Odur rose_)-THE SPEAKER: She is saying that because the figure was wrong.MR ODUR: No! This is a House of record. When records are captured, the ministers do not have the liberty to come here and say: “Just expunge it”. They must be held responsible for their submission.Yesterday, I told them to read before they come and present here and that procedure is alien to this House. Otherwise, we would all be coming back here every day and saying: “Expunge.” THE SPEAKER: Proceed.MS ANITE: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for that ruling. The statement I am reading is on the status of release of the budget for the sports subsector for Financial Year 2022/2023. Following my statement presented at the Fifth Sitting of the Second Meeting of the Second Session of the 11th Parliament of Uganda on 9 November 2022, it was guided that a special meeting be held between the Minister of State for Education and Sports, the National Council of Sports and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, to further discuss issues under the sports subsector.A detailed explanation on the budget regarding the allocation to the sports subsector, which is under the National Council of Sports, is as below:Approved budget for Financial Year 2022/2023The total approved budget for Financial Year 2022/2023 for National Council of Sports is Shs 47.81 billion. The details are as follows:Wage  – Shs 1.61 billion;Gratuity – Shs 0.42 billion;Non-wage recurrent - Shs 7.75 billion;Non-wage subvention - Shs 38.03 billion. Total budget - Shs 47.81 billion Non-wage subvention are the funds transferred to support the different sports federations. The above budget estimates for Financial Year 2022/2023, as appropriated by Parliament, are attached as Annex 1. Madam Speaker, for the information of honourable colleagues, it is actually uploaded on our iPads.Budget release under the National Council of Sports at half-year of Financial Year 2022/2023The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has so far released a total of Shs 17.61 billion - (Interruption)THE SPEAKER: What is the problem?MS ANITE: Hon. Ssemujju might be malicing me. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, make sure all your microphones are off.MS ANITE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just for the record, regarding the figure I presented [Ms Anite] MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS6199THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 10 NOVEMBER 2022yesterday, which has been expunged, the correct figure is now – THE SPEAKER: It has not. (Laughter)MS ANITE: …which I requested –(Laughter). I now want to state the correct figure.THE SPEAKER: State the correct figure.MS ANITE: It is Shs 17.61 billion that we have released to the sports subsector for wages and support to the various sports federations. This represents 36.84 per cent of the approved Budget. The table below summarises the performance by budget categories. (Applause) Performance subvention recurrent is performing at 35.44 per cent, contract staff salaries are at 50.01 per cent, gratuity expenses are at 66.52 per cent, and non-wage recurrent is 39.36 per cent. Our performance is at 36.84 per cent, which is below the 50 per cent performance. From the above table, of the Shs 38.03 billion approved under the subvention recurrent category, Shs 13.48 billion has been released, representing 35.44 per cent performance - which I just stated is below the 50 per cent required performance. Notwithstanding the above, my ministry held a meeting with the sports subsector on 12 October 2022, and subsequently requested the accounting officer of the National Council of Sports to submit the following information to ascertain the extent of financial pressure to trigger subsequent releases. Madam Speaker, in addition to this meeting, you had a meeting with us this morning. We did request them to give us the payroll of all the relevant federations to ascertain the exact wage bill, contracts of all the staff that are employed by the federation, tenancy agreements for the federations that are renting, receipts for the expense spent on utilities, calendar for all the international and domestic events for the Financial Year 2022/2023, and audited books of accounts from the federations. However, the council has, to date, not provided this information and my colleague, Hon. Peter Ogwang, did commit that he will provide this information to us. Madam Speaker, as I draw closer to concluding this submission, allow me state the following: That with the meeting that you chaired this morning, we did ascertain that the money released to the federation is Shs 6.3 billion and I thought that we captured that and this is away from the Shs 7.1 billion that was appropriated by Parliament for the Commonwealth.Madam Speaker, allow me to confirm that -THE SPEAKER: What percentage is that out of the 38?MS ANITE: Then that will take us to 40 per cent.THE SPEAKER: No; Shs 6 billion of Shs 38 billion? Accountants help.MS ANITE: Madam Speaker - where is this accountant, Hon. Bahati? As they do compute that, I must admit that my competency is in resource mobilisation. THE SPEAKER: I know it is not on expenditure; it is on mobilisation. Go ahead.MS ANITE: The colleague is asking which resources I am mobilising; you always see me with investors - that is resource mobilisation. (Laughter)Madam Speaker, as you get that percentage, my ministry is fully committed to meeting the required financing needs of the sports subsector within the available cash flows to support and facilitate our gallant sportsmen and women. I also would like to take this opportunity to congratulate our national netball team, the She Cranes, for the impressive performance in New Zealand during the recent Fast5 Netball World Series. Defeating the world’s number one, the Australians, was extraordinary. Indeed, if I were a Ugandan and I were seated in this House, I would be clapping. We are indeed very proud 6200PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEof them and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development shall continue to support them through timely releases of the funds and cash flows. Madam Speaker, as I conclude, you did, indeed, observe variation in figures and we have tried to reconcile and this is the submission. I beg to lay. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Anite. Hon. Ogwang, do you have anything to say?3.24THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Madam Speaker, I thank you for chairing the meeting and I would like to thank honourable colleagues for the support they extend to the sports subsector. Like you have always said, sports knows not religion or political party; it is for all women and men of this country. I want to call upon us to continue to invest in the sports subsector. This will help us to make our country proud. I congratulate the She Cranes, I congratulate the Uganda Athletics Federation. Specifically, I just returned from Thailand, where Uganda participated in the world mountain run; out of the 14 teams which represented various countries, Uganda emerged first. It won four gold medals, three silver medals and also had three bronze medals. So, I congratulate the gallant sons and daughters of Uganda. Last but not least, I call upon the Parliament to support my quest for us to improve on our infrastructure development. If we want more talent, let us put more money into developing infrastructure. I thank you so much, and I welcome the directive that will be given today in line with my subsector. I would like to say, I am now three months old in the ministry, specifically the sports subsector. There are a lot of changes which I pledge to make in the sports subsector and I know it might not go well with some people. I call upon you to stand with me because in each and every part of our country, we have a few good people and many bad people. Therefore, allow us to clean up the bad people within the sports subsector to make us have more medals and to fly Uganda’s flag high. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Peter Ogwang of Ngariam, the minister.3.26THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My brother, Hon. Peter Ogwang, knows very well how all of us are invested in supporting sports. And it is a no-brainer, as Parliament, trying to argue about the need, given the fact that we have a high proportion of young people and, therefore, sports are a very potent investment. Madam Speaker, my point is that you did conduct a formal citizen arrest on the finance ministry on this subject and the matter that raised that curiosity to occasion this debate probably cuts across other sectors. And I am here to request you to give a date on the Order Paper for the finance minister to follow through the demand you made yesterday - to present to Parliament the extent of appropriation, then the cash, ceilings and then the releases. Otherwise, what my sister, Hon. Anite is going through, if there was compliance, wouldn’t really be the issue. Therefore, I get the sense that people at the ministry of finance are playing around with the figures to try and confuse people expecting money to implement programmes. And in their wisdom, they think that they are they are just being magnanimous in releasing the money, but not a matter of obligation and law. Therefore, we are not talking about magnanimity; we are talking about compliance. Madam Speaker, if it pleases you, please give the ministry of finance timelines to come and present that to Parliament. Otherwise, we are groping in the dark and along the way, they will come clean as to their actions. [Ms Anite] MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS6201THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 10 NOVEMBER 2022THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Yesterday, we gave that order that we need a report to be presented. Maybe, the only thing that was not given was a timeline. How much time do you need to present that to us before we go into the budgeting process? We need to know how you have used what we provided for.3.29THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIV ATISATION AND INVESTMENT)  (Ms Evelyn Anite): Madam Speaker, my colleague, Hon. Musasizi, did actually commit to bring that. I want to re-enforce his position that within three weeks, we should be able to bring that.THE SPEAKER: In three weeks’ time, we should be receiving the Budget Framework Paper. Can we have that comprehensive report in two weeks’ time?MS ANITE: Yes, Madam Speaker. I will take that as a marching order. We will do good to that. THE SPEAKER: Thank you.3.30MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much and the two ministers. Particularly, the Leader of the Opposition has already thanked you for your support to the sector. The Hon. Ogwang has issued an open invitation to Parliament to support him. Maybe, the first thing that he will need to do is look at similar sports councils in Africa and how much money is appropriated. I think Nigeria is now near to a trillion shillings. Both Hon. Evelyn, the Minister of State for Investment and the Minister of State for Sports, are celebrating the Shs 47 billion this Government gives sports, less than the Shs 140 billion that you give to the President for donations. When he is moving around and there are people dancing for him, he gets envelopes to give out. You want Parliament to celebrate that out of Shs 47 billion –  My issue is for the Minister of Sports, in particular, to help us understand whether he has inherited a shell. When Hon. Bakkabulindi was in that ministry, he only had a commissioner for sports and a secretary. They were only three in office. You said you are going to change; I do not know who you will change. That is all that was in that sector. One time, we had an argument with the President over sports. He treats it casually. He said, “They don’t ask me these things of sports. Now, I want to come and play football.” There, he was in Namboole kicking the ball and said that is a way of supporting sports. (Laughter) That was the time I was working at the Monitor.Madam Speaker, I want to ask the Minister for Sports to tell us because you cannot invite Parliament to support nothing. What has changed in that ministry that requires support? Is it the budget, the infrastructure or the minister? I was sympathetic to Hon. Obua when he was there. When we speak about ministries, we mean it. If you do not know, go and ask Col. Tom Butime, when he was given a fake ministry and he declined it. There are ministries where they just put you and you are happy when there is actually nothing. I do not want you to be satisfied with being a minister. Can you tell us, what is it that you want us to support? (Laughter)3.33THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): First of all, I would like to thank my brother – Hon. Ibrahim Ssemuju; my friend. We are very close, by the way, if you did not know. He can confirm or deny this.Madam Speaker, to begin with his question; what has changed? I am here. I am hardly three or four months old. That is the first thing. Number two, what has changed in the ministry? 6202PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEBy that time, when Hon. Bakkabulindi was the Minister of Sports, if I am correct, maybe the budget was even not more than Shs 4, 3 or 2 billion. However, as of now, we are talking about Shs 47 billion, which I really want to appreciate you for Parliament and Government. If I do not do that, then I would not be honest.What has changed? The Department of Physical Education and Sports has about 15 technical staff from that time of one commissioner and a secretary. To be honest, a lot is changing within the sports subsector. About the Bill, I am happy that yesterday, we were here discussing a Private Member’s Bill, which has gone to the committee. As Government, we were also discussing about bringing up the Bill. These are the new changes, which have come in the sports subsector, which I really –THE SPEAKER: By the way, we are giving you Tuesday to lay your Bill. MR OGWANG: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I am happy the Leader of Government Business is here. Tuesday, I have to lay the Bill here. I thank you for granting us that opportunity. Also, let us talk about the medals. Today, Uganda is able to defeat Australia. You are talking about Nigeria; what is the budget of Australia for sports? That is the number one netball champion in the whole world. Uganda defeated Jamaica, which has been No. 4 in netball. What has changed? Uganda defeated South Africa -THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there is a point of order here.MR OGWANG: So, I only want to say that –MS OPENDI: Honourable minister, I have been granted to raise –THE SPEAKER: Your in-law.MR OGWANG: My in-law, when you begin hitting me on the Floor of Parliament, what happens? (Laughter)MS OPENDI: This is a friendly one, my brother-in-law. I want to thank the Minister and the Government for the little it has put into the sports sector. We were all here when the netballers were fundraising and saying that the money, which we appropriate for FUFA is not adequate to cover their sports budget –THE SPEAKER: It is not FUFA.MS OPENDI: I mean, the sports council. When they win medals, we are here to talk and appreciate as if we put in money. Therefore, Madam Speaker, is the minister in order to speak about the medals that are won by all these different disciplines when, actually, there is minimal support extended to these sports disciplines? You were here when netballers invited me for their fundraising. Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for the support you have given to these netballers - for your own money, you have given to them. Honourable minister, we appreciate but is it in order to claim all these efforts done by the different disciplines when minimal money is being put into the sports sector?THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when I support a team or group, I do so on behalf of Government. I am a Government person. I work for Government. Even if it is from my own pocket, that is a salary I get from Government. (Laughter)MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, can I conclude. First of all, allow me to put this on record – (Interjections)  - Madam Speaker, please, protect me. For all international competitions, Government foots; air tickets, per diems, hotels and even preparation; full board. What I am saying here is that we need more. This little is there but these federations are also given an opportunity to fundraise. There is no law that they should not get out and fundraise on their own. That is their right and I would like to call upon us here and the private sector to come in, like Hon. Ssemujju said. In Nigeria, MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS [Mr Ogwang]6203THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 10 NOVEMBER 2022the private sector has been putting a lot of money into sports, which is not the case with Uganda. How many multinational companies are putting money into the sports subsector? I want us to say, MTN, you are here. How much are you investing in the sports subsector? Airtel, you are here. How much are you putting into the sports subsector? Coca Cola, you are here. This is what I want to call upon Parliament and the Government to support, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: That is why we need a law in place. MR OGWANG: I would like to say that special appreciation goes to you and I request Parliament to clap for you. You have been supporting us and we must move forward. (Applause) The only way we can help our young people -THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, after hearing from the Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the State Minister for Sports, who has been there for about three months, we must appreciate our sports sector because it has improved. However, after hearing all the submissions from both sides, there are some inconsistencies between the figures of yesterday and those of today regarding what was appropriated and what is being released. The appropriation of Parliament had a different figure. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development wrote to the National Council of Sports and gave different figures. For instance, we appropriated Shs 3 billion for the Federation of Boxing, as a House but what the ministry of finance wrote to the National Council of Sports was Shs 1 billion. Therefore, I wonder which one is more superior; is it Parliament or the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development? During our meeting, the Accounting Officer said that we should only take what the ministry of finance tells us. That was the statement from the National Council of Sports. Due to this mismatch, very many MDAs, like what the Leader of the Opposition and others have just said, could be facing the same problem. The inconsistency is further manifested between the releases that are being communicated and what is being given to federations. If you ask what criteria is being used to give federations money, nobody will explain it to you. There was a ring fencing that has not been respected. The other federations are given more money than what they are supposed to get within this quarter and there is a problem. I ask my young brother, Hon. Peter Ogwang, for your own good, can we have an audit of the National Council of Sports before you take over so that you know what you are taking over? Can we hear from you? You were in that meeting and you looked like you had never known what was happening.MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, with your guidance, I concur with you that we should carry out an audit of the institution, which, of course, in this matter, is a forensic audit for the National Council of Sports activities. I welcome that because we all say we must be transparent in the manner in which we manage the public funds. These are not personal funds but public funds. I support it. I would also like to inform this august House, particularly my brother, Hon. Ssemujju, that each and every district of Uganda receives Shs 40 million for sports activities, including municipalities. Madam Speaker, I am ready to lay on the Table the money that the Government paid - THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, receive information. If you did not know - it is now time for you to go and crosscheck this information. MR OGWANG: Yesterday, I got questions here but I want to confirm that my district of Katakwi got Shs 40 million. It is the same as your district but what does that money do? It is the reason I call upon all of us here - I know the pressures we go through when our children go into the sports season. The pressure comes to us 6204PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEas if there is nothing that the Government puts into some of these district activities. Therefore, interest yourselves. I have communicated to the various districts to ask them to submit their reports on what that money has done. Help me to find out that information. Madam Speaker, as far as your guidance is concerned, I welcome the decision of us having a forensic audit in the National Council of Sports so that we can ascertain how the monies are being utilised there. I thank you.THE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter. Members, we need action to be taken in this institution so that we know where the money goes. We budgeted for Shs 38 billion but they have only released Shs 6.3 billion. Out of the Shs 6.3 billion, we do not know how it was distributed. It is like people sit in the boardroom and agree on how much to give each person. We need to know the criteria used. From there, we shall ask the Prime Minister to jump in when we have a report. MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, I listened to the debate we had yesterday and the inconsistencies that have been revealed, including the request by the minister of state for finance to have some of the figures expunged. The fact is that something does not seem to be right as far as these federations are concerned. Yesterday, we received information that in the first quarter, all federations did not receive anything. However, the Executive said that it had given federations something. The inconsistencies in these figures reveal that there is something wrong with the National Council of Sports but also, that there is something wrong with the ministry of finance. In the circumstances, I would like to move that this Parliament be pleased to have a select committee thoroughly consider this matter so that we have an input and contribution on this issue. I would like to move under rule 190 that this Parliament sets up a select committee to thoroughly investigate this matter. I beg to move.THE SPEAKER: Is your motion seconded? It is seconded by Hon. Hanifa Nabukeera, Hon. Rose, Hon. Nsaba-Buturo, the minister, Hon. Linos Ngompek and Hon. Solomon Silwany.Honourable members, do you know why Hon. Asuman is moving a motion on rule 190? It is because you can only have a select committee that you are in control of, not a forensic audit from people that will give you a report in one year’s time. We need to act before we go into the next budgeting process. I beg of you, Madam Leader of Government Business, it is in good faith. It is for us to correct ourselves. 3.48THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Madam Speaker, we need to move as a team. I would like to assure you that this Parliament has appropriated a lot of money, which goes into the ministries to help our people in the service sector. The ministries of education, health, works, and water send a lot of money to our districts. Madam Speaker, I want you to agree with me that we have to open our eyes and have some time as leaders in our respective areas to closely monitor. The only challenge we have been having is that we have not been giving you information. I want to apologise for that. (Applause) My brother, Hon. Ssemujju, when Hon. Nabbanja is talking, you want to stand up so people can see you. (Laughter) But this time, let me talk; allow me to conclude -THE SPEAKER: Kindly, let the Prime Minister finish. I know what you are going to raise.MS NABBANJA: I am doing this for the good of the country. I want to ask the ministries to give you information like the President directed. Members, please, use this information in the councils and tell councillors so they are also empowered. Give it to the LCIII Chairpersons because they help us to monitor these people. [Mr Ogwang] MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS6205THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 10 NOVEMBER 2022Two, we have a role in our ministries. I believe you know what I am talking about. Madam Speaker, audit - let me hear what he wants to say. Honourable member, you are my brother and friend; so, you can raise the procedural matter. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have not yet finished the motion. It was seconded - I am going to name the members of the committee. However, the information the Prime Minister is giving us is very vital –(Applause)- because it will help us determine how much money was given to our districts, how much was received and how much has been spent. That is the only way we can get these corrupt people. Is there value for money? Therefore, finance ministry, can you give us information on how much money you have given to all the districts in the country so that we are able to determine what has been done and what is not done?MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to put it on the record that when I want to be seen, I do not have to stand when Hon. Nabbanja is on the Floor. THE SPEAKER: That was a joke.MR SSEMUJJU: But it is recorded by Parliament. I want to say that I know what to do if I want to be seen. Madam Speaker, a motion has been moved under rule 190. Proceedings of this Parliament are recorded and watched, as a colleague said earlier, by the whole world. In the middle of the motion, we have - maybe we did not get orientation but the Prime Minister’s Time gives the Prime Minister the opportunity to give a statement or answer questions. The procedure I am raising is whether the Prime Minister, who has been here for fairly long and knows the Rules of Procedure - is Parliament proceeding well to even confuse the technical people who are recording our proceedings here in the middle of a motion moved under the Rules of Procedure and the Prime Minister reads a statement?THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that a select committee be constituted to investigate the operation of the National Council of Sports.(Question put and agreed to.) THE SPEAKER: The Prime Minister was just contributing to why we should have a select committee. That is why she was talking but it did not distort anything - I am still on the Floor. Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister for your contribution. Honourable members, before we get to know how the money is being used in the National Council of Sports, I want to say that we are not adding them money. Much as they are crying for more, we will not add before you check on the governance issues.I now, therefore, name the members of the committee. Let me name the members and then you will come.MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a matter of procedure, for your guidance again, would it be safe for the record of this House that Hon. Basalirwa is advised to move under rule 59(k)-THE SPEAKER: Without notice.MR MPUUGA: - not having given notice to the House so that we can still carry the motion but change the record on the Hansard.THE SPEAKER: When Hon. Basalirwa moved, rule 59(k) was suspended by the Speaker and he moved under rule 190. Honourable members, I, therefore, name the members.1. Hon. Mpindi Bumali - Chairperson2. Hon. Laura Kanushu     3. Hon. Ssolo Kayemba6206PRIME MINISTER’S TIME4. Hon. Idd Isabirye 5. Hon. Donald Katalihwa6. Hon. Agnes Acibu 7. Hon. Margaret MakhohaWe have six members; please, give us a report. MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you. However, I also want to inform Members that by the powers entrusted to me by the Constitution, I will cause a forensic audit into this in addition to what Members will do. Thank you very much.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.3.37THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence on two things. One, the chairperson of the select committee you have named is the President of the Uganda Paralympics. In addition, when we talk about Uganda Paralympics, it is within the National Council of Sports. Therefore, I would like to beg your indulgence that since we wanted a person with a disability to be among the members, maybe-THE SPEAKER: Hon. Laura Kanushu will chair the committee and we can replace Hon. Mpindi with Hon. Solomon Silwany. Honourable Members, that is the team I have selected.MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, the last – I had wanted to beg your indulgence. Why am I saying this? Can I request -(Interruption)- Madam Speaker, can you protect me? THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, please – Hon. Ssemujju, I think you are lost; your place is the other side. (Laughter) Please, first go up; the minister is speaking, please. MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I really want to beg the indulgence of this House; the directive or the position that you are giving that no money should go to National Council of Sports during this time -THE SPEAKER: No. That is not what I have said. I have said that Parliament is not going to add you additional money in the budget – before we confirm. MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I have no say over that. I thank you. THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we want to know where the money that we give you goes; that is what we want to confirm. When we have found out that, we can add you more money. Once we confirm that there is credibility – because now, there is suspicion that, maybe, there is fraud. Next item. STATEMENT ON GOVERNMENT BUSINESS FOR THE SUCCEEDING WEEK4.04 THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I move under Rule 28 of our Rules of Procedure that requires me, as Leader of Government Business, to make a statement to this House regarding the business of the succeeding week. I, therefore, submit the following business for the week of 15 to 17 November 2022. We shall have a statement by the Minister of State for Education and Sports (Higher Education) on the fire outbreak at Salama School for the Blind in Ntenjeru-Kisoga Town Council, Mukono District. We shall also have a statement from the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development on the 16 days of activism against gender-based violence against women and girls.We shall also have another statement by the Minister of East African Community Affairs on [The Speaker]6207THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 10 NOVEMBER 2022the 22nd East African Community Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, commonly known as juakali , in NaguruWe shall also have a motion, which I will move.Madam Speaker, thank you very much. THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. Next item.PRIME MINISTER’S TIMETHE SPEAKER: (Ms Pacuto rose_) Hon. Avur, what is your problem? MS PACUTO: Madam Speaker, the Parliament of Uganda is in the second year of our term. I have observed with concern the sitting space for the minister of state in charge of disability affairs. Madam Speaker, her condition cannot allow her, in any way, to sit on the front bench. Even when the House is fully packed, you find Hon. Asamo squeezed there. Madam Speaker, I beg the Parliamentary Commission to design a special seat for Hon. Asamo -(Applause)- and any other minister that will come in future with disability so that they are appropriately –(Interjection)-  whatever. I remember Hon. Asamo used to sit somewhere there in a special place. Maybe, let her sit there and she can present as a minister from wherever she is. If not, Hon. Solomon, the Parliamentary Commissioner and Hon. Prossy, please, as the Parliamentary Commission, Is it procedurally right for us to continue like this for Hon. Asamo to sit for another three years in an inappropriate place? THE SPEAKER: Actually, it is not only Hon. Asamo that has that challenge. A number of persons with disability have that challenge and they have raised that issue to us. Hon. Solomon, do you have what to say? 4.04MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, we have taken note as the Backbench Parliamentary Commissioners and we are going to fast-track to see that that is done because it is a very pertinent issue. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Commission, next week, we will sort out the issue of Hon. Asamo. (Applause) I am assigning you, the backbench commissioners, to bring somebody to make sure that a comfortable chair is fixed. Thank you. 4.06THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, I thank you on behalf of Cabinet and the frontbench -THE SPEAKER: Maybe, to show you that we care about our persons with disability, as a Commission, we gave all our persons with disabilities aides. They move with their aides, who are paid by Parliament. (Applause) MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I got a question from Hon. Julius Acon Bua, Member of Parliament for Otuke East. He said that in 1972, the Government of Uganda awarded a house to John Akii-Bua when he won a gold medal in Munich, Germany, during the Olympic competition. He said that while the physical house was given, the land title was never delivered to him and, as such, his family does not have any documentary evidence of ownership of the same.His prayer is that I clarify whether or not the title in question exists. He also asks whether I can lay the same on the Table and hand it over to the family of the late John Akii-Bua to put the matter to rest .Madam Speaker, my response is that the title exists and I wish to confirm that in July 2021, 6208PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEunder the wise leadership of the First Lady and the Minister of Education and Sports, the Government secured the certificate of title for the property donated to John Akii-Bua in 1972. The details of the property are as follows:The district is Mengo, the county is Kibuga, the block number is 29, the plots are 1708 and 1709. Therefore, this land title was handed over to the administrator of the estate during the President’s recognition of the Ugandan athletes in October this year at State House.The second question came from Hon. Ephraim Biraaro, Member of Parliament Buhweju West. He says that Buhweju, like other districts in Uganda, is endowed with several minerals, most prominently gold. That our people have been rendered vulnerable to ill health as a result of chemicals used by commercial gold miners. It is said that these gold miners who use industrial scale methods and technology apply mercury in the running streams, in order to compress the gold powder for their benefit, which mercury is known as a hazardous chemical to humans, animals and all aquatic life. Water, which flows from gold mines in Njeru, Ngaju, Kagorogoro, Bihanga, Nyakitaraka and several other places, is shared by the communities downstream to their detriment. The big commercial gold miners seem to have no regard for property rights of the natives. They enter and excavate any piece of land at will. His prayers: 1.  That the ministries in charge of minerals and environment should go on ground in Buhweju to assess the dangers posed by chemicals, and take appropriate action.2.  The ministry in charge of licensing commercial miners should go on the ground and tame the impact on the population by their agents. 3.  The Committee on Natural Resources, which is within your powers, Madam Speaker, should make a visit to Buhweju and assess the impact of the mining activities on the community.Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development has instituted policies, reviewed and enacted laws to guide the development of the sector, for instance, the recently assented to Mining and Mineral Act, 2022. This will ensure sustainable socio-economic transformation of the country. The ministry is continuously engaging with all stakeholders including Ministries, Departments and Agencies and local governments to ensure compliance to the Mining and Minerals Act. Honourable colleagues, the ministry together with the National Environmental Management Authority is committed to the implementation of the Minamata Convention on Mercury, where Uganda is a signatory. The Convention on Mercury is the most recent global agreement on environment and health, adopted in 2013. One of the objectives of the convention is to protect human health and the environment from pollutants and releases of mercury and its compounds. Government is promoting the use of environmentally-friendly alternatives to mercury such as the use of borax in processing of gold. Madam Speaker and colleagues, the law provides penalties for the use of mercury and other hazardous chemicals in the mining sector. Like I said when I was starting, I request you to allow the Committee on Natural Resources to conduct an oversight visit as per the Member’s request. Hon. Veronica Nanyondo, Bukomansimbi district woman MP. She said, “I rise on a matter concerning the readiness by Government to implement the new lower secondary school curriculum. Recently, Government, through Ministry of Education and Sports and the National Curriculum Development Centre, introduced a new thematic-based lower secondary school curriculum that will be implemented when schools reopen in January, 2023.” [Ms Nabbanja]6209THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 10 NOVEMBER 2022According to her, this has been an issue of debate – even before Parliament – to the extent that we considered halting the implementation of the new curriculum. Questions arose as to whether the new curriculum will deliver the envisaged outcomes and overcome the challenges faced by the existing curriculum. It is also not yet clear if all stakeholders were involved in the process of developing the new curriculum are the key determinants to its successful implementation. Her prayer is: “Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is vital that teachers, parents, students and all stakeholders who together support the education sector are on the same page in regard to the new curriculum.”Madam Speaker, my response is that the implementation of the new lower secondary curriculum started in February 2020 and it is on track. The pioneers of this new lower secondary curriculum would have been in senior three but due to the COVID-19 pandemic and lockdown, they are in senior two. They are expected to sit their first assessment by the Directorate of Industrial Training on their occupational proficiency in 2023 and Uganda Certificate of Education examinations by UNEB in 2024. A total of 6,020 Government and private schools received syllabus books for the subjects offered in addition to prototype learners’ textbooks, teachers’ guides and training manuals in 2019. 30,000 secondary school teachers from both private and Government schools have been trained on the new lower secondary curriculum. I have provided the table with details of trainings and orientations of various stakeholders on the new lower secondary curriculum as you can see in the provided details.Madam Speaker, the lower secondary school curriculum is not thematic as indicated by the honourable member. It is a competency-based curriculum, which is outcome-based and learner-centred. The thematic curriculum is for the primary level and this was rolled out in 2007, starting with primary one up to primary seven in 2013. In the process of developing the new curriculum, consultations were carried out with a number of stakeholders. The Ministry of Education and Sports has continued to create awareness on the new lower secondary school curriculum through radio and TV talk shows, and presentations at different forums.The fourth question came from Hon. Isaias Johny Ssasaga, Member of Parliament Budadiri East, that the Uganda National Examinations Board is withholding exam materials for all secondary schools for the Uganda Certificate of Education and the Uganda Advanced Certificate of Education in the forthcoming exams, demanding for certificates of clearance from the Uganda National Students Association and the Uganda National Students Association and Secondary Science and Mathematics Teachers’ (SESEMAT), as contributions for their release. The Uganda National Students Association and the Secondary Science and Mathematics Teachers (SESEMAT) are demanding schools to pay all accumulated arrears for these schools, presumed collected from students’ co-funding since 2020. With the COVID-19 situation, most parents were hit hard and failed to clear school fees arrears, of which most schools waived them off. His prayer was that the Ministry of Education and Sports prevails over UNEB to release the exam materials to schools. The second one is that UNEB be cautioned not to attach either the release of materials or results of students, based on UNSA or SESEMAT dealings with schools. Madam Speaker, my response is that the Uganda National Students Association (UNSA) is an umbrella body for students in Uganda, both in Government-aided and private post-primary institutions of learning. The students’ body derives its mandate from the Education Act of 2008, which requires all schools and institutions to establish students’ councils. Collectively, these students’ councils manage and run their affairs under the UNSA constitution.6210PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEA total of 1,572 schools had been cleared by 27 September 2022. Head teachers who have challenges have also been handled differently. I want to report that there is no school that has been denied examination materials, as alleged.Madam Speaker, Secondary Science and Mathematics Teachers (SESEMAT), is a programme that started in 2005 between the Japanese Government and the Government of Uganda, through the Ministry of Education and Sports, to improve the teachers’ delivery, which would, in turn, lead to improvement in the performance of science and mathematics education. This intervention was started in 2005 and underwent three phases and thereafter, JICA phased out. For the sustainability of the programme, a fee of Shs 1,000 was levied on each student. Due to the non-commitment of the head teachers in remitting these funds, it was decided to tag the collection of UNEB materials to the certificate remittance of SESEMAT funds, as it was seen as the most suitable alternative to boost these collections because it targets both private and Government-aided schools.Because COVID-19 left schools closed and, therefore, no collections from students were made for the years 2020 and 2021. These years were waived off and the collections being demanded are for those of the current year 2022 and the arrears of 2019, if any. The Ministry of Education and Sports is engaging all head teachers in the country.Hon. Joseph Ruyonga, Member of Parliament, Hoima West, Hoima City stated that Government of Uganda has, over time, prioritised education reforms as an anchor of socio-economic transformation and development, as demonstrated in the various policy reforms, such as the Universal Primary Education (UPE) of 1997, and the Universal Secondary Education (USE) of 2007, among others.The introduction of UPE has led to increased demand for secondary education services by learners who complete the Primary Seven level. Nyarugabo Seed Secondary School, located in Nyarugabo Cell, Kiduma Ward, Busiisi Division in Hoima West started a community school in 2019. In June 2020, the Church of Uganda Bunyoro-Kitara Diocese donated 6.9 acres of land to the then Hoima Municipality and the land title was transferred to the names of Hoima Municipal Council, Nyarugabo Seed Secondary School. The school has 114 students from Senior One to Senior Four, studying from a community hall. The school was supposed to be constructed by the World Bank under the Uganda Secondary Education Expansion Project and all the necessary documents were submitted, including the land title. The council had been assured that the school was included in the Financial Year 2020/2021 budget.His prayer is that: can I please update this House on the status of this project? Madam Speaker, my response is that the Government, through the Ministry of Education and Sports, is waiting for a no-objection from the World Bank before commencing the procurement process under the Uganda Secondary Expansion Project. Question No.6 is from Hon. Moses Kabuusu, Member of Parliament, Kyamuswa, Kalangala District. The Government of Uganda obtained a loan to construct seed secondary schools in all subcounties in the country. As a result, Nekemia Memorial Secondary School was built in Buuvu Island – I think it is Buvuma –(Interjection)-  okay, let me read it as it is; Buuvu Island in Kyamuswa County in Kalangala District, in the first phase under Uganda Inter-Governmental Fiscal Transfer Programme (UGIFT) and was meant to be officially opened early this year, which has not happened. It is now the third term and there is no sign of the school opening.His prayer is to know when Nekemia Seed Secondary School in Buuvu Island in Kyamuswa County in Kalangala District will be opened, as there is no substantive head [Ms Nabbanja]6211THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 10 NOVEMBER 2022teacher and staff recruited by the Government to run the school. The second one is: aware that Government policy does not support boarding seed secondary schools, is there any special way Nekemia Memorial Seed Secondary School in Buuvu, Kalangala District can be opened as a boarding seed secondary school, since it is meant to serve primary schools in Kachanga, Luramba, Kotobo and Bufumira, which are all in different islands. Madam Speaker, my response is, the Education Service Commission has finalised the recruitment of 4,805 teaching and support staff for seed secondary schools. Among these are 126 head teachers and 156 deputy head teachers. The ministry has already issued appointment letters awaiting posting instructions and deployment to the various seed secondary schools, including Nekemiah.It is true that the current scope of seed secondary schools do not have boarding facilities. This is in line with the USE School Policy. However, the ministry and Government have noted the need to have exceptions for districts located in Karamoja and the islands, where operation of day schools is very challenging. Assessment is on-going by the ministry engineers to ascertain that the cost needed to provide the above facilities are budgeted for in the medium term.Question No.7 came from Hon. Naome Kabasharira, Member of Parliament, Rushenyi County in Ntungamo District. Madam Speaker, the Member says that there is a constant outcry by truck drivers plying the Kampala-Masaka-Mbarara route over the mismanagement of the Lukaya and Mbarara weighbridges and alleged misconduct of the officers in charge.Truck drivers complain of harassment and extortion by some officers in those respective weighbridge stations. This unprofessional conduct of business by the officers manning those stations may cause financial loss to the Government as the money extorted from the drivers does not reach public coffers. Her prayers are that: 1. The relevant agencies streamline the operations of the weigh bridges across the country.2. An investigation should be conducted on the two weighbridges to establish the extent of the problem and the errant officers be prosecuted.Madam Speaker, Mbarara and Lukaya fixed weighbridges are located along the Masaka-Mbarara Road and are used to regulate the overloading of trucks for purposes of protecting the road infrastructure from premature damage. The two weighbridges are managed by the Ministry of Works and Transport through the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA).The Government is in advanced stages of installing the first phase of a high speed weigh-in motion system at Mbarara, Magamaga and Luweero. The high speed weigh-in motion systems for other weighbridges including Lukaya will be installed in the subsequent phases. These systems will allow compliant transporters to move on the road without having to stop on the weighbridge.Data centralisation has been done for Mbarara, Lukaya, Luweero, Magamaga, Mubende and Mbale weighbridges. This increases visibility of weighing operations at each weigh station for monitoring purposes.Madam Speaker, I would like to inform this House that the matter reported by the honourable member in Rushenyi is being followed and those officers will be brought to book.Question number eight: Hon. Naboth Namanya, Member of Parliament of Rubabo in Rukungiri District says that Kahengye Water Project commenced in 2015 with a projection to provide a lasting solution to water shortages in the constituencies of Rubabo, Rujumbura, Rukungiri Municipality and the neighbouring areas of Mitooma District.6212PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEThis project cost the Government Shs 54 billion and it had been estimated to be commissioned in the year 2017. Later, an extension was made by the Ministry of Water and Environment in conjunction with a contractor to complete this project in the year 2018. The Government is at the verge of losing this huge sum of money because after seven years, the project has not been completed and commissioned and Rukungiri District is still facing the challenge of water shortage.His prayer is, can I provide this House with the progress report and the reasons the project has not been completed for five years beyond its completion date?Madam Speaker, my response is that it is true the Rukungiri project, which was constructed by M/S Techno Fab Engineering Limited, was expected to be completed by the year 2018. The contractor progressed well until the company faced legal and financial challenges in 2018 due to the death of the main stakeholder.Re-organisation of the company following the demise of the principal stakeholder took some time. Work resumed seriously in 2019. However, the progress faced a setback following the outbreak of COVID-19 in 2020. During this period, importation of materials was not possible and movement to sites within the country was affected by the lockdown. In addition, the ministry faced cash flow constraints occasioned by the COVID-19 budget cuts.Madam Speaker, currently the system is undergoing test running and full operations and commissioning of the completed project is scheduled to take place by the end of the year 2022. I was told by December this year.On the issue of cracks that are said to have developed on the water treatment and collection tanks at Lilima and Nabweya gravity flow schemes, a team of engineers from the Ministry of Water and Environment have visited the installation at the two water supply systems. The micro cracks occurred because of the settlement of the foundations of some of the structures at the water treatment plants, mainly on the aprons at the veranda, due to change in soil conditions because of rains. The ministry is undertaking remedial works. Madam Speaker, I had more questions, which I will answer next week. Honourable colleagues, thank you for listening to me.THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much, Hon. Leader of Government Business, for the timely responses. [Member rose_] Do you have something to say?4.37THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for filing the responses to Members’ questions. I have only a few comments to make on the responses. On the question filed by Hon. Acon Julius relating to the gift by the past government to our athlete in 1972 - of course, the NRM Government came into power 14 years after the offer was made. It took 35 years to effect the offer. We can say it is never late. However, for the comfort of this House and posterity, it would be better, Rt Hon. Prime Minister - when you say the land title was given to the administrator of the estate, this being the House of Parliament, it does not really hurt if you even declare the name on record. If it is the Administrator-General, then we get to know because there is a Government administrator. Therefore, this remains a bit unclear. If the administrator is an individual, a member of the family or a government, which is the Administrator-General - Clarity helps in knowing and following up, on who actually is holding in trust for the family. When communicating with Parliament, I beg that clarity does help a great deal in clearing such gaps. Secondly, on the question filed by Hon. Mwijukye relating to pollution of community water sources and disrespect of property rights [Ms Nabbanja]6213THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 10 NOVEMBER 2022by the miners; I think part of the question required some assurance. If there is pollution of water sources, then you are dealing with a dicer  question. I would have expected you at least to give assurance that an inspection is on. Otherwise, the answers are more futuristic than addressing an immediate community concern. I want to invite you to probably engage with the Member and understand the problem much better. If the question is actually immediate, probably you are dealing with a very serious health problem that requires urgent handling so far. On the question raised by Hon. Nanyondo Veronica on the lower secondary curriculum, first of all, we discussed in this House of Parliament - the 10th Parliament, to be particular - when this curriculum was taking off. We warned that probably a lot more consultation would have been undertaken but for some reason, we were in a hurry. For the record, all of us would like to have a new curriculum designed in a manner that will make our children more empowered from the lower stages of education. Madam Speaker, what the Rt Hon. Prime Minister did not inform the Member who asked the question is what became of those other schools that were not involved in the orientation. The record is 6,020 schools, Government and private. The number is much bigger. It is on record that very many teachers, up to now, do not understand how to implement this curriculum. It is actually causing disorientation to the learners and the teachers. A teacher becomes very frustrated if he cannot confidently deliver. Part of the challenge is that even the materials - the prototype books that were provided were not enough. The private schools did not get it. They have been spending a lot of money to photocopy. Some of the teachers actually are teaching by guesswork. Probably, the country requires more assurance that over time, Government must admit to the gaps and immediately come in to close them. Madam Speaker, one of the challenges arising from the manner of implementing this curriculum is that the component of inspection in education has since collapsed. I do not know whether it is financing or sheer negligence. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, if you want to sample, I want to challenge you to start from Kakumiro. Go and sample private and Government secondary schools. Just make out of your routine as you move. Go and find out how they are struggling to implement this curriculum. I worry that if you do not arrest the situation much earlier - because we have at least two years before the first cohort is outed. We can arrest it in the middle and offer remedial intervention to both teachers - because there is no education system better than the quality and preparedness of its teachers. Therefore, the teachers still have gaps. They need a lot of technical backstopping to appreciate the length and breadth of this curriculum. It is still the problem. Do not feel shy, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, to report to the gaps so we plan for this country together. There are problems. Inspection has serious challenges. You may not be able but I understand the haste with which these questions require answering. You may have to invite Parliament to join you in making the situation better. You are also aware that in the countryside, there is hardly any power, and ICT services are not there. The teachers who are supposed to offer them are non-existent. I do not know what you are going to do. I envisage gaps. We need to admit to them and make things better. The second last is the question raised by Hon. Ssasaga. In my opinion, the response is more procedural. Madam Speaker, I do not know whether we may be compelled to require the Clerk to put a date for filing questions on the Order Paper.  This question has been answered late by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. It becomes a bit problematic when a question is answered late and probably some of the issues raised have been overtaken by events. 6214PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEThis question was supposed to remedy the possibility of some students missing exams because of these possibilities. Filing is coming in at a time when some of them have missed. The filing and response to questions need to be considered so that Members get answers to their questions in earnest. Otherwise –THE SPEAKER: That is true. We are also mindful that at that time, we were on recess. It is good to put time but most of this could have come during recess. MR MPUUGA: Probably in the future, the rules could be amended now that the Prime Minister has other able deputies. The questions are responded to, not in a persona, but after consultations that the office responds and not the individual, to allow room for the deputies to respond to questions in time. It could be good. Of course, it is very smart for the Prime Minister in person to come and exhibit her smartness in response to questions. Where she is not around, she should be able to secede the ground for an able deputy to come and respond to Members’ questions.Also, on the issue of UNSA, probably some Members are not actively following the UNSA matter. In our times, this was a very active students’ body. Lately, it looks like an extension of some other political groups. That is killing the motivation of students to subscribe to it. When these noble young people’s organisations are politicised, then the whole idea of their constitution is lost. Therefore, the people with authority need to take note of the fact that we can disorient well-intentioned programmes by the manner in which we relate or portray them. Lastly, Madam Speaker, my comment is on the question raised by Hon. Naome Kabasharira, the Member of Parliament for Rushenyi County. I appreciate the Prime Minister’s response. Madam Speaker, the first prayer needs to be given more assuring responses. First of all, streamlining is a managerial issue. I think the Prime Minister needs to assure the Member that she understood the context of her question.On the second prayer – where the Prime Minister is assuring her that the Government is in “advanced stages”, what is that stage? If it is procurement, procurement is multi-stage. Can we know the stage at which the procurement is? The Government cannot be at some “advanced stage”. Is it high school or O’level? I would like to invite the Prime Minister to agree that the Government does not communicate in generic terms. The Government communicates in specific unequivocal terms so that people who ask questions can be able to communicate to stakeholders elsewhere because the Government answers questions in a more particular way that assures the people that their concerns have been understood. Generic answering connotes politics. Some questions do not require political answering; they require technical specific answering. Madam Speaker, I thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Leader for the Opposition. Leader of the Opposition, I happen to have got a copy of the two land titles. They were registered on 24 June 2022, under KCCA – 00093470, 0009366. I got those copies of the titles and the owners do not want a lot of information to be given out on who the administrator is and some other information, for confidentiality purposes. However, if you want, I can give you a copy of the titles. I think that is what they preferred, as a family. They did not want the names to be shown. You never know - you may follow up someone at night because he now has a lot of land. (Laughter) They have a reason to that effect. 4.51MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga West County, Kagadi): Madam Speaker, I would not want to dispute the information you have just given. However, the guidance I seek is that the Akii-Bua’s land was given to him for his distinguished achievement, by the Government of the Republic of Uganda. [Ms Nabbanja]6215THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 10 NOVEMBER 2022I believe I am a stakeholder in this country. Having given to the family of the late Akii-Bua and as a citizen of this country, I think I am entitled to know whether the people occupying that house or the titles are being processed in the names -THE SPEAKER: They are actually not being processed. They have been processed by the family.MR TINKASIIMIRE:  They have been processed in the names of the beneficiaries of the estate of the late -THE SPEAKER: I may not know the beneficiary per se, but the name here is “Bua Akii-Bua.” He is a son of the late Akii-Bua. Hon. Hamson Obua is just a nephew, but the other one is called Bua. (Laughter) The names relate to the family, so, we do not know whether it is a family member – a son or whichever. 4.53MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago North County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have already ruled and we are not supposed to discuss this issue. However, the person who raised the question can follow it up to find out the authenticity of this information and the beneficiaries of the land. If he finds out that it is not right, he will come back to you and the matter will be settled. Thank you so much. 4.54MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House that the family of the late Akii-Bua was called to State House, Entebbe and the land title was handed over to them. There is no complaint. I think the matter has been resolved without any issue. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much, Hon. Tonny. Thank you for that clarification. Let us not discuss people’s property here. We have helped them to get it - that is if we have helped them – but we must thank the Government for fulfilling the pledge. 4.54MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity -THE SPEAKER:  Leader of Government Business, there is an issue for you here.MS LUCY AKELLO: I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity. I have a quick question to the Prime Minister in regard to an issue that she is already aware of; the beatification of a very great man, Venerable Giuseppe Ambrosoli. He was a Reverend Father and doctor. The Holy Father, Pope Francis, has decided that the rite of beatification of this great man should be held here in Uganda and it is going to be the first of its kind in Uganda. This great man did so much for us. He put up a hospital in Kalongo in Agago, a leprosy centre in Morolem and so many other places. He was also a professor in Mulago. Is it possible for this Parliament to pay tribute and honour this great man before we conclude and have the beatification done in Kalongo on 20 November 2022? THE SPEAKER: I heard Members shouting; should I put the question? Prime Minister, you have seen how popular that issue is. 4.56THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Madam Speaker, I know how popular that is. I would like to inform Parliament that the archbishop came to my office. The archbishop has met the President and the President directed the Ministry of Works and Transport - and I know work is on-going in Agago. The Member of Parliament and the minister for economic monitoring has been with me. I have been to Agago myself. There is some progress, except that – you know Government money - there are those processes that have been delayed. Nonetheless, I would 6216PRIME MINISTER’S TIMElike to promise that the Government will honour the promise.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members – of course you know that there is a timeline. MS NABBANJA: Lastly, Madam Speaker, I think we now need to move a motion. Can I move a motion? THE SPEAKER: Now, without notice? Please do.MS NABBANJA:  Maybe we make it special because the person in question is a very big person. THE SPEAKER: Let us make a special - MS NABBANJA: Let us make a special one together with the Members of Parliament. I will call them then we agree on a date, then I will move. Madam Speaker, I request that the Members of Parliament come with me today, we go and process and see where the obstacles are so that we can move. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as very good people of the Parliament of Uganda, that does not stop us from making our personal contributions towards the cause because it is a very important event for us, as Ugandans. As we stay in the queue; as we wait for the Government release, we could start as Members of Parliament. We are not going to say, “Give this,” but there is a blessing in giving.Obama has said it all that blessed are the hands that give. Therefore, Members, let us support that initiative and welcome it to Uganda. I thank all of you. Based on that, I now adjourn the House until next Tuesday at 2 o’clock.(The House rose at 4.59 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 15 November 2022.) [Ms Nabbanja]