
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Thursday, 24 November 2016

Parliament met at 2.13 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Today, we have four statements and it is my hope that all the ministers are ready with these statements so that we can finish with them. We have some Members who would like to raise some urgent matters. We will deal with those and see how to roll up the business today. Thank you.

2.15
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Whereas I appreciate that the health sector has a lot of challenges, what is happening in Buhweju needs serious attention. Although we have eight sub-counties, we have only three health centres III. We are a district without a hospital; we only have a health centre IV. Consequently, we are losing lives and women are dying in labour. Just last week, we lost three women in Karungu, Bihanga and Engaju sub-counties.

Mr Speaker, I pray that the health centres II are upgraded to health centres III in those sub-counties where we have no health centres III. I also pray that -(Interruption)

MS KATWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The statistics we have show that every month in Buhweju, we lose five to seven women in labour. This is because the health centres are very far and Buhweju is a hard-to-reach area. With difficult topography, it is difficult for mothers to walk those long distances to access the health centres.

As hon. Mwijukye said, we only have three health centres. This is a hard-to-reach district with eight sub-counties. The roads are very bad. It is a big problem for our mothers to access the health centres. 

Mr Speaker, Buhweju as a district needs serious attention because the health sector in Buhweju is in problems. We are not going to see our mothers and children dying every day when we do not have any solution for the problems.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that still information?

MS KATWESIGYE: Yes, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

MR MWIJUKYE: Thank you, honourable colleague. Mr Speaker, as I conclude, the number of health staff in Buhweju stands at 31 per cent. I pray that it is also raised by the ministry because we must protect lives. We must not sit and see our people die every day, especially our mothers, given the fact that Buhweju is a very hard-to-reach area like my colleague said. We pray we are given the attention we deserve. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MR TUMUHEIRWE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Much as I come from Rukungiri, I am a neighbour of Buhweju. I only wanted to add that even where these health facilities are, we do not have power. The same situation prevailing in Buhweju also prevails in Rukungiri. I am very serious about this because the health workers use “katoki”. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is a “katoki”?

MR TUMUHEIRWE: “Katoki” is these mobile phones which have torches. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you know the language of the House.

MR TUMUHEIRWE: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I was just advising.

2.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Certainly, it is Government policy that every sub-county should have a health centre III and every constituency should have a health centre IV. However, what they are referring to as district hospital, we do not have it yet in the policy. These are general hospitals and of course, the general hospitals were constructed based on the population. General hospitals, ideally, are supposed to serve specific populations of about 500,000 people. 

However, Mr Speaker, allow me inform the Members of Parliament from Buhweju and all the other colleagues who may be having this challenge that we are doing our best to ensure that sub-counties that do not have health centres III at all, we have these health centres constructed there. Where there are health centres II and there are no health centres III, we are planning to upgrade the health centres II into health centres III.

For the constituencies that do not have the health centres IV; where there are the health centres III, we also plan to upgrade these to health centres IV. we hope that if we receive the funds that we are trying to target in the next financial year, including the loan that was brought to this House by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and of course funding from the budget of the next financial year, we shall be able to move this plan ahead in a phased manner beginning with the hard-to-reach mountainous districts like Buhweju and the island districts. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR CHEPTORIS: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister because there are districts like Buhweju or Kween which do not have district hospitals, yet the budget that was presented last year includes some of those pledged district hospitals. You know, in the districts that have difficult terrains and no roads, our women die while being taken to hospitals for delivery and so on.

Why doesn’t the minister give us the clarification on which hospital she is going to implement under the Ministry of Health since they were reflected in the budget? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I indicated, our priority will be to serve the hard-to-reach districts like the mountainous and island districts. That will be the first priority. Of course, priority will be to those areas where there are totally no health services.

There are areas where there are no general hospitals, no Health Centres IV and no nearby facility and transportation from these areas to the nearest hospital is quite difficult and distant too. Therefore, we will come here with a list of these districts we are going to consider first, the sub-counties and Health Centres IV to be considered first.

MR OKIN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to seek clarification from the minister. Yesterday, I was in Buhweju with the Committee on Local Government Accounts. Last week, I was in Bukwo District, one of the districts categorised as very hard-to-reach.

What we found out there was that, initially the health workers were under a special provision. They were given some allowance. However, this allowance has been cut off completely in Buhweju and Bukwo. Therefore, we wonder why other districts are being paid this hard-to-reach allowance and others are left out like Buhweju. I would like to find out from the minister; what is happening? Thank you very much.

MS CHEKAMONDO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank Members for raising these issues. When you go to health centres II, many of them were promised and they were told that they would upgrade to health centres III. However, when you see the services there, they are not worth calling health centres III.

Therefore, can the minister explain to us whether these health centres II are going to be upgraded to health centres III so that they help people? It is not only in Kapchorwa but throughout the country. I thank you.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The hard-to-reach allowance is not just given because you perceive an area to be hard-to-reach. A hard-to-reach allowance that is given is given to the hard-to-reach. Sometimes, you find that somebody is in Bukwo town and wants to be paid the hard-to-reach allowance.  Hard-to-reach from where? Yes, I am serious on this. 

Therefore, you find that the hard-to-reach allowance may be applicable to the staff that are far away, may be in the mountainous areas but not those who are within the town councils.

I have been to Bukwo myself and this matter was raised and was clarified to them, because the Ministry of Public Service defines hard-to-reach in a specific way; different from our own understanding of the hard-to-reach. Otherwise, somebody will even say that Natete, Nakawuka is hard-to-reach –(Interjections)- Yes,  Nakawuka, is also a hard-to-reach area.

However, we do understand the challenge that the people in Bukwo face especially those within the town, because it is quite a challenge for the staff there. They do not have - I hope they have banks now. You find that the health workers and teachers have to move to Kapchorwa to access their salary and, of course, it is at a distance.

Regarding the health centers II, I indicated clearly, where there are no health centres III at all, this will be the first place where we are going to put funding so that we have these health centres constructed. Where there are health centres II and there is no health centre III in that sub-county, we shall upgrade that health centre II to a health centre III.

I hope I am clear on this –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It would be fair for the honourable minister to be very specific. The answer is too general and not having a time limit. Therefore, can the people of Uganda know when you are going to start on that programme?

MS AMONGIN:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I would like to get from the minister is in regard to the health centres IV for particular districts that were supposed to have been upgraded to district status. 

Would the minister be kind to give us an update of how far you have gone in regards to upgrading of those health centres IV, to district hospitals, and outline which districts. This has been raised for the last three years and some of the districts like Ngora are waiting. Thank you.

MR AGABA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek further clarification from the minister. I am surprised about her clarification of hard-to-reach areas. I am aware under the Ministry of Public Service, hard-to-reach areas are classified based on the fact that they are hard-to-reach.

However, in her illustration, it appears, after reaching the hard-to-reach areas, there are other harder to reach areas within the hard-to-reach areas that attract the special allowance from Government. If you go to Kalangala by boat and it is hard-to-reach, then it appears within Kalangala there are other areas where you have to go by boat.

I thought the Ministry of Public service has classified hard-to-reach areas as hard-to-reach, therefore, if Kalangala is hard-to-reach, then any point in Kalangala becomes hard-to-reach just like in Bukwo or any other hard-to-reach area. Thank you.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like colleagues to understand that we have plans but if these plans are not funded, then we cannot move at the pace that we would all want to move. We have mapped out areas where there are no services at all. There are districts where there are no, for example, general hospitals but there is a health centre IV. Then you find there is a private, not for profit, health facility. Those maybe slightly better off than those that completely do not have the general hospitals. 

Therefore, in order for us to upgrade a health centre IV to a general hospital, we must look into the infrastructure and funds for staffing and to have the relevant equipment in place.

Mr Speaker, whereas it is everybody’s wish to have a hospital within every district, it is not possible for us to do it at ago. This is why we handle these matters in a phased manner, beginning with those who are completely in dire need, without any services nearby and then we move on to the others.

Similarly, for the health centres III or the constituencies that do not have health centres IV, we cannot just upgrade because for a health centre III, there is need to have 19 health workers according to our establishment. However, for the health centre IV you need 49 staff. Therefore, you cannot simply say let us upgrade. You must ensure that there is enough money to pay these health workers who will be working in this health centre IV. Lack of funding is the reason why some of the districts have fewer staff compared to others. This is all because of the challenge of funding.

I would like to assure you that at some point, we shall bring you a comprehensive statement of the health centres III, IV and general hospitals that we are going to start with by district. Emphasis will be on those where there is totally no service, the hard-to-reach districts like the islands and mountainous areas.

I have explained the issue of hard-to-reach areas within my means. This is a matter for Ministry of Public Service, because we have interfaced with them on this matter, especially when we travel and find challenges like people complaining of being in hard-to-reach areas. 

As I said, if one is within a town council, be it mountainous or otherwise, it is sometimes not considered as a hard-to-reach area.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But what do you do in the interim period when people are actually dying in Buhweju and other places where they do not have these facilities?

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, allow me to state that the issue of staffing is the responsibility of the districts. We are operating under a decentralised system. 

The districts have the district service commission that employ health workers. They do advertise and recruit them. For us at the centre, we take responsibility for the regional referral hospitals and the national referral hospital.

For the hospitals within the district and the health centres III and IV, the first call should be on the district because you sometimes find that they are negligent and do not do their work. We shall make a follow up to find out whether Buhweju has staffing levels at 31 per cent with a view of seeking to help you address it. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Yes, honourable minister.

2.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add onto what the minister has said. The question that was raised as to when we are going to upgrade the health centres II into III – colleagues, you will realise that our ministry tabled a loan request to borrow from the World Bank towards improving maternal health. 

When we talk about maternal health, we mean maternal health at a lower facility like health centres III and IV. Part of that money is meant to upgrade some of the health facilities from health centres II to III in a phased manner.

With that addition I have brought, I am happy that when the loan request was tabled, Members really supported it. We are happy that some of that money will be used to improve maternal and new born health at lower facilities. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Please, let us stop here now. This was not on the Order Paper.

Honourable members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of third year Administrative Law students from Kyambogo University, who have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have Buhweju District Speaker, Deputy Speaker and sub-county speakers. No wonder the honourable members have – (Laughter). They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

2.37
MS JULIET SUUBI (NRM, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. I am a member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs and last week, we met with our mission in Addis Ababa. From the meeting, we got to know that we have a candidate, Dr Warren Namara, who has been nominated for a position of Commissioner, Department of Social Affairs at the African Union.

The biggest challenge that the mission shared with us is that there is no budget for the campaigns. We badly need this position because we lost the opportunity for Dr Specioza Kazibwe to head the AU. 

The African Social Welfare is the only position that we have as Uganda and unfortunately, there is no budget for Uganda but other candidates are campaigning.

My prayer is that we need this position. I propose that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs comes up with a budget to make sure that we campaign in time and recover our money by taking that position.

Honourable members, you are all aware that –(Interjections)- information is welcome.

MR KATUSABE: Mr Speaker, you are aware that I am the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs. (Laughter) I rise to pledge my total support. (Applause) We need that position as a country at the African Union because, literally, every country on the continent is well represented. It will be extremely unfortunate if we do not seize that opportunity, especially that we lost out on the big position. We cannot afford to lose out on this one as well. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you rose on information. (Laughter)

MR KATUSABE: The information, lastly, you know I am the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs and as a policy expert, the policy path right from the definition to the application and utilisation – we need our own so that we are effectively and efficiently represented on the African Union high table. That is the information. Thank you.  

MS KAROORO OKURUT: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Member for Bukonjo West County, hon. Godfrey Katusabe. He has risen above petty political considerations. (Applause) This is what it means to be a patriot. 

I wish everybody here, especially those on the other side could emulate him. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUITY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I am going to firmly enforce the rule on information because it is now becoming a matter of opinion. (Laughter)

Members rise on information and they debate. Please, information is information. If you rise to give information, then give the information. But the minute you start using words like “because” and “if”, then you are already debating. Honourable, please, wind up.

MS SUUBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was praying that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs comes up with a budget so that we support our campaign in a timely manner to enable us take up this information. I thank you.

MS AOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the honourable to clarify the criteria used for bringing on board that candidate so that we are also comfortable to support, that proposal of financial appropriation. And also clarify on our failed candidate; where did she get the funding for her campaign? I believe she campaigned, where did she get the funds? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members – 

MR OKIN: I am also seeking clarification, Mr Speaker. This is a simple clarification I want to seek from the honourable member: is that a Government position or it is an individual position, because if you are seeking funding from Government on an individual position, then it does not add up.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Member who has raised the issue has stated that she is a member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs and that she was in Addis Ababa last week and she discovered that the candidate that has been nominated is not campaigning, while the others were campaigning there. So, there might be need for this House to think about finding money to facilitate the candidate to campaign. As to who nominated her, that was not her business; her business is that there is a candidate that needs to be supported. Please, wind up.

MS SUUBI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Finally, like the shadow minister said, we should love our country before we think about any other thing. We badly need this position and I pray that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs brings a budget so that we can start campaigns in time to win this position.  Thank you very much. 

2.44
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (MS Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank hon. Kyinyamatama, Member of Parliament for Rakai, for having raised this important and urgent matter. 

I have been interacting with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and I want to allay her fears. I know that some work is being done, which I cannot divulge at this point because I know you all know what happens when we are campaigning. I know that my President is reaching out to his counterparts. I know that hon. Sam Kutesa is reaching out to his counterparts and I know that there were meetings in Marrakesh where we were, organised by ambassador Ssebunya where the matter was raised to find out how we can reach out. 

This does not mean that I will not approach the minister in charge again to make sure that the required logistics are in place. I thank the Member for raising this matter. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Next item. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE PROPOSAL TO HIRE POSTGRADUATE MEDICAL STUDENTS FROM MAKERERE COLLEGE OF HEALTH SCIENCES TO FILL THE STAFFING GAPS IN MULAGO HOSPITAL

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, do you have this statement on your iPads or hard copies? Okay, proceed honourable minister.

2.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This statement, I guess has been uploaded on the iPads and it is on the proposal to hire postgraduate medical students from Makerere College of Health Sciences to fill the staffing gaps in Mulago Hospital. 

There have been different reports from different leaders alleging that Mulago Hospital loses 15 new-born babies everyday as a result of the absence of the senior house officers and demand for them to be paid if they are to resume service. 

Mr Speaker, we need to understand who the senior house officers are. Senior house officers are postgraduate students majoring in various fields in medicine. The courses undertaken are for three years: a Master’s Degree in Medicine is theory and practical and a practical training is on the ward. 

The senior house officers work and train under the supervision of the senior consultants and the professors in their field of speciality. Majority of the postgraduate students are those working already either in Government or in the private sector and some are not employed at all. 

The norm was that the medical officers are supposed to work for two years after graduation and then undertake the postgraduate training. 

On admission, the postgraduate student indicates who their sponsors are for the entire three year course. The Makerere College of Health Sciences after admission of the students informs the management of Mulago National Referral Hospital about the admissions indicating the numbers. 

The students that apply for the postgraduate training at Mbarara University of Science and Technology are admitted for training at the Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital, and those who apply at the Makerere College of Health Sciences are deployed at Mulago National Referral Hospital. 

The postgraduate students employed by Government take study leave and they earn their full pay while on study leave. Some are sponsored by Government under Mulago KCCA/ADBA Project; Others have been sponsored by the Ministry of Health over the years. 

Those admitted are accommodated by Mulago Hospital at the Doctors’ Village while others live in rented premises paid for by the Ministry of Health. They are also provided with meals while on duty. 

As at 1st November 2016, when Makerere University was closed, Mulago National Referral Hospital had 350 postgraduate students training in different specialities. 

There have been several statements made in the media by different people, as I indicated before, regarding the death of children. The Ministry of Health would like to strongly refute these allegations as baseless and a total misrepresentation of facts. 

In the same vein, we would like to put the record straight as follows: following the closure of Makerere University and the subsequent withdrawal of the senior house officers who are postgraduate students, the hospital administration has since re-arranged the workforce at the facility with special focus on the critical areas like special care-unit and the labour suite.  

Since the withdrawal of the senior house officers on 1st November to date, Mulago has unfortunately lost 31 new-born babies and you can note that the month of November is almost coming to an end. So, it is not 15 babies dying per day as alleged. 

These deaths were majorly as a result of severe birth asphyxia, whereby the babies fail to get oxygen while in the womb, and complications associated with pre-maturity. 

The severe asphyxia is largely caused by prolonged labour which is a consequence of late referral. According to the statistics, Mulago has lost approximately one new-born baby per day and this is due to unavoidable circumstances. 

It should be noted, that Kawempe Hospital only handles expectant mothers and new-born babies and babies below one month. Children above one month who are sick are managed by the upper Mulago Paediatrics Directorate. 

There were 64 senior house officers in Kawempe and 56 senior house officers in the upper Mulago in Paediatrics. These postgraduate students were training under the supervision of the specialists employed and deployed in Mulago National Referral Hospital. Therefore, it is not that all the 350 were actually at Kawempe and Upper Mulago. 

As far as duty coverage is concerned, currently 34 specialists and five medical officers are managing the labour suite while four specialists are attending to the special care unit. These are backed up by the 76 midwives in the labour suite and 20 nurse/midwives in the special care unit and 21 intern doctors that were recently deployed.

Therefore, whereas the withdrawal of the senior house officers has created some gaps with a longer patient waiting time in the outpatient department, the process of healthcare delivery has not been significantly affected. On a positive note, the specialists are now more available at the hospital to attend to the patients.

In the early years, all qualified medical doctors were employed by Government; once you qualified, you were immediately employed. However, following the introduction of the private scheme at Makerere University, more students are now enrolling to undertake medical courses and when they complete, they immediately – because they have their money – apply to do the masters programmes. The number has since increased and it is not possible for Government to employ all of them.

The senior house officers employed by Government continue, as I said earlier, to earn their salary and only get accommodation and meals at the hospital.

Therefore, the ministry wishes to inform this House that the senior house officers who are postgraduate students are students training to be specialists in different fields. What they do in the hospital is what Members term as “work” but it is training under the supervision of specialists employed by the Government of Uganda. 

The ministry would, therefore, like to request the House to disregard the rumour that children are dying as a result of the absence of the senior house officers and there is no crisis at the country’s national referral hospital, as we speak. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think the issue was that there was a proposal to hire postgraduate medical students from Makerere College of Health Sciences to fill the staffing gaps in Mulago Hospital. What is your response to that because the statement covers the condition of Mulago without dealing with the subject?

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, I think this proposal was as a result of that statement made by various people that we were losing 15 children per day and, therefore, Government should consider hiring these health officers. However, we are saying that even with the absence of the senior house officers – whereas there may be a gap, it is not something that we can do now because there is no crisis at the hospital to warrant the hiring of these senior house officers as stated by some members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So can you now state for the record what your response to the proposal is?

MS OPENDI: Our response to the proposal, Mr Speaker, is that we are not in a crisis and we are managing the situation. As of now, there is no need for Government to hire these senior house officers - (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, our rules are known here in Parliament; that the Business Committee sits to agree on the order of business in the House for the week, the following week and the following month. 

Mr Speaker, this very narration is very clear here in the House, which you chair. The proposal is for them to hire staff to fill the staffing gaps but the honourable minister – it is even clearly stated here as one who should be presenting this statement. Is it, therefore, fair and in the interest of Ugandans for the health minister not to tell what the situation was before the senior house officers were stopped, following the closure of the university?

Where is the authenticity of the information that you are giving us to the effect that it is only one baby that is dying per day? -(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, a point of order from a Leader of Opposition is quite different because it has to –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, a point of order is according to the rules.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, the point of order that I would like to raise is this: Is the honourable minister in order to lie to this House and bias this House to believe that the situation in Mulago is okay yet it is not?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you asked if it is in order for the minister to lie. Now, I need you to prove to me that she has lied so that I can rule.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, when a patient dies in a hospital, there is a death certificate that is given; can the minister lay on the Table the information that she is giving us here?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the word you used of “lying” is one of those words that parliamentarians try to avoid, courtesy of the rules. You have used it and yet you have not substantiated it; withdraw it. You have said that the minister has lied and you have not justified it. Just kindly withdraw and we shall proceed with business.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, I have contacts in Mulago – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the usage of the word “lying” is what I am addressing.

MR NZOGHU: I can honourably withdraw if the minister lays on the Table –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I consider that a withdrawal. Honourable members, let us use words that give courtesy to each other, please. That is the rule. The whole rule of parliamentary practice and procedure is courtesy to Members of the House; that is the basis. So, you do not use those words because they are not helpful.

Honourable members, that is the response. Can I have the Chairperson of the Committee on Health say something and then we see what to do next.

3.01
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Michael Bukenya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am going to speak, first as a doctor, then as a politician and I will also ask the Government Chief Whip to forgive me because I am going to speak against what the minister has said. 

First, I stated on the Floor of this House that between eight and 15 children are dying in Kawempe because of delayed action – that is what she called asphyxia. Some are born dead and others die in the neonatal unit within the first 24 hours of birth. 

What is happening in Mulago? At Kawempe Hospital, which is a maternity hospital, they are running only emergency services. If you went for a planned operation, they will tell you to go back home. Imagine a situation where you have 100 postgraduate doctors - I will not count the intern doctors - and you withdraw 64 out of the 100 because Mulago Hospital has 30 specialists. These doctors are being assisted by the few specialists from Makerere University, so they are only running emergency services. 

I will tell you about the role of the Senior House Officers (SHOS); these are midlevel managers and doctors, who have been working, for example, in Kiboga and Kasese. They are fresh from acquiring their Master’s degree. When they come, they have several responsibilities. They have academic duties, they run outpatient clinics, carryout ward rounds, night calls, lifesaving surgical operations and they also teach and mentor interns. 

Those in the army can relate to that issue because you cannot work with only the Gen. Katumbas without the sergeants, corporals or recruits. The midlevel managers are missing so there is no one to command the sections, the companies and the brigades. Therefore, I do not know what the minister is talking about. 

In other countries, the midlevel doctors are given call allowance, health insurance, transport and housing but this is not the case in Uganda. In the hospitals of Mulago, Kiruddu, Kawempe and Naguru, they can only accommodate 80 doctors; so the others rent in slums. Some come from as far as Gulu and others have families elsewhere, and so. they cannot get time to go and work somewhere else.

The minister said that the majority are sponsored by the Government. I challenge her to produce the certificates here. I know out of the 330, less than 30 are Government sponsored while others are privately sponsored students. This issue was not a big deal in Mulago Hospital because previously, postgraduate doctors were allowed to do their Masters degrees without paying school fees. 

These doctors work during the semesters, holidays, public holidays and they have no leave. It is, therefore, embarrassing to see Ugandans suffering. There are no planned surgeries in the hospitals, only emergencies and there is no one to mentor these interns. It is embarrassing for the minister in charge of the sector to come here and dismiss the matter in any manner. 

The proposal we had with the Speaker here was to get a short term measure to stop this because when Makerere University was closed on the 1st, it was later realised that there was dire need to have these doctors get back to work. The Minister of Education and Sports wrote to the College of Health Sciences and instructed them to reopen only the postgraduate school. In her statement, she stated that it was due to the human resource requirement. These doctors actually refused to get back to work claiming that they are not labourers. 

They also said that on 13th June, during a dinner organised by the Uganda Medical Association, His Excellency the President instructed the Minister of Health to work with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to stop this modern day slavery. That was an instruction and I am surprised they are still defiant even up to today.

The minister has talked about doctors being sponsored by KCCA and the Ministry of Health. She claims that they are earning a salary but this is not true because the numbers in that category are less than 30 out of the 300. 

Back to the statistics, I have a copy of the statistics; on 6th November, 10 children died of asphyxia in the labour ward because of shortage of man power and delayed action. You cannot, therefore, allow Ugandans to continue with this situation when they only require Shs 2 billion. 

The university is going to be closed for an indefinite period. The hospital is already running emergency services only. I, on the other hand, have been doing research. In the department of surgery, only one elective procedure has been done in the last three weeks since they closed the university. They only do emergencies. If you came with a tumour in the breast, they will tell you to first go back home as they handle one whose intestines cannot function anymore. This is totally unacceptable on the Floor of this House. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit but I am uncomfortable with what is going on. I was privileged to oversee the sector and I cannot keep quiet when things are not okay. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me give this information and then you can proceed with the motion. The Minister of State for Education and Sports, hon. Muyingo, came to my office just before I came here. He said he would not be here because the President had called a meeting over this issue and right now, they are meeting in Nakasero. He said that the statement should have waited for that meeting so that they could give it a comprehensive outlook, when they came back. That is why the initial proposal of Tuesday would have satisfied Members on the statement that would have come. However, yesterday, the minister said she was ready with the statement and we accepted that it could be made. 

Honourable members, can we have a more exhaustive discussion on this matter on Tuesday? By that time, this particular statement will have also been harmonised with the one coming from the Minister of Education and Sports, because the President has made some directives on this matter. This will enable us have a more comprehensive report, including this one. Thereafter, we will see how to proceed with the debate on Tuesday. Will that be proper? 

MR TIMUZIGU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have listened to your guidance. The meeting in Nakasero seems to be a positive way forward as far as the statement is concerned. 

The heading reads, “A proposal by Government to hire Senior House Officers.” The minister’s statement on the other hand is the opposite of the heading of the statement. We may have hoped that parts of the resolutions of that meeting were aimed at hiring these senior officers but the minister said they do not need the officers. 

Would it be procedurally right for us to wait for the output of that meeting, which may not contribute to the statement the minister has presented? Thank you. 

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank colleagues who have showed justified enthusiasm to make sure that Ugandans do not suffer in this period, when we are faced with the problem of the closure of Makerere University – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it is not enthusiasm, it is concern. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I have been irrigated by the Speaker’s knowledge. Mr Speaker, I would like to appeal to colleagues to accept your guidance because the meeting which is taking place right now in Nakasero is a high profile one. You cannot refer to a minister’s submission as final and claim that that meeting may not even do a thing. The meeting is chaired by the senior Minister of Health, who is the President because he is the minister of all the ministries. We are just helping him. 

I, therefore, would like to request – 

MR CENTENARY: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it in order for us to debate a serious matter in speculation of the outcome of a meeting, to which we are not even part?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This House can never and should never be caught even thinking about carrying out debate in anticipation. That one is prohibited by the rules. However, what is happening now is slightly different and the reason is this; this matter came from the House and the question was framed by the House and there has been a response by Government.

I told you that the Minister of State for Education came to the office to say that they will not be in the House; if a matter is affecting education, they will not be able to answer because they are in a meeting with the Ministry of Health and other people to try and deal with this matter. It is information that is within the knowledge of the House now, that, that meeting is taking place and is in relation with the concern that the House had raised. It is, therefore, not in anticipation.
 
That is why I am saying that let us not debate without having all the information. Let us debate when we have all the information and then we can debate properly. Otherwise, if we start now, we will spend time on it and then on Tuesday, when there is another report and we start from where we left, it will be improper use of parliamentary time.

MR ATIKU: I take your guidance in good faith -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have no choice.

MR ATIKU: I would like to plead with the minister to tone down. The issues that we are talking about concern life. People have died ever since Makerere was closed; so, when we are talking here, people are watching us out there. They expect this House to provide solutions and we expect nothing but the truth and workable solutions.

Mr Speaker, I would like to appeal to the House that we will be rightly here waiting for the outcome of the Nakasero meeting, with results that will give hope to this country. The national referral hospital, which is now operating at 40 per cent capacity, in terms of human resource - that is terms of doctors – we have had over 350 senior house officers. These are the doctors who were doing masters degrees, who are now not there. 

What do you expect if a national referral hospital that has been operating with support of 350 doctors does not have them now? People have lost lives. Mr Speaker, in light of this and the information given by the Chairperson of the Committee on Health, I would like to appeal to the minister to withdraw the shallow statement she has given here, which is very contradictory and shaming to this House, until the outcome of the other meeting in Nakasero is with us. We will then contribute and have clear records that give hope to the nation. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you see, the situation has arisen this way; because Makerere is closed, a category of students who were supporting the hospital have been withdrawn. This is the automatic result of the occurrence. That is why a proposal is coming that a separate process of hiring be conducted to bring back those ones into the system.

However, the debate that is going on, if it has to do with what is happening in Makerere, means that those ones now will have to come under a separate arrangement rather than hiring. The solution is also in the meeting. That is why I said that it might be better for us not to start a debate on this statement now. We could wait for both statements and then we can have a debate. That is my proposal. However, the minister was on the Floor before these matters came up. Honourable minister, let us wait and then you can sum up.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, we agree with you but I only would like to make an appeal to the ministers. It is this pulling and pushing that is causing us problems. All these contradictions we are seeing are between the ministries. I do not want to say what I know about what is happening but my appeal goes to the Prime Minister to help. We failed to have a statement yesterday because of what was happening between the ministries. Therefore, my humble appeal is that, please take it back so that you are able to come up with a harmonised position.

It shows a degree of disorganisation if you come here with contradictory statements. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, take charge such that when you come back tomorrow or next week, all issues should be harmonised. Let me stop at that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what matter do you rise, honourable member? 

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, when I rose to give my perspective, I had actually keenly listened to the minister and I saw glaring contradictions in her response as she presented her statement. Her response and statement were misleading, not only to this Parliament but the whole country because we have access to Mulago Hospital on a daily basis. She was misleading this House. 

Would it be procedurally right for the minister to simply walk away –(Laughter)- with a misleading statement that she has just presented on the Floor without necessarily withdrawing it so that we can follow the guidance that you gave, that they bring a realistic statement. Mr Speaker, would it be procedurally right for her to just walk away having given to us a misleading statement?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the honourable Member for Busongora North is still not comfortable. You see, when you are in Parliament and you are speaking, the words you avoid to use, you substitute them. They mean the same thing but they sound polite. For example, instead of saying “lie”, you can say, “factual inexactitudes” (Laughter) or you can say, “misleading”, like you have used now. You could also say, “incorrect”. However, the minute you use the word “lie”, that is an imputation. Some words are very dangerous in this kind of setting and that is how you fell into this trap; people listening to you think that you are just annoyed because of other things. 

However, I think that the point is made. In the spirit of us moving forward with this matter properly, honourable minister, you need to help us so that we can move forward and get these things done please.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We all feel sorry when children die and we are all concerned. However, I would like to state that the current staffing structure of Mulago National Referral Hospital is a structure that was approved by Public Service in 1999. We have just had a new structure approved by the Ministry of Public Service and we are in the process - Mr Speaker, in October, there was an advertisement for various regional referral hospitals including the national referral hospital to increase the staffing.

However, most importantly, I just wanted to give Members statistics. Note that currently, the approved staffing structure as at 1999 was 2,000 -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, that can come on Tuesday.

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, let me leave the statistics but allow me inform Members that this statement is not by the Ministry of Health alone. We had consultations and of course I am giving this information because I am aware of another meeting, which is taking place right now, and there are various things there. Allow us to come up with a more comprehensive statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us handle it this way. We have come this far, let us go and deal with these other matters. I think up to now we have proceeded well. Let us now leave it here and then we move to the next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.24
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The statement is ready and I think the Members have it. However, I received a call from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs telling me that hon. Henry Oryem, who is holding the portfolio, is indisposed. He cannot come and give the statement and the two ministers are not available. I am sorry that we cannot receive the statement today. I hope that on Tuesday, another minister will have come back. He is alone and he cannot come to make the statement.

MS NAGGAYI: Mr Speaker, I want the Government Chief Whip to clarify. She is mentioning only the state minister and not the senior minister. They are three; if one of them is not available, one of the others should be available. The Chief Whip should maybe inform us why the other line ministers cannot be available.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, we are talking about the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. If you listened clearly, I stated that the two ministers are out of the country and hon. Henry Oryem, who remained holding the portfolio, is indisposed. He has a cough so he cannot speak. I received this information today. We cannot arrange to delegate any other minister to come and read the statement.

I know that the statement will raise queries and I am not in position to answer for the ministers of Foreign Affairs. I am, therefore, requesting for only Tuesday so that we can make this statement -(Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am at pain to bring this point of procedure. Rightly so, the Government Chief Whip has clearly said that the ministers in charge of that docket are all not available. However, the Leader of Government Business in this House is available. Business should not be bogged down, because even the statement is available. 

Therefore, there are three principles; he can delegate on behalf of the entire Cabinet for this statement to be presented so that we can proceed –(Interjections)- do not bog down every single word; I am not saying that he should be the one to rise up. Therefore, Mr Speaker, with the presence of the Leader of Government Business and the number of honourable colleagues on the Front Bench, we procedurally seek your indulgence to see that the statement that is before us is presented and debated. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know, there are people responsible for sectors and there are sectors where peculiar kinds of things happen. For example, if the Chief Whip is to present the statement and then she is asked about the outcome of the meeting of 22 August 2016 in Nairobi by the minister and John Kerry, what will she say about it?

Those are the challenges that we have because when things are sector-specific, you cannot expect - unless you do not want to debate but you want somebody to read and then you keep quiet about it?

We want ministers’ statements to be debated in the presence of the person who authored the report so that they can defend and give clarification on issues that may not be there. Can we, therefore, leave this matter there please? We still have other business.

MR ARIKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On certain occasions, the Chief Whip has been able to read statements on the Floor of this House on behalf of ministers that are absent. As a matter of procedure, does it mean that we are setting a precedent today that next time the Chief Whip will not be able to stand in for a minister on the Floor to read a statement when such a minister is not in the House? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think it is about briefing. If a particular person is sufficiently briefed on a subject, they can handle it.

MR AOGON: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I know in our Rules of Procedure, it is well stipulated. If you are not going to be in the House, at least let the Speaker be aware of that and you can delegate somebody to represent you.

However, we understand - I can read from the faces of the ministers present. I think none of them was well prepared for that aspect. Therefore, for now, I beg Members that we go for any other business and first set that aside so that we can be in position to handle things. We are in one House though we might be in different colours. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now with that counsel from Kumi Municipality, can we move on with other matters?

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the same note, I would like to inform this House that the Committee on Foreign Affairs has prepared a report on its findings during the recent tours. We are ready to present it next week on Thursday -(Interjections)- I said I wanted to inform the House and plead with you to be patient for the minister to come but at the same time, we also have a report, which we shall present to the House next week on Thursday. Thank you.

3.32 
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora North County, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. At the start of this Tenth Parliament, the President of our country, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, increased the number of ministerial positions and also the number of ministers. At that time, the Chief Whip and the Leader of Government Business argued that the big number of ministers and portfolios would increase efficiency and effectiveness. His Excellency was very careful, to the extent that he appointed a minister for general duties, Al Hajji Nadduli.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it without portfolio or general duties? 

MR NZOGHU: General duties. Mr Speaker, the Front Bench cannot, therefore, complain that they have run out of manpower. I would like to put it clearly on record that we are using taxpayers’ money and we must account for it. Once business has been put on the Order Paper, it must be respected. If we postpone this matter, it will be eating into the agenda for next week, which will therefore be pushed to the following week, and the backlog will be too much.

In the interest of this country, the Government Chief Whip should tight-mark her team, and also the Prime Minister and Gen. Moses Ali should become more vigilant in making sure that the ministers deliver. Mr Speaker, it is important that you rule in such a way that we do not lose time as Parliament and that the Front Bench does its work. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. This House cannot debate in vain; it will be improper use of our time. The time we have used trying to see what we should do with this report has not been a proper use of parliamentary time because we have other business on the Order Paper. If we are not able to proceed with this item, we will go to the next one and then we deal with the issue of why, probably at another time.

For now, we have other statements that are pending. We can deal with them while we try to find out whether the minister is sick or why he is not here. Let us proceed to the business that is available.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Mary Kitutu): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, on Wednesday, 16 November 2016 during the plenary sitting, hon. Muyanja Johnson Ssenyonga raised a matter of national importance concerning the partitioning of Lake Victoria between local and foreign investors. He said that this has denied the community access to fish from the same lake. 

It is true that cage fish farming is being undertaken in Lake Victoria and indeed in other water bodies in the country by various developers, both local and foreign. However, these are just users and not owners of the lakes as it is sometimes reported in the media. These developers have been permitted to use the lake for specified periods and the permits can be withdrawn if the conditions set for cage fish farming are not adhered to. 

The authorisation to use the lake for cage fish farming, however, needs to be streamlined between Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the Ministry of Water and Environment which is mine, and the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), which is also under our ministry. 

Cage farming is a new activity. The capacity in the country as well as institutional arrangements for undertaking it are still being developed. Ministry of Water and Environment, as the custodian of all the water bodies in Uganda, is responsible for issuing permits for use of the water in cages and controlling pollution from cages. The National Environmental Management Authority issues environmental impact assessment certificates while Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries permits the setting up of cages. 

While each of these organisations have specific roles to play in cage fish farming, often times cages are set up in the lake after only getting authorisation from the Ministry of Agriculture and before getting authorisation from both Ministry of Water and Environment and NEMA. There is, therefore, a need for coordinated authorisation to ensure that cages are set up in locations where they will not interfere with activities of the local communities, and far from other water using activities on the lake such as water supplies. This will also ensure that there is no serious impact on the quality of water in the lake but also conflicts among other various lake users including local fishermen. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a modification of our rules. This should have been under what we call “questions for oral answer”, but because that avenue has been closed by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and his team, now we resort to what is not procedurally right, but it is the best option we have.

You raised this issue as a matter of urgent public importance so that you get answers like now. Ordinarily, it should have been a question for oral answer properly drafted and submitted to the Clerk’s Office, forwarded to the minister and then the minister would come and respond the way she has done. However, we had to extract it by some other mechanism because the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Government Chief Whip and the team from Cabinet have not assisted us in this area. However, it has been received anyway. Thank you, honourable minister, for this. 

Can we have short a response on this? Are you the one who raised the matter, hon. Muyanja? Raise your supplementary question briefly and then we can expand it. 

3.40
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono South County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the quick response, which answers half of what I demanded for here on the Floor of Parliament. 

My question was inclusive of the invaders from one of the neighbouring countries, who are using bad fishing methods and have encroached as far as Katosi. Those good neighbours are from Rwanda. She has not mentioned anything about them.

Secondly, I emphasised the issue of what happened during elections. There is no order on the lake since we went for elections. I do not know whether there is anybody concerned. We have a very serious concern and many of our people are still suffering. 

She also said there is need for coordination. Indeed, there is total disorder on the lake. Our concern is: when will the coordination start? In the Committee of National Economy, we were told that we were collecting over US$ 150 million a year, now we are getting less than US$ 50 million. We are lamenting about the poor performance of the economy. That is our concern. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. We should remember that this is not a debate but points of clarification. 

3.42
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Mr Speaker, I think there is also need for the minister to give us the list and the names of the firms that have been licensed to operate on this lake. I am saying so because of the concern the honourable member raises about the invaders. Therefore, can the minister provide the list of those firms and their number?

Secondly, why would we license or issue permits before streamlining the guidelines on how to operate on the lake? Like you have said, there is need to streamline; if that is the case, can we halt the operations until these guidelines are brought into place? Thank you.

3.42
MR JOSHUA  ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Part of what I was going to raise is what hon. Okupa has raised. There is policy trial and error in Uganda. We first try and when we fail, we think we can make corrections inside there. 

The caging technology or technique is not a new thing but its application in Uganda is new. Therefore, there should have been benchmarking in our interactions with countries where they tried it. That is where we go wrong. In addition, if we a see clash in authorisation, whether it is the Ministry of Water and Environment or the Ministry of Agriculture or NEMA, it tells us that we were not prepared to take on this kind of venture.

Mr Speaker, in Nebbi, there are children who have grown up and have not tasted the most treasured fish – angara – for the last 10 years. Why? It is because of the same issue of caging on Lake Albert, where people claim they own portions of the lake. Therefore, it is not only on Lake Victoria; it is almost everywhere. 

We made a lot of noise the other time about the need to bring a comprehensive report on the status of the lakes. I would like to thank the minister for this quick response. It is unprecedented that a response comes in writing from a minister answering a matter of national importance. That is a good job. However, we may need a real status-of-the-lakes report in Uganda so that we know if we still own anything –(Interruption)

MR MULINDWA: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. I thank the honourable minister for responding very fast. The issue of Rwandese coming to Mukono area reminds us to demarcate the boundaries very well. We need to know our boundaries on the lake. That is the other issue I wanted to mention.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, in summary, I would pray that your unfettered power should prevail to ask the minister to follow up on what was requested – a comprehensive report on the status of the lakes. 

You remember when Dr Kizza Besigye raised an issue of Lake Kyoga being sold out, it became a political hotcake. The trend we are taking, however, seems to raise a lot of suspicion. To do away with that suspicion, Government should come clean on this matter. Thank you.

3.45
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is a cross-cutting appeal to the ministry, especially when we are dealing with people who have thousands of years of experience and we are inviting them to Uganda. I am very worried. 

I went to Masese with the Committee on Tourism and saw cage fish farming there. The locals no longer carry out fishing and it is very worrying. The Chinese have gone to every sector and for them they eat everything. (Laughter)  

We need to be clear on what our resources are. It is very absurd because they are the ones in Masese. When you go to fisheries in Kajjansi, they took over. What happened? How much investment are they providing in the fishing sector?

Mr Speaker, some of these questions of national importance help us to bring out the concerns of the citizens. Without protection from powerful countries and multinationals, Ugandans will not survive in any sector. That is in the fisheries sector, but in the trade sector it is worse. Therefore, it is a matter of concern to all of us that you are allowing us to be economically invaded in our country.

3.47
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Mr Speaker, the honourable minister has rightly said that cage fish farming is a new activity. She has gone ahead to tell us that the capacity to undertake it is being developed nationally. I was also glad to learn that NEMA gives permits and probably the Ministry of Water and Environment. However, in Lake Kyoga, the fishermen now own suds – floating islands. They protect these suds as their personal fishing grounds. Any attempt to invade any sud would cost you a life.

Mr Speaker, the other day I was speaking on the Floor of this House, telling you about 10 people who have so far lost their lives because a new technique of fishing has also been introduced. You have a sud, you get decomposing bodies and put them under the sud and use them to attract fish in big quantities. This is the new method on Lake Kyoga. 

I would like to know from the minister whether my people are also practising cage fishing in that way or this is a different method of fishing. What is the ministry doing about it?

3.49
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek two quick clarifications from the honourable minister. 

The first one is whether these cage fish farmers are given special fingerlings so that they raise different types of fish in the cages, which would then add value to the cage fish farming. If they are going to raise the same kind of fish which is within the lake, other than accessing the fish easily it might be difficult to explain to the population that these are special farmers who are taming the fish for themselves.

The second clarification is in regard to the question that was asked. The worry was that the advent of cage fish farmers partitioning the lakes for themselves is angering the local people because the local people do not seem to have access to the lake. When you portion the lake to individual people and others do not get, it becomes a cause of anger. 

I thought the minister would talk about how they are managing the relationship between the cage fish farmers and other fishermen who are not involved in cage fish farming but are fishing. This is because it means the local fishermen have to go deeper into the lake to access non-caged areas. I did not see any attempt to harmonise this relationship and that seems to be the foundation for the question by our colleague.

3.51
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto South County, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister in charge of water for her good report on cage fish farming. 

Fish farming in Uganda is a source of income and at the same time a source of jobs to our indigenous people. However, today as we introduce fish farming, our indigenous investors are not yet ready to take over the fish farming business. Before we liberalise cage fish farming, we should sensitise our local fishermen about fish farming. Otherwise, if we just open it up, our local people will lose out completely and yet some foreigners are ready to take our fresh fish at any cost.

Therefore, I would like to urge the ministry concerned to first sensitise the local people on how to do cage fish farming. Otherwise, we shall lose a lot of opportunities in terms of jobs and money. I beg to submit.

3.53
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank Members for their contribution and concerns about our lakes. I would like to say that this subject is a bit wide. 

I agree with the honourable member who requested for an extensive report from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. The Minister of Water and Environment owns the water; NEMA does some work on the environment; but the biggest chunk of cage fish farming is for the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. I request that you allow me to go back and make a statement on cage fish farming not only on Lake Victoria but on all the lakes so that people know the situation that is pertaining. 

Mr Speaker, fish farming is something that Government is ready to invest in. Government encourages its people to get into it because the population is increasing and yet the lakes remain the same size and everybody has invaded the lakes. That is why you hear about this illegal fish farming that is going on in our lakes. The only alternative is to go into fish farming upstream using cages.  

Mr Speaker, if you accept, I request that we come back and make a substantive statement on this. These other questions of Chinese eating everything cannot be answered by the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So we might have to call them here?

3.55
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to remind hon. Ssempijja that when you are bringing that report, make sure that you bring the list of the firms that are doing cage fish farming on Lake Victoria and other lakes. That came out very vividly.

Secondly, I would like to inform this House that we have a policy on aquaculture. A Member raised it here and said that we started cage fish farming without a policy. We have an aquaculture policy and we also have Statutory Instrument No.33, which gives further guidance on areas where to establish cages, protection of breeding grounds, where boats and ships pass; all of this is found in the statutory instrument –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: I would like to find out from you something about that policy on aquaculture. Aquaculture is general; do you have something on pisciculture and mariculture? These are all under fish farming. Does this policy cover all the three, because cage fish farming falls under pisciculture?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: “Aqua” means water. If you are farming in water, it is aquaculture. We are talking about cages which are deep in our waters. Someone said that we started this technique without a policy and I have mentioned the major policy called the aquaculture policy, which guides fish farming in cages in Lake Victoria. 

The minister in charge is here. May I request him to give us copies of this aquaculture policy so that Members can go through it? If you find gaps, we are free to amend. We can amend policies. We make policies to serve the people and take services to the people in the most appropriate manner.

I would like to talk about the demarcation of borders in water. This is being handled by Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation where Uganda is a member. We have been discussing the placing of boundaries in the waters but the problem is that these boundary markers are being vandalised by the fishermen. They do not want to respect borders. Therefore, Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, you have to include this in your report.

Mr Speaker, hon. Anthony Okello talked about suds and I will end with this so that the Minister of Water and Environment can clarify. I want this august House to understand the challenges of maintaining our waters. People staying on suds in his constituency and northern Uganda have been there for years. 

The former Minister of Internal Affairs and I worked together when I was in charge of fisheries. We launched an operation to remove them from the suds but politics came in at that time. We were going for campaigns and they started crying everywhere and Members protected them because they needed votes. The President listened to their cries and that is why he put a ban on enforcement. As I speak, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has already written to the President requesting him to lift the ban so that we can do enforcement again and protect the lives of the people who are staying on suds, because they die every day, and also save our fish. 

Again, as we talk, we have fish hunters and fish farmers. The fish hunters have depleted almost all the fish in the waters because they are using mosquito nets and other illegal nets. I thought I should not sit and keep quite with this information especially since I served as a minister in charge of fisheries. Thank you for giving me this opportunity. 

4.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Mary Kitutu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I must thank colleagues for the information and the guidance given to us as a ministry. As the minister, I promise that where there is need for enforcement, we are going to step up and we are going to use your information to correct whatever is not going right. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I think there is that undertaking from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Honourable Minister of Agriculture, you have made this commitment to brief the House on the state of the waters as it relates to this issue of fisheries and things like that. What timeframe are you giving us because that has been asked for a while now? 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, first of all, I accept the instructions from the Government Chief Whip and promise to bring this report in ten days. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Even if it falls on a weekend? (Laughter)

MR SSEMPIJJA: It excludes weekends. Ten working days.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You should come here with the statement on Tuesday, 6 December 2016. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON WATER WEED ON LAKE KYOGA

4.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Mary Kitutu): Mr Speaker, on Wednesday, 5 October 2016 during the Prime Minister’s Question Time, hon. Anthony Okello, Member of Parliament of Kioga County, asked what interventions Government has put in place to address the issue of the strange water weed on Lake Kyoga. The response from the ministry is as follows: 

Water weed on lakes are as a result of enriched nutrients in the lake due to pollution. The pollution comes from areas around the lake and may result from use of fertilisers in agricultural farms, industrial pollution, poor waste water and sanitation management. To control the continued growth of the water weed, the ministry is undertaking a number of measures as follows:

1. 	Preventive measures: These include the protection and restoration of water catchments so that they perform their protection functions. Many wetlands in the catchments have been encroached on and they no longer perform their function. 

	The other actions being taken include control of pollution from industries, factories and hotels through issuance of waste water discharge permits, setting up waste water treatment plants to treat waste water from industries, and construction of sanitation facilities.

2. 	The second intervention includes removal of the actual water weed through use of mechanical, manual and biological methods. This activity used to be done collaboratively with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries with funding from Egypt. However, the project has been completed and there are no more funds for this activity.

All the above efforts, however, are hampered by an inadequate budget. There is also a need to improve coordination among the various stakeholders to ensure that actions are integrated. I thank you and I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

4.06
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Mr Speaker, I raised this matter and I would like to thank the minister for her response, especially on what brings out the water weed and the efforts they are trying to undertake as Government.

Mr Speaker, I think the commitment from the side of Government is not so convincing. Our people are in a dilemma at the moment. Water weeds have created a canopy on top of Lake Kyoga to the extent that you cannot navigate the waters. Fishing expeditions are, therefore, greatly hampered. Now we come here and make a very brief summary -(Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, when this matter was raised towards the end of the Ninth Parliament, a team of scientists was sent to Lake Kyoga. They took samples, came to Kawanda and carried out research on how these weeds behave -(Interjections)- They are nicknamed “Nankabirwa”. 

They invaded at the time when I was in court over those people who were doing illegal fishing. Therefore, research has been done to prescribe the correct measures one has to take to kill the weeds without injuring the environment. 

I think when funds are available, using the research that has been done the matter will be handled. However, I would like to assure you that we know the injury that is being done. They are so injurious to the people and the environment and we have to make sure we handle this expeditiously. This is the small information I wanted to give my colleague.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Government Chief Whip, for the Information. Mr Speaker, I think at the end of it all, we would like to see the removal of the water weeds. This is not an event that occurred just yesterday; it has been going on for about five years and we have been talking about the same thing. 

It is true studies have been done, but these weeds invaded the lake around 2013. I am, however, convinced with the statement and the commitment you have made, which enriches what the minister has stated in this House. Therefore, we will wait to see the progress that Government will undertake. Thank you very much.

4.10
MS CHRISTINE ACHEN (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the answer that has been offered by the ministry in relation to the problems of water weeds, not only on Lake Kyoga but in the waters of Uganda. However, as a user of the waters and representative of Amolatar District, just like my colleague has said, we really feel the response is not really satisfactory. 

My question always is; as a country, why do we always want to carry out post-mortem research? Why do we always want to venture or invest in curing problems other than having experts prevent the problems? It is not only the “Nankabirwa” weed that is a problem in Lake Kyoga, we also have a problem of water hyacinth that we have never gotten a solution for and it is over 20 years that it has been in existence.

Therefore, as the people who represent those who use Lake Kyoga, we really have problems. This is not only about water weeds, but it is also about fishing, water transport and safety of our people. We are praying that Government takes it up as one of the priorities. 

It seems there is no sector in Uganda where we shall say we have enough money. Look at the fish sector; it is in a mess. When you talk about water weeds, nobody wants to know. When you talk about the safety of the people who are using the water bodies, it is the same. I think Government should get up and do something.

4.12
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Thank you, honourable minister, for the response. I would like to specifically thank my colleague, hon. Anthony Okello, for raising this question on the Floor. 

It is true that the weed on Lake Kyoga is a big problem as it has caused safety issues and people have died. One time I was at Ninga landing site, one of the 28 landing sites in Nakasongola District, and I saw this. When this weed comes in abruptly, it catches up with the fishermen on the lake and they can stay there for a whole week without moving. Therefore, it is not something easy and Government should look into this matter urgently.

I would like to address myself to the point the minister made about an Egyptian project, which has since ended and as such they lack enough resources. The Egyptian project helped us to train technical personnel to remove the weed and they helped to bring in equipment. This equipment is now lying idle and yet it was worth Shs 1 billion. Therefore, the ministry should prioritise this matter because the equipment is available and the technical personnel are available. It is just a matter of putting in a little resources to concentrate on the weed on Lake Kyoga.

I sit on the Budget Committee, honourable minister, and I am waiting to see how much you are going to propose for this.

4.14
MR VINCENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri East County, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are talking about Lake Kyoga but recently, we were visiting Moyo and at the crossing at Laropi, we saw this “Nankabirwa” weed. Therefore, I would like to bring it to the attention of this House that it is not only on Lake Kyoga but actually -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that the scientific name or local name?

MR WOBOYA: The honourable minister has informed us about this name. The point is that there is a strange weed at the crossing at Laropi, which is covering the entire water body there. While I was crossing, I promised my colleagues that when I get an opportunity, I would raise this issue here. 

When we are carrying out interventions, we must also think about that area as the weed is covering the entire River Nile at the crossing. Let interventions be put in place at Laropi crossing. Thank you.

4.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to that of the Members and comment on the attack of the water hyacinth. I happen to be one of those who have been at the forefront of fighting this disease called the water hyacinth since 1997. I call it a disease because it is dangerous.

Way back in 1997, at Owen Falls Dam, some of you may remember that the water hyacinth used to cover the whole upper part of the bridge and we started with a simple design - a harvester – to control it. Government later came in with the interventions that hon. Nankabirwa has talked about from the Ministry of Agriculture. They brought equipment, which would harvest it.  

What I realised was that the water hyacinth tends to multiply very fast. If you do not intervene, it will cover the entire water body. Our intervention involved stopping movement downstream by placing floating substances, which would stop the weed from moving.

When I went to Moyo, I noticed what hon. Woboya has just talked about and I sent a message to the Ministry of Agriculture. This weed is a threat and even the cage fish farming technology that we are talking about is threatened. We have to work on this. Therefore, I request the honourable members here, and in particular my Minister of Agriculture, to look for ways of curbing this water hyacinth. I beg to submit.

4.18
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL, INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to clarify that there are two weeds that we are talking about now. There are so many weeds but the dangerous ones include the water hyacinth that you all know about. In fact, that programme where we got assistance from our brothers from Egypt came as a result of fighting the water hyacinth. However, this new weed has very small leaves. That is the one that is bothering my brother up there. 

I would like to assure Members that research has been done and work on fighting this weed is going to commence. We retained all the machines here and the staff that were trained are in the Ministry of Water and Environment and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. We are going to start removing that weed on Lake Kyoga so that it does not attack other water bodies.

Mr Speaker, I would like to assure the Members that something is going on. Government cannot sit back and leave the people suffer in any way. Since the minister who is in the lead in this fight against water weeds is here, she will conclude the matter. However, I would like to assure the Members that we are not keeping the machines idle. We are working and we are going to deploy them any time from now to Lake Kyoga.

4.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Mary Kitutu): Thank you very much for all the information and guidance. 

Colleagues, I said that water weeds are an indication that the water is polluted and that is why we have plants growing in the water. In the ministry, we are in charge of taking preventive measures and my colleague in the Ministry of Agriculture has to do it manually - to remove them. 

I told you that we have started working aggressively in catchments but our limitation is finances, which are controlled by you. Therefore, when we come here on the Floor pleading that we need more resources, please do not push us away. You can see the gravity of the matter. 

We recognise this issue because it affects the livelihood of the people. We want to go into smart agriculture where we do not pollute the lake and also the industries should not pollute the lake. We are committed as a ministry to serve Ugandans and we shall work closely with you. We shall be informing you in a timely manner on what we are doing. Thank you very much.

MS ALUM: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable minister. The fishing sector has always attracted a very small budget; I wonder whether this time round, as we are in the budget process, you are going to bring before this Parliament a sufficient budget to address some of these problems. 

Secondly, you know that the waterweed hinders transportation and affects the livelihood of the people. It also comes along with a number of diseases. I am wondering whether you have done enough sensitisation in the communities around the lake, be it the industrial or local, so that they know what they are supposed to do.

You have talked about building capacity. Since the problem of the water weed started way back in 1997, I wonder what capacity the Government has built. Government cannot even address this issue and they waited for a Member of Parliament to come before the House and raise the matter. I would like some clarification on that.

4.23
MR FRANCIS GONAHASA (FDC, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was in a meeting this morning with the African Development Bank on the issue of feeding Africa. There was a very touching statement from a participant who said that no donor has developed any place in this world except if the owners of that community take responsibility. We have been talking about the Egyptians who brought their money and did some work. When the money got finished, the weeds returned. 

I have risen to speak on the issue of the waterweeds. We see them starting small, then we talk about them and we seem to be very happy to watch them grow. There is a dam in northern Uganda and the farmers are now complaining that they are going lose up to Shs 1.6 billion because the weed is covering the water. We tend to think that somebody out there - the Government, the agriculture minister or the once upon a time minister in charge of fisheries - will come to these dams and clean them for us. We should start doing these things ourselves.

The water hyacinth came to Uganda as a flower. Somebody brought it and everybody loved the purple flowers. We distributed and sold it all over the place not knowing its danger. When the hyacinth started spreading out, we watched it and it has now cost us so much as a country. 

Wherever we come from, we must sweep the front of our doors. However, when we bring it to this House and say that Government has to find money – There was a story in the papers last week where a team of farmers in the Lango sub-region were asking Government to help them clear the waterweed. This is a weed that they have seen growing over the years. The farmers knew what they were losing. We also know very well that as Parliament, we may not put in the money. Therefore, the people out there should be mobilised to take responsibility for their water dam. 

I do not know who constructed the dam but they have been using its water for their food, for bathing and for other purposes. Now they have been fishing and it is only them who know how much they have been getting out of this dam. They say that they are going to lose Shs 1.6 billion but they are waiting for somebody. 

Can we get our people out of this waiting mode, because nobody owes us a living anywhere? Mr Speaker, may I request that we get beyond this? There is no budget but the local people could get into their boats and start cleaning up this weed. They could have cleared it while it was in one corner but they have waited for the entire lake to be covered. We must come back to earth. We have a problem of always fire fighting. That is my submission.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is in the long term because right now, the lake is covered. 

MR GONAHASA: I am talking about the dam.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They are talking about Lake Kyoga and not a dam. Therefore, the magnitude may be bigger than a dam. Let us address it in the context that it has been presented to this House. Let us have the honourable minister. Please, let us wind up.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you. I take your advice, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget has assured us that she will give us support on this and I cannot thank her enough.

We have built capacity in the ministries. In fact, when we were fighting the water hyacinth, we trained groups of people at all landing sites. Some of you who go through Jinja will notice that on the right side, there is always a boat and some people waiting around. Those are the local people that we have trained and they are doing it on our behalf. 

Regarding this new weed, however, studies have to be conducted because what will you tell the people when you go there? You must gather scientific information on the weed and that is what we are doing. As we remove the weed, we are carrying out studies on it.

Lastly, I would like to thank the shadow Minister for Agriculture for calling upon people to engage in self-help. However, as you know, that will be welcome in the long run. In the short run, we need to act very fast and use whatever resources we have to curb the expansion of the damage on Lake Kyoga. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you want to wind up on your statement or you are okay?

MS KITUTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In winding up, I would like to say that we have taken the message and we appreciate the contribution and concerns of colleagues in Parliament. As a ministry, we are going to prioritise this to ensure that something is done on Lake Kyoga and we shall report back.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister and Members, for these concerns and for the information that you have shared that has enriched this particular segment.

Honourable members, the Speaker, Rt Hon Rebecca Kadaga, hosted visitors from the Miss Uganda Foundation. She invited the foundation members to come and observe the proceedings of the House. In the VIP Gallery, we have Miss Uganda 2016, Miss Leah Kagasa, accompanied by Miss Fiona Bizzu, Miss Uganda 2012/2013; Miss Brenda Nanyonjo, Chief Executive Officer of Miss Uganda Foundation; Pastor Sandra Ngabo, Kampala Foundation; Miss Janet Naluggya and Miss Kevin Zziwa from the Miss Uganda Foundation. 

I have been requested to introduce them to you but I have a better qualified person who I am now going to delegate to introduce these people to you. This is none other than the runner-up of Miss Uganda 1969, hon. Cecilia Barbara Ogwal, the Woman representative for Dokolo District. (Applause)       

4.32
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, thank you for that appropriate introduction. I think it is important that the young girls know that beauty did not start with them; it was there. (Laughter) My late mother would say, “It did not start from you, we had it”. 

I would like to thank you very much and appreciate Parliament for allowing Miss Uganda to visit Parliament before she goes to take the beauty of Uganda to the world level. Mr Speaker, the Miss Uganda events this year have been broader than they have ever been. The Miss Uganda events are not just focusing on the beauty of the person; this time, they are saying, “beauty with a purpose” and that is the theme. 

One of the things, which touched me personally, and I am sure is also going to touch Parliament, is that the event came out with several categories of Miss Uganda. They have decided to declare themselves ambassadors for the different areas that would help us mobilise the population. 

We have got a beauty queen who will be promoting rural agricultural production. Unfortunately, she is not here. There is a beauty queen who will be specifically promoting tourism and trade for this country, and I think the ministry should take interest in that. There is also a beauty queen to promote youth entrepreneurship. I believe the youth who are here will definitely take interest in that. There is a Miss Uganda to fight against teenage pregnancy; the members of UWOPA should take interest in identifying the ambassadors for this particular area. 

Mr Speaker, in the interest of time, I would like to say that Miss Uganda has been given the flag of Uganda to take with her tomorrow; she is leaving tomorrow. It is important for us to note that this event is being sponsored by private individuals. As such, the people who have volunteered to make contributions have made this event possible. 

When these people go outside, they market Uganda and take the image of Uganda out there. I am touched because of the presence of the Miss Uganda Foundation in Parliament in a bid to make sure that they get the blessing of the institution of Parliament so that whatever they do, they will carry the messages, which we would have given to our daughter. 

Mr Speaker, it is no longer beauty to market immorality; it is now beauty to market the beauty of our culture, the beauty of the personality of Uganda, the beauty of the agricultural environment of Uganda and generally, the beauty of the personality and hospitality of Uganda. That is what we want. 

We do not want our daughters to look at themselves and think that because they are very beautiful, people should take advantage of their beauty, particularly the men. Do not claim them to be your second, third or fourth wife. We want them to market their brains and the gifts that God has given them. 

I would like to end by saying that this beauty queen, Leah, comes from Toro. That is an area, which grows tea, and it is an area with people with a personality of grace and gentility. When I contested as Miss Tea in 1969, I missed the title because the lady who competed with me had that grace and gentility and they expected me, when serving tea, to do so with a smile and with gentleness, –(Laughter)– which unfortunately, I could not do. It came out of the Mutoro girl who competed with me and she got the title. Therefore, I am positive that the Miss Uganda we have, who has the grace and gentility, will adequately represent Uganda in the Miss World beauty contest. 

I, therefore, beg anybody in this House, if you have anything, even if it is US$ 1 I would appreciate, to make a contribution. There are people from Toro who have made contributions on a personal level. The Speaker of Parliament has contributed the air ticket on a personal level. So anyone who can make a contribution will be appreciated. 

I am the patron of the foundation, so anyone who makes a contribution should not be afraid. I am very strict on accountability and I will make sure that each and every penny is accounted for. 

May God bless you, Miss Uganda. Please carry the beauty of Uganda, and everybody in the House appreciates your beauty. I have not seen Brenda. Where is Brenda? She is the brain behind the foundation and she was the beauty queen of 2012. You can see her; she looks like me. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I am sure you now know that I did not make a wrong choice in selecting hon. Cecilia Barbara Atim Ogwal to introduce Miss Uganda 2016. 

Being the presiding officer, once in a while in this chair, I can definitely confirm that those judges who made you first runner-up instead of giving you the first position were right. Today, I can confirm that that grace and gentility is still lacking. (Laughter) This is because when I am sitting in the chair, sometimes I face a lot of difficulties when she comes up. (Laughter) If she did that in 1969 and she is still doing it today, we can only say that we are at par with the judges of 1969 that they did the right thing in not making her Miss Uganda, but that is on a light note. 

Miss Uganda and your team, we support you as Parliament and we will continue to support you. Just do the right thing and we will do the right thing also by supporting your cause. Fly the flag, support Uganda outside our territory and build this image that Uganda is a beautiful country with beautiful, graceful people who have a big heart. Their hearts are in the right place. We wish you well in your endeavours. Go and do the right thing for this country. Thank you very much and God bless you. 

Honourable members, that was a personal statement from hon. Cecilia Atim Ogwal and so it does not attract a debate. This House now stands adjourned to Tuesday, at 2 o’clock. 

(The House rose at 4.41 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 29 November 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 
