

Tuesday, 28 November 2017

Parliament met at 2.03 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting, after a reasonable break. I hope you are energised sufficiently to be able to carry on and conclude the business that is remaining before us. 

I will cause an alteration in the Order Paper on item number 4. The item is removed because it is not properly presented there. The person who is supposed to be in charge of it is not ready with the reference that had been given to him. 

As you recall, this matter was actually not raised by the Member of Parliament for Kibaale. This matter was a motion from the Minister of Local Government. I, therefore, do not know how the Member’s name came into the Order Paper. It could be misleading.

Therefore, for purposes of our records, even if it is to come back, it will be the motion by the minister in relation to Butebo and Kibaale and the attendant matters thereon. Let us have that corrected so that when it comes back, it will come as a motion by the Minister of Local Government. 

I am sure the speech of the Member of Parliament for Kibaale must have influenced what has come on the Order Paper, because he spoke quite eloquently on the subject. However, it was not your motion and it should be properly recorded. 

Honourable members, in the gallery this afternoon, we have students and lecturers from Bugema University, Mbale Campus. I do not think they are here yet; they are still coming. Therefore, I will wait for that time to make that announcement. 

Honourable members, I will communicate on what we need to do with the matter that is before the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. I need to do that to give some guidance on how we are going to proceed with it. These will be constitutional amendment issues and all the proposals that are going to be made, if any, must have been discussed and interrogated properly before we come on the Floor to make amendments. 

Therefore, I will communicate properly on this subject at a later time.  However, in summary, if a member has any amendment that he or she would like to propose in the two constitutional amendment Bills; the first one being on land and the other one on the Electoral Commission and other related matters, I ask you to approach the committee that is handling this matter so that the proposal is interrogated and a decision is taken on it. 

It is because we will run a risk of what happened in 2005 when we were amending the Constitution: a matter came from the Floor, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs had finished its work, but one member shot out on the Floor to make a fundamental amendment in the Constitution and it was agreed to with the attendant problem that we now have. If you look at Article 8, Cap A; it was not part of the Constitution. It was never intended to be part of the Constitution, but by a proposal made on the Floor, it was adopted by the House. Now, there are issues with it. We would like to avoid those things. 

Therefore, any matter that relates to constitutional amendment has to be discussed properly. Whoever has any amendment, the House has to know what the amendment is about so that when you discuss it, it is clear rather than just bringing it on the Floor at the time when the matter is already at the committee stage. I will formally communicate this at a later time so that you know how to proceed and present your views on the amendments, that is, if you need to make any. Thank you.

I have a matter from the Member of Parliament for Nakapiripirit, who is not yet here and the Member of Parliament for West Moyo County.

2.09 
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to draw your attention to the conditions of roads in Moyo District in general and West Moyo County in particular.

Mr Speaker, the roads in our district are all spoiled and vehicles cannot move as expected. This is because of the heavy rain and heavy vehicles carrying relief food to the refugee centres. Not only that, but also lack of routine maintenance has made the roads impassable. The heavy trucks that carry refugees from Sudan have also led to the pathetic condition of the roads. Furthermore, the shoddy works, incomplete roads as well as the number of refugees that normally come to board the ferry from Larupi have all led to the pathetic condition of the road.

Mr Speaker, the road between Obongi and Moyo, as I talk, is completely impassable. Usually, criminals are brought from Obongi to the Magistrate Court in Moyo. However, of late, they have to take the longer route via Yumbe or, at times, Adjumani simply because the heavy rains spoiled the roads. The roads between Larupi and Paanjala, Metu-Ayaa-Abeso, Metu-Bari-Arapi, Moyo Town Council via Lama and the highway that is between Atiak, Adjumani, Moyo and Yumbe and Adjumani to Sinyanya to the ferry are all completely spoilt. 

As a result, Mr Speaker, ambulances break down on the way. They cannot carry emergency cases. The sick normally die along the way to referral hospitals. Women in labour pains cannot access the hospital. Others are at times referred to Lacor Hospital and others to Moyo and Arua hospitals but because the roads are very bad, they cannot move as it is expected.

Like I said before, the Magistrates’ Court in Moyo is not used fully in Obongi simply because the roads are now spoilt. Perishable goods like tomatoes, cabbages and so on, delay on the way and as a result they get spoilt. Transporters fear going to Moyo and that leads to retarded development in Moyo District, loss of lives due to accidents and so on.

Mr Speaker, I pray that a deliberate and affirmative action be taken on Moyo Road because we host refugees; tarmac all the major highways from Atiak after Adjumani, Moyo-Yumbe and Arua so that vehicles can easily move and take goods. A bridge on river Nile at Ralopi should be constructed so that there is fast movement of people.

And lastly, UNRA should resume their routine maintenance of this road so that we can also be opened up to other areas of West Nile and Uganda for social economic development. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there anything from the Government on this issue of Moyo roads?

2.14 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, we will ask the works and transport minister to make a statement not only on the issues of Moyo but on the general picture in the country regarding roads especially those that are supposed to be maintained by UNRA because it is a complaint that is being registered from all over the country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you also inform the minister that by the time he/she comes to the House, they should be able to report on steps they have taken so far, now that you have got the information?

MR BAHATI: I will do, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

PETITION BY FISH MONGERS AND RESIDENTS OF KIOGA COUNTY, AMOLATAR DISTRICT, LUBYA SUB COUNTY IN BUVUMA DISTRICT, BUKOOLI ISLANDS IN NAMAYINGO DISTRICT, KYAMUSWA COUNTY IN KALANGALA DISTRICT AND KALUNGI SUB COUNTY IN NAKASONGOLA DISTRICT

2.16
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I move under rule 29 of the rules of procedure of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. 
The Humble Petition by fish mongers and residents of Kioga County in Amolatar district, Lubya Sub County in Buvuma District, Bukooli Islands in Namayingo District, Kyamuswa County in Kalangala District and Kalungi Sub County in Nakasongola District, presented on their behalf by Okello Anthony, Member of Parliament for Kioga County Amolatar District; 

STATES That:
The Subject matter of the petition regards the mistreatment of residents of various fishing villages on the major lakes and rivers in Uganda. 
 Bullets A, B, C, D, and E are statements of fact and with your permission; I request that I proceed on other areas and the records would capture this part.

However, the crux of the matter is on F; the deployment of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces on all lakes of Uganda has brought untold suffering to the fishmongers and other lake users including:

Death of a number of people resulting from the corporal and other inhuman and degrading punishment, such as the death of Mr Oceng Moses who happened to come from Kioga, who was tortured by UPDF soldiers and later dumped at Murchison Bay Hospital in Luzira, where he succumbed to death due to injuries.
Destruction of property 
Forced eviction of communities, such as those Muntu and mutemamuti in Kyanywa Parish, Buwanga Sub County in Masaka District.
Confiscation and conversion of personal property including fishing gears.
Irregular and unlawful orders made without consultation and total disregard of the law.
Introduction of arbitrary rules and regulations such as requirements that all boats below 28 seats are banned from the lake.
Destruction of boats without due process and explanation.
Arbitrary arrests and detention without trial.

G) The issuance of the presidential directive as well as the deployment of the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces has had other adverse effects on the management and regulations of the fisheries sector including:

The total disregard of the laws and regulations governing the fisheries sector, and the Fish Act and regulations made thereunder, creating a legal vacuum on which legal regime to apply.
Rendering the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is redundant; especially the commissioner fisheries and district fisheries officers.
Confusion resulting from lack of a clear legal regime and clearly laid out complaint procedures through which persons affected by the actions of the enforcement team may seek redress including access to courts of law and recovery of illegally and unlawfully confiscated property.
Unregulated mushrooming of private fishing associations such as the Affiliated Fisheries and Lake Users Association, which prohibits local people from accessing the lake and carrying out fishing and; 
Misinterpretation of the presidential directive, especially by those implementing it as it was exempted by the ban on importation of all fishing nets and related input by the ministry of trade under the guise of implementing the presidential directive issued in January 2017.

Your humble petitioners further aver that the actions of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces have not only rendered them landless and economically redundant, but have also resulted in untold suffering and human rights abuse and have therefore brought forward this petition seeking for your indulgence in their plight.

THEREFORE, your humble Petitioners pray that;

Parliament refers the matter to the relevant parliamentary committee to investigate and make recommendations.
The Uganda People’s Defence Forces enforces the presidential directive in conformity with the fishing law and in consultation and guidance from the commissioner of fisheries as well as the district fisheries officers.
All men and officers of the UPDF who have violated the law should be brought to book. 

And your Petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray and hereto, they have appended their signatures.

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the petition at the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the full text of the petition and I see in prayer (a), of your prayer, you are asking that Parliament refers the matter to the relevant parliamentary committee to investigate and make recommendations.

This is a matter of the law and no further pronouncement is required from Parliament on this subject so it should be accordingly deleted from the record. 

The prayers are two; the issue of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces and also all men and officers in the UPDF who have violated the law should be brought to book. Those are the only two prayers that are valid under our Rules of Procedure. By the authority of the Speaker, I have accordingly struck the first one out. Thank you. 

Honourable members, the circumstances are that we do not have 45 days and these matters are urgent. By the time the 45 days elapse, it will be Christmas period so I do not know whether this matter can wait up to next year for it is urgent. If this matter is urgent, I would be tempted to refer these matters to the ministers responsible for the sector to come back in two weeks and brief the House on the on-going matter. This is because if we give it to the committee, it will go up to next year. Can I refer this to the minister responsible so that there is proper guidance on this issue in two weeks? It is the proper way to proceed for the many affected Members concerned with the sector.

Honourable members, this petition is accordingly referred to the minister responsible for this sector. Minister of Defence, do you want to say something before I make the reference? Do you want to debate the petition? 

Can I refer this issue back to the sectoral ministers? That is the one for defence and agriculture - harmonise and come back in two weeks and brief the House on the way we are going to handle this issue. 

Honourable ministers of defence, agriculture and fisheries have received this reference to handle this in two weeks. Come back to the House and advise us on how to proceed because there are communities that are affected by this. It is accordingly referred. Clerk, extract the minutes and forward this to the ministers responsible. Thank you. 

Honourable members, before the laying of papers, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have the following staff from the office of the Secretary National Council of Provinces Parliament of South Africa; Ms Liezel Visser, Mr Luvo Nxelewa and Mr Kenneth Skolo. They are here on a benchmarking study on Government assurances. Please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause) 

We also have students and lecturers from Bugema University, Mbale Campus represented by hon. Jack Wamanga-Wamai and hon. Connie Galiwango. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)
We also have pupils and teachers from Victoria Junior Mixed Day and Boarding School represented by hon. Paul Akamba and hon. Mariam Naigaga from Namutumba District. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. Thank you. (Applause)      

LAYING OF PAPERS

SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE 1, FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018

2.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay Supplementary Schedule no.1 for the financial year 2017/2018. 

THE ANNUAL BUDGET PERFORMANCE REPORT – FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

2.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the Annual Budget Performance Report for the financial year 2016/2017. 

THE 2016 ANNUAL REPORT FOR UGANDA DEVELOPMENT BANK LIMITED

2.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the Annual Report for Uganda Development Bank Limited for the year ended 2016.
 
THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS AUTHORITY
ANNUAL PERFORMANCE REPORT JULY 2015 TO JUNE 2016

2.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the Annual Performance Report for the Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority for the period July 2015 to June 2016. 

THE TREASURY MEMORANDUM ON THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT ON THE HEALTH SECTOR FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

2.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the Treasury Memorandum on the Report of the Public Accounts Committee on the Auditor-General’s Report on the Health Sector for financial year 2014/2015. 

THE MACRO-ECONOMIC AND FISCAL PERFORMANCE REPORT – FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

2.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the Macro-Economic and Fiscal Performance Report for the financial year 2016/2017. 

REPORT OF THE UGANDAN 70TH SESSION OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE AFRICAN PARLIAMENTARY UNION (APU), RABAT, KINGDOM OF MOROCCO, 20-21 JULY 2017

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. James Baba is not here. Okay, honourable members, let the records capture these documents that have been read on item no.5. Item no.5, (I) and (II) are referred to the Budget Committee. Item (III) is referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Item (IV) is referred to COSASE while item (V) is referred to the Public Accounts Committee. Item (VI) is referred to the Committee on Finance. Accordingly, extract the minutes and forward these records to the respective committees. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ANTI-COUNTERFEITING GOODS BILL, 2015

2.30
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I interacted with both the chairperson of the Committee on Trade and the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives this afternoon. However, I realised that the committee has to harmonise with the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. 

I, therefore, requested the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to come here and seek for more time so that the committee harmonises with the minister in charge of the Bill. Since I do not see the minister and I spoke to her; I would like to request you and the august House that we give the committee and the minister more time; probably three or four days so that they harmonise. It will make our work easy when we are processing this Bill, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: After all this time, you have not harmonised. Can you tell us what is going on, chairperson? 

MR RUHUNDA: Protect me, Mr Speaker. As the committee, we have done a thorough job on this Bill. We are only waiting for the minister to come and follow procedure so that we can present our report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, are there no further consultations required? 

MR RUHUNDA: I do not know which consultations beyond what we have done but since the Government Chief Whip has asked for the consultations, we can meet and reconcile. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that this report is being laid on the Floor here? 

MR RUHUNDA: I am sure the Government Chief Whip knows the reason why she needs further consultation. Therefore, we shall meet and harmonize. At least, within two days, we should have an answer.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Honourable minister, if you are not ready with this Bill, you know what to do because we cannot keep it on our pending business when there is no business. If there is no business, tell this House, you move and follow the proper procedures and deal with it instead of having it hanging somewhere and clogging our systems.

Honourable minister, we are on item no.6, Bills, Second Reading, The Anti-Counterfeiting Goods Bill, 2015. That is the one where we are expecting a motion from you for second reading.

2.33
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Mr Speaker, we have received a report of the sectoral Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the Anti-Counterfeiting Goods, Bill 2015 recommending for the withdrawal of the Bill.

Mr Speaker, given that this is a Government Bill, approved by Cabinet after considering its merits to the economy, I implore Parliament as a matter of procedure to grant me time to inform Cabinet on the recommendations of the committee and seek its guidance on the matter. Thereafter, I would be in a position to report to Parliament appropriately.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have not heard the report of the committee. The House has not seen it.

MS KYAMBADDE: Mr Speaker, we need to harmonize –(Interruption)

MR KAFUUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If the Bill is ready for second reading, is it procedurally right to require that it first goes to Cabinet for approval instead of coming for a second reading? Is that the new procedure?

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rule 132 prescribes the time that a Bill, when forwarded to the committee, must be reported to this House. It is within 45 days and the rule prescribes the procedure if the committee wishes or finds that they need to ask for an extension. However, the committee did not because the chair of the committee says they are ready with the work. 

Therefore, I am also perturbed and that is why I am wondering whether we are proceeding well. They say business now awaits the input of the minister and yet this is not the procedure of the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this Bill was read for the first time in the other Parliament. It was one of the businesses that were saved by this Parliament to handle. Therefore, the matter was referred to the present committee at the time when this Bill was read again. What is before us in item 6 is “Bills, Second Reading” where I had anticipated that the minister would come and move her motion for second reading of the Bill and then we see how we proceed.

However, if there are preliminary issues that you needed to have alerted the House about - because now we do not know what the minister is talking about. The chairperson says he is ready to proceed and he says that the request for consultation is being made from the House right now. Therefore, where are we? What we expected from you was a motion for a second reading of the Bill.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, this is a supplementary procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Under what rule do you have supplementary procedure? (Laughter)

MR KAKOOZA: Procedure, Mr Speaker. I think we should not allow the work of Parliament or our committee to be delayed. The practice of this House is that when the Bill is committed to the relevant committee, the person who presents that Bill to the committee is the minister herself; unless we are told that when the ministries were interacting with the committee, the minister did not appear and wants to put more information or to withdraw the Bill. We should know that here because the performance of Parliament depends on the Bills we pass and the work we do here.

I do not know whether we are procedurally right to say that the minister is still waiting for her input when she appeared to the committee. Are we proceeding well?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe somebody could help us, what is the problem honourable minister?

MS KYAMBADDE: The problem is, the committee wrote to us a report and recommended that we withdraw. Therefore, we have to consult; we have not harmonised our position.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, are you considering withdrawal?

MS KYAMBADDE: No. We are not considering a withdrawal.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, what are you going to consult on if you are not considering a withdrawal?

MS KYAMBADDE: We want to harmonise with them first because we have not fully harmonised on that particular issue as per their recommendation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, these matters are moving to Thursday and by that day, honourable minister, you should either be prepared to come and move your motion for second reading or do what is best in the circumstance. This is the Thursday after tomorrow. It is so ordered.

Honourable chairperson, we deal with this matter on Thursday because the minister is not moving the motion. Next week? Okay.

MS KYAMBADDE: Mr Speaker, I was just going for the Continental Free Trade Area (CFTA) representing East African Community and I am returning on Friday. Can you please give us another week?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. This item is adjourned to 12 December. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO INVESTIGATE THE LAWLESSNESS OF BODA BODA CYCLISTS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Bunya? I thought I saw the member. Is the seconder of this motion ready to move the motion? Next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UNIT ACCOUNT 10.21 MILLION ($14.4 MILLION) FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP (AFDB) TO SUPPORT MULTINATIONAL LAKE VICTORIA MARITIME COMMUNICATIONS AND TRANSPORT PROJECT

2.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow $14.4 million from the African Development Bank Group (AFDB) to support Multinational Lake Victoria Maritime Communications and Transport Project.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Nakaseke North, Masindi Municipality members and others. Would you like to speak to your motion, honourable minister?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, Lake Victoria plays a very important role in our region. The lake has the largest fresh water fisheries in Africa, catching between 800,000 to 1 million metric tonnes of fish annually worth $600 million at the landing points and $250 million in exports. It provides livelihoods for the 3 to 4 million people around its shoreline and employs about 200,000 fishermen to perform the primary fishing activities using a fleet of small crafts approaching 70,000 in number.

Lake Victoria, as everybody knows, is shared among three countries where Tanzania has the largest share of 51 per cent, Uganda 43 per cent and Kenya has six per cent of the lake. The existing marine transport system on the lake is critical for trade and economic development in the Lake Victoria Basin. Lake Victoria transport potential has not been fully exploited due to the fact that it is one of the most dangerous waterways in the world according to the statistics on the lives lost each year and number of obstacles demonstrated. The lake claims 5,000 lives in the region each year compared to an average of 181 lives in the last three years in Uganda.

It is against this background that the project is meant to address safety of life and transport planning issues on Lake Victoria to encourage increased transport and trade on the lake. The project is designed to improve quality of life for the people living within the Lake Victoria Basin.

Mr Speaker, you referred this loan to the Committee on National Economy and they are ready to report to the whole House for consideration. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Members, this matter was referred to the Committee on National Economy to examine, report and advise us on how to proceed. Can we receive the report before I propose the question for debate?

2.46
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are ready to present the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow Units of Accounts 10.21 million, equivalent to $14.4 million from the African Development Bank Group to support the Multinational Lake Victoria Maritime Communication and Transport Project.

Mr Speaker, this report has been signed by 24 Members and before I proceed with the presentation, I would like to lay, on the Table, the documents which we examined to support our work. We have the signed report, signed minutes of the meetings, the minister’s brief on the proposal, the sectoral development plan 2015/2016 and 2019/2020, the project appraisal report, draft disbursement letter, summary of loan negotiations, draft loan agreement and the National Planning Authority compliance letter. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, the Committee on National Economy considered the request by Government, which has already been stated, in accordance with rule 166(2)(b) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The request was presented to the House in March and referred to us. However, because of the information needed, which took a long time to be gathered, it has taken us a bit of time to report back. 

We applied two methodologies: we had meetings with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Ministry of Works and Transport, the Lake Victoria Basin Commission, Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation and we also studied a number of documents, which are contained in paragraph (2). 

The background to the project has already been given by the minister and so I do not have to repeat it.
Mr Speaker, I would like to go straight to the alignment of the project to the country strategy. These days when we are examining requests from Government, we make sure that they are aligned with the various planning documents. This project is consistent with the National Development Plan (NDP) II objectives of provision and ensuring a safe, secure and efficient maritime transport system and integration of information and communication technology into regional initiatives.

The project is in line with:

The protocol for sustainable development of Lake Victoria Basin.
Lake Victoria Basin Commission Strategic Plan 2011-2016 (we understand a new one is being finalised) aimed at improving safety and navigation and security on Lake Victoria and promoting an enabling environment for investments in lake transport.

Mr Speaker, we found it appropriate to look at the loan so far contracted by Government from African Development Bank for the transport sector and these are contained in Table 1. However, the performance is far from desirable. Money has been committed but it is not being disbursed as fast as one would desire and this is affecting the development, which is expected out of these projects. It is a long list but not all of them have delayed because of Government’s fault. Some of the financiers take long to clear some of the requirements. On the other hand, the biggest obstacle is counterpart funding.

Mr Speaker, under Table 2, we give a status of the loans under the Ministry of Works and Transport, which have been contracted from other sources. The other ones were from the African Development Bank. However, even these ones are not any better than the earlier ones. 

The above projects, under the Ministry of Works and Transport, amount to $427 million out of which only $92.2 million has been disbursed. The $24 million was approved by Parliament as supplementary expenditure for payment of upfront insurance fees for the Japanese earthmoving equipment for district and urban roads. The utilisation was affected by lack of counterpart funding.

Project objective

The project seeks to address maritime transportation and navigation safety through the contribution of safe, efficient, cheap and environmentally-friendly transport links and fishing activities to achieve poverty reduction and sustainable development. 

The project cost is divided into three components. The first component is the maritime communication system for safety on Lake Victoria and this will entail the development of a Public Private Partnership (PPP) structure with Global Systems for Mobile Communications (GSM) telecom operators on extending existing networks. 

The projects will also operationalise the SOS (110) emergency number and this will be in addition to interfacing the maritime communication network with a video surveillance system. The projects will also provide support to the Maritime Rescue Communication Centre. The Maritime Rescue Communication Centre in Entebbe will be remodelled and furnished to include weather alert briefing rooms. Installation of emergency communication equipment and software will be undertaken in this centre. The project will establish 12 emergency research and rescue situations in quite a number of places on the lake.

Mr Speaker, the second component is maritime transport study. The component has two sub-components, which include development of the East African Maritime Transport Strategy. It was identified that there is weak capacity in the Ministry of Works and Transport and Lake Victoria Basin Commission to undertake studies. As a result, consultants will be hired at a cost of $0.4 million. 

The second sub-component is preparation of the Lake Victoria Transport Development Programme. This consultancy will be hired at $0.214 million. 

The third component has four sub-components: support operation of the project implementation unit and national executive agency. 

The second sub-component in this is capacity building. This is an area where Government lacks capacity and it will cost $0.8million.

The third sub-component is skilled development and this will involve training members of Women in the Maritime Sector for East and South Africa (WOMESA) and collaborate with the Lake Victoria Basin Commission in support of the HIV population, health and environmental programme of the rescue centres. We are aware that we have the highest prevalence of HI/AIDS in the lake region.

Awareness, monitoring and evaluation is another subcomponent. Under this, a consultant will be recruited to prepare the project’s strategy. In addition, the awareness programme will be implemented, including Maritime Safety Promotion.

Mr Speaker, the project cost is highlighted under table four. The total cost is $12.85 million. Out of this, African Development Fund (ADF) will contribute 79.5 per cent, Government of Uganda 12.5 per cent and the European Union/ATF Grant will contribute 8 per cent.

Mr Speaker, under Table four, the project cost by component in Units of Accounts (UA) is provided but it also adds up to what I have already stated. The project cost by expenditure category indicates that civil works and provision of goods and services will take a significant share of the project’s cost, as indicated in Table five.

Terms and implication of the loan

Loan terms

The loan that is being contracted is 10.1 million Units of Accounts, equivalent to $14.4 million. It has a maturity period of 40 years, with a grace period of 10 years and repayment period of 30 years. It has attracted an interest charge of 0.75 per cent on amount disbursed and outstanding.

Mr Speaker, the implication of the loan, based on the loan terms and conditions is that the level of concessionality is given under Table 8.21. It indicates that it is a friendly loan and not fully concessional because it is from the African Development Bank but it is near concessional. 

The project implementation arrangement, under paragraph nine, is that the East African Community Secretariat will be the overall oversight body of the project in the region. Its functions will be delegated to the Lake Victoria Basin Commission to manage the day to day activities. 

At the national level, the Ministry of Works and Transport will be responsible for the implementation of activities that are categorised as national. The Lake Victoria Basin Commission and the ministry will work closely with Uganda National Meteorological Authority for provision of weather forecasts and Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation (LVFO) in utilisation of the Beach Management Units, establishment of the rescue centre and it will also aid navigation and training.

At the national level, the project implementation unit will be created to undertake the day to day implementation and this will be hosted under the Ministry of Works and Transport. The search and rescue stations will have a trained crew, rescuers and will be responsible for identification and training of local potential rescues. The crew will be alternating between education and safety awareness.

Economic and financial returns

As already stated, an estimated 5,000 lives are lost every year on the lake. We hope that by 2019, this project will save up to 4,000 lives. The growth rate of fatalities is assumed to be three per cent. Growth rate of fatalities with the project will grow at a lower rate of two per cent. The contribution of the project to total life savings is assumed to be 80 per cent.

Going on the budgetary implications, the project implementation is assumed to commence in 2017 – I do not know whether that will be possible - and is expected to be operational by 2019. During 2017/2018, Government has made a provision of Shs 200 million for recurrent studies to cover initial allowances. 

The loan and the current debt situation of the country

The loan will certainly increase the country’s total nominal public debt that is currently at $8.9 billion by the end of June. External Debt is 5.2 constituting 60.5 per cent. However, we are still far from the converging point of 50 per cent; the total debt to GDP stands at 39.5 per cent.

Mr Speaker, the committee, in examining and scrutinising the proposal, made observations and recommendations. The first observation is on international conventions. The International Conventions on Maritime and Search Rescue of 1979 places responsibility for providing rescue services upon the state. While other regional states have ratified and are implementing the relevant international maritime conventions and protocols on safety of navigation, Uganda has not.

The committee therefore recommends that Government should expedite the ratification process of the International Conventions on Maritime and Search Rescue to be in harmony with the region.

Institutional arrangements

The committee observed that institutional arrangements are limited to rescue infrastructure. Activities that include intervention to support economic and social wellbeing of the people around the lake, particularly related to women and including actions to encourage fabrication of life jackets locally and improved fish skin processing are necessary. While this is welcome, involvement of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is critical in designing appropriate policy consistent with interventions that are going to increase women participation and productivity in the lake area.

The committee recommends that Government should involve the Ministry of East African Affairs to coordinate the implementation of project activities to ensure policy consistency and harmonisation of sector activities, in line with the East African Community Protocol.

The committee made another observation that the search and rescue station will have trained crew of one station manager and three rescuers who will be responsible for identification and training of local rescuers. The crew will be alternating between education, safety awareness, promotion, community projects as well as be on standby for rescue operations on a 24/7 basis. This is not sustainable because somebody cannot be on standby for 24 hours and then train, rescue and remain efficient.

The committee recommends that Government hires more rescuers, after the project, to provide sufficient cover for rescue operations, awareness campaigns and community activities.

The second observation is on regulation of lake activities. The committee observes that safety issues on the lake largely emanate from poor regulations of lake activities, including transport and fishing.

The project introduces communication technology and establishes rescue infrastructure with limited attention on illegal activities that are rampant on the lake, as we all know. Regulation is the responsibility of the Transport Licensing Board. However, in practice, lack of resources limit the board’s registration and inspection activities.

The maritime police is similarly deficient in capacity and unable to exercise the required level of control. The Transport Licensing Board is also now responsible for domestic implementation of the East African Legislation for Lake Victoria, working closely with the Lake Victoria Basin Commission. However, much of the legal and regulatory framework requires revision to be harmonised with EAC legislation already introduced for Lake Victoria.

The committee, in that regard, recommends that the project design should be revised to provide for synergies with other stakeholders like the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to enhance safety and productivity of the lake.

Government should also revise the existing legislation to be consistent with the regional Lake Victoria Act.

On the budget implication, the committee observed that a provision of Shs 0.2 billion has been provided in the current financial year for recurrent costs to be covered by Government of Uganda. However, staff for the project implementation unit have not yet been recruited to kick start the project preparation activities. In the absence of staff, recurrent costs may not be fully utilised for the project preparation.

The committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Works and Transport identifies the project implementation unit staff prior to project implementation and before disbursement of the Shs 200 million to undertake the setting up of the implementation unit, which is a prerequisite for loan approval.

The last observation is on sustainability of the project. The committee recommends that for the project to be sustainable, Ministry of Works and Transport should expedite the process of revision of the legal and regulatory framework for the water sector to harmonise it with EAC legislation for Lake Victoria within two years of the project and ensure sustainability.

The committee further recommends that Government should expedite project implementation by ensuring project readiness is achieved prior to financing, as provided in the Parliament guidelines, which were set up by our committee and were adopted by Parliament.

The committee recommends that the PPP contract with private telecom companies should focus on common objectives geared towards beneficiaries consuming affordable services while at the same time, enable telecom companies to provide the desired service.

As I conclude, the committee largely complied with the loan approval guidelines, which were set up. We would like to request all Government project coming for loans to ensure that they adhere to the loan requirements otherwise, we will not handle their loans.

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow 10.1 million Units of Accounts, equivalent to $14.4 million from the African Development Bank to support the Multinational Lake Victoria Maritime Communication and Transport Project be approved subject to the recommendations that we have made. I beg to report, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, madam chairperson and members of the Committee on National Economy for handling this. It has delayed a bit but we are now there. We are required to give our guidance on this matter.

Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow Units of Accounts 12.21 million from the African Development Bank Group to support the Multinational Lake Victoria Maritime Communication and Transport Project. That is the motion I propose for your debate; that it be adopted and approved. Debate starts now.

Since we have so many issues coming up, can we have limited interventions on this? How much time do we need? Are two minutes okay? I have two other loan requests. Okay, three minutes. Agreed. 

3.09
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and the committee members for this loan appraisal and for the report. 

In support of this maritime communication and transport facilitation, I would like to know from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development when they intend to have similar projects on other lakes. We have Lake Kyoga and Lake Albert that is even more hostile as we lose people every day in their efforts to go to West Nile. Every week we lose people from Arua and Nebbi. We would be happy if there is an intervention on that lake.

Secondly, I would like to know, in line with the President’s complaints, whether we are not creating a lot of duplicating agencies with parallel competition for the same logistics. Have we given up on building the police marines as a department, which should be handling this effort that now we are coming up with a parallel rescue team? Why don’t we focus our resources in building a national police marine with the capacity to rescue people instead of creating another institution, which will consume the same resources?

The biggest concern we have been having with intra-government projects is implementation. Earlier, we had the East African Trade Facilitation Programme, which delivered single border posts but because different countries have different implementing agencies, we get confused. We want assurance from Government that there will be coordination from not only Works but also what it takes to make sure that the project does not delay.

I would like to end with the need for Parliament to support more concessional loans because in the recent days, we seem to be attracting more commercial loans and very soon, our budget will have servicing problems because debt servicing is the first call on the budget. It is a priority and the moment you have too much debt servicing, there will be problems. Aware that we have other non-loan obligations of PPPs and PSAs, which are taking many billions of dollars, we need to continually keep checking our debt stock and sustainability. I thank you very much.

3.12
COL. (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to thank the committee and to support the motion. 

However, I have a few concerns, Mr Speaker. One of the concerns is the protection of the lake. Lake Victoria, as you all know, is actually being polluted. The lake is at the verge of extinction and I confirmed this when I watched the 8 O’clock news on BBC last night. There was a whole 30-minute documentary on the death of Lake Victoria. I know so many articles have been written about Lake Victoria and other water bodies in Uganda but our lakes are not protected. There is a lot of pollution and the wetlands have been destroyed. 

Therefore, while we take these loans, the future of Lake Victoria is not assured. I would have been comfortable if this loan or other loans were being requested to protect and preserve our water bodies especially our lakes either by restoring the wetlands massively or removing all encroachers from the wetlands around our lakes and all catchment areas. 

Furthermore, as you are aware, most of the factories around Lake Victoria have actually shut down. However, if the illegal fishing was curtailed, maybe we would be assured that this loan would be paid. If this loan also included promotion of tourism on our water bodies, then we would be assured that there will be some revenue to pay back this loan.

Mr Speaker, these are my concerns and I would be happier if the committee addresses them. Thank you.

3.15
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to first thank the committee. The Committee on National Economy has brilliant brains because of the surgery they have done. I am only going to improve on the recommendations. 

They talked about the performance of the previous loans; some of the loans are stuck somewhere and we have not seen their impact because some people are not doing their part and because of that, let us defer the approval of this loan. I think this is critical because in 2017, we need to research more than talk in this House. We need people who are going to perform. We cannot approve a loan when there is an idle loan somewhere and yet Ugandans are getting poorer. 

Secondly, we are talking about building synergies between ministries and the concerned stakeholders; however, we cannot approve this loan when you have done nothing about that. This is the time for us to avoid approving any loan for the sake of approving it. If we do that, we shall always continue supporting our voters in the constituencies and yet these loans were supposed to create an impact. 

I have also observed – yes, we are talking about the Multinational Lake Victoria Maritime Communications and Transport Project and how we are now supporting Kenya - that is very good for us; but you have never even talked about securing life jackets for all the people using water transport in Uganda. What have you done for the school going kids without life jackets? When are we getting a loan for them? Why should we approve such a loan when those ones are suffering? Talk about Namayingo here; when I went to hon. Abott’s constituency, even as a Member of Parliament, I crossed the lake without a life jacket. I took a risk bigger than a mountain. 

We should not approve this loan now. We are not saying it is bad; but let us defer it until those recommendations are acted upon. This thing of saying Government should be encouraged or Government should be advised cannot work. Ugandans are used to deadlines that even on voting day, they will come at 5.00 p.m. Therefore, this should also be treated like a deadline. We can only approve once you have done what we have told you to do. I think that is the best thing for this country. Thank you so much.

3.18
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two concerns. I would like to thank the committee for having attempted to make a good report in spite of my concerns. 

Just like my colleague from Nyabushozi, my biggest concern with Lake Victoria is protection. You all remember very well that the Committee on Natural Resources presented a very comprehensive report on how Lake Victoria was being endangered. On sand mines, we requested Government to take very stringent measures to save the only biggest water source in Africa remaining. 

Mr Speaker, I am sorry to say that immediately we presented this report, we seem to have alerted even those who were still asleep. The activity now has more than tripled. We are here very busy trying to pass a loan on maritime communications and transport; transport on what when the lake - which one should come first? This is my biggest concern. I would have loved to support it but I still have doubt. 

I do not even see the smallest recommendation. Are we talking about removing the communities which are digging directly in the lake and settle them somewhere? I have had an opportunity to visit Rwanda and saw Lake Muhazi. The lake was about to completely disappear from the face of the earth but they were very decisive and limited the community to a certain distance from the water body. You should go and see that lake.

Why don’t we learn such things from even our smallest and closest neighbours? I think we should be talking about how to protect our only remaining water body. Otherwise even all these big loans we are getting for projects like Karuma, Isimba; are going to come to nothing unless something is done about our water bodies especially Lake Victoria and its catchment areas.

Finally, there are a lot of disjointed linkages as far as projects are concerned. Do you know there is a big project called Lake Victoria Environmental Management Programme (LVEMP)? I wish they had brought an up to date report on this project to show what they have been doing. I think these disjointed linkages in our operations especially through these big loans are a very big disservice to our people. I, therefore, reiterate with a very heavy heart that I do not support the loan until those concerns are addressed. I thank you.

3.21
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concerns have been echoed in one way or the other. However, if last night the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the chairperson of the committee had watched a report on BBC Focus on Africa about Lake Victoria, they would not have presented this request today. Mr Speaker, in the next 50 years, that lake will not be there if we do not address the challenges that face it. 
Lake Victoria is just a messed up water body which is not under any control. The effluence from all industries and toilets, the vegetation, the transportation and the harvesting of immature fish are all done in Lake Victoria. When I saw the presentation, it was like serving food without sauce. Why can’t we first cook our food with the sauce, put the lake in place and then talk about its transportation?

Mr Speaker, I rise to give these concerns such that the disaggregated management of the lake is avoided. Government should give us a comprehensive report on Lake Victoria about what is happening. In the future, we should involve all agencies of Government – Works, Environment, Industry, Fisheries and Wetlands so that we resuscitate our lake.

My chairperson is present – we visited the banks of these lakes and all the banks were dumped and the one of Lake Victoria is just expanding. If we had serious climate change, some of the roads like Masaka would have been submerged by Lake Victoria because there are no banks on the shores of Lake Victoria. All the banks were cut due to bank exploitation and the water levels are low because it is just flooding all over the place. Chinese ships are just extracting sand and the fishermen are just idle.

Mr Speaker, I therefore call upon the Government and Parliament that this is a golden opportunity; let us sit down and review the entire ecological system of Lake Victoria and revamp it once and for all rather than this piecemeal approach. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.23
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. I would also like to thank the committee and the planners who came up with this idea of developing Lake Victoria. 

Mr Speaker, I will differ from what honourable members have said; this loan has been misunderstood by other Members. The islanders or the people living around Lake Victoria think the intention of the loan is to help people who move on the Lake Victoria to ease communication. 

The problems that are coming up now – whether it is poor fishing or the forests that are being destroyed; it is because of poor communication. There are places in islands where you cannot access the MTN or Airtel network and other networks. Therefore, if this loan is approved, I think even the implementers in the Ministry of Communication and Transport, gender and other ministries will find it easy to communicate with the relevant officials.

I vividly heard from the presenter that this will also help in creating rescue communication centres. Mr Speaker, I come from the islands of Lake Victoria and you may be crossing the lake and you fail to access network yet you cannot see anyone because you are in the middle of the lake. However, if such rescue communication centres are put in certain places, you can reach such people and they will come to rescue people. Otherwise, people are dying because there is no help.

On the mainland, even if you were travelling to Kaberamaido or using the Jinja Highway, you will easily get an ambulance but that is not possible on the islands. Therefore, if a rescue centre is created in the lake, someone will be able to call for rescue.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to inform this Parliament that we have passed so many loans for roads. Government has done a lot to construct roads and this time, I would like to request that all Members be passionate enough to help islanders get transport. What happens in the islands - I also would like to call upon Members to come and visit my constituency because in Buvuma, we have only one ferry. This ferry only goes to one island, out of the 52 islands that make up Lake Victoria.

I think the planners of this loan thought it wise to provide ferries so as to improve transport on the lake. This will ease business and people’s movements on the lake within the East African Community because this lake covers three countries: Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania.

In conclusion, I would like to say that every person is aware that HIV prevalence is too high in the islands and such a multi-sectoral loan will help with prevention of HIV/AIDS and remember HIV/AIDS is not only in the islands. Someone may get infected from the island and they will come and infect you here. You cannot differentiate who is from the island or the mainland – (Laughter)

Therefore, in view of reducing HIV, the loan will help with sensitisation and other means. I would like to ask the Members to support this loan so that the islands can also get this funding. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, after that appeal from the honourable member for Buvuma District, do we need further debate on this matter? In all fairness, the debate is focusing on something else rather than what the Member has talked about and what the loan is requested for. Do we need any further discussion on this? Can I put the question? 

I put the question that the request to authorise Government to borrow UA 10.21 million from the African Development Bank Group to support the Multinational Lake Victoria Maritime Communications and Transport Project be approved?

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO UA 28.328 MILLION (USD 38,349,313.28) FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK AND UA 41.462 MILLION (USD 56,129,597.12) FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND TO SUPPORT THE UPGRADING OF THE KAPCHORWA-SUAM-KITALE ROAD PROJECT

3.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to $38 million from the African Development Bank and $56.129 from the African Development Fund to support the upgrading Of Kapchorwa-Suam-Kitale Road Project. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”]It is seconded by hon. Tom Alero, hon. Aogon, hon. Mukitale, hon. Imalingat and hon. Namuganza. Would you like to justify the motion? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the project objectives are:

To upgrade the existing 73-kilometre gravel road on the Ugandan side;
 To pave road standards to provide all year round accessibility; and
 To upgrade the current gravel road to bitumen surfacing standards thereby providing an efficient and sustainable transport system to the people of Kapchorwa.

This is a long-awaited loan to support this part of the country and I do not want to spoil the mood in the House. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter was referred to our committee. Before I propose the question for your debate, I would like the chairperson to report. Honourable chairperson, you have heard; so try and summarise your report. 

3.34
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Mr Speaker, the loan request to borrow UA 28.328 million equivalent to $38,349,313.28 from the African Development Bank and UA 41.462 million equivalent to $ 56,129,597.12 from the African Development Fund to support the upgrading of Kapchorwa-Suam-Kitale Road Project was referred to the Committee on National Economy for consideration. I, therefore, present the report of the committee. 

However, before I present the report, I would like to lay at the Table the following documents; a report signed by 28 Members, the signed minutes, the minister’s brief on the proposal, the National Development Plan II Compliance Letter from the National Planning Authority, the National Transport Master Plan, the National Development Plan II Project Implementation Plan, the Environment and Social Impact Assessment, the Resettlement Action Plan and the project appraisal document. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MR BATEGEKA: Mr Speaker, the State Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development has already gone through the background so I do not think I need to labour with it. I also do not need to go through the alignment of the project to the country planning framework, reading the mood of colleagues present. I will quickly move to the project objectives, outputs and impact. 

The objective of the project is to upgrade the existing long gravel roadway on the Ugandan side from Kapchorwa through Kween to Suam. It is a difficult terrain; therefore, travelling from Kapchorwa to Kween to Suam currently takes about five hours. Upgrading this project will reduce the travel time from about five hours to slightly over an hour or one hour and a half. Hence, the impact is going to be great in terms of trade and facilitating movement. Ugandans travelling from some of those parts now have to go through Kenya to come to Kampala. 

Project description and components –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually you might have to deal with the recommendations to help the process.

MR BATEGEKA: Recommendations –(Interjections)– my job is being made difficult, Mr Speaker. Since this report is uploaded on the Members’ iPads, I presume they have read the report. I shall quickly go to the conclusion by the committee and waste no time.
 
Mr Speaker, all members of the committee recommend that the request of Government to borrow UA 28.328 million from the African Development Bank and UA 41.46 million from the African Development Fund for financing the upgrading of the Kapchorwa-Suam Road, which is 73 kilometres long, under the multi-national Uganda-Kenya-Kapchorwa-Suam-Kitale and Eldoret bypass roads project be approved subject to the recommendations and observations made. I beg to report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson. Honourable members, part of why we are responding this way is because this has been a long standing issue in this area. I think this House receives the report with gratitude now that this particular problem is going to be addressed specifically for the people affected by this. I am actually not surprised that debate is taking the way it is taking but I am still required to propose the question for your debate. 

The question that I now propose for your debate is for the approval of the motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to UA 28.328 million from the African Development Bank and UA 41.462 million from the African Development Fund to support upgrading of the Kapchorwa-Suam-Kitale Road Project. Debate starts now.

3.40
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. This matter is so pertinent. Going by the mood of the House and the fact that it is long overdue, I beg to move that the question be put that this loan be approved by this House. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded by the Member for Kamuli Municipality and the Member for Amolatar. Honourable members, I am required to put the question to that motion that the question be put. I now put the question first to the motion that the question be put. I put the question to that motion that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to UA 28.328 million from the African Development Bank and UA 41.462 million from the African Development Fund to support the upgrading of the Kapchorwa-Suam-Kitale Road Project. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW EUROS 270,266,042.15 FROM THE UK EXPORT FINANCE (UKEF) AND EUROS 37,110,585.9 FROM STANDARD CHARTERED BANK (LONDON) FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF PHASE 1 OF THE NEW KABAALE INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT IN HOIMA

3.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow 270,266,042.15 from the UK Export Finance (UKEF) and Euros 37,110,585.9 from Standard Chartered Bank (London) for the construction of Phase 1 of the new Kabaale International Airport in Hoima.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the members for Hoima Municipality, PDW Western, Kanyum County, Buliisa and Mitooma districts. Would you like to speak to your motion? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, as the background to this loan, commercial crude oil reserves were discovered in 2006 amounting to 6.5 billion barrels of oil of which 1.4 to 1.7 billion barrels are estimated to be recovered. The deposits are mainly located on the east bank of Lake Albert and in the Nile Delta north of Lake Albert. We have made progress towards this and now what remains is putting the right infrastructure in place to be able to drill this oil by 2020.

The object of this loan is to:

Facilitate construction and reduce the construction period for the refinery and related works, which will have a big economic impact on our economy.
To reduce the travel time of the necessary vital equipment for the production of oil between Hoima and Entebbe-Kampala, which is not achievable using the current infrastructure.
To reduce traffic accidents and improve safety for persons working with the exploration, development, production, construction and refinery of oil products among others.

It is one of the projects identified on our roadmap towards production of oil by 2020 as a key infrastructure to facilitate other necessary infrastructure like the refinery, pipelines and others. 

The Committee on National Economy considered this loan and they are now ready to report. However, I must emphasise that it is a loan for Kabaale in Hoima, which is part of the Bunyoro Kingdom. Sometimes Kabaale is mistaken to mean Kabale. The other day when I was in Kabale, people asked me when the airport was going to be constructed. The loan is for Kabaale International Airport in Hoima District. Thank you.

3.44
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This loan was referred to our committee on 30 September. We have scrutinised it and we are ready to report. However, before I do so, permit me to lay on the Table the following documents: 
The signed report; 
Signed minutes of committee meetings; 
The minister’s brief on the proposal; 
The contract agreement; 
Project development document; 
Due diligence assessment report; 
Letter of concurrence on direct procurement; 
Clarification on bid document; 
Memorandum of understanding between the Government of Uganda and Solel Boneh International Holdings AG; 
Master plan, detailed design and indicative term sheet.

Mr Speaker, in scrutinising the report, we held interviews with the finance minister, the works minister and the Civil Aviation Authority. We studied quite a number of documents which are listed under paragraph 2. It is quite a long list. 

The minister has already given the background to the project. It is important to note that the project is aligned to the different Government planning tools and so it is within the National Development Plan II.

Mr Speaker, the minister has given the objectives. I now wish to go to the project cost, which is given under table 1. It is going to cost Euros 376,628,000 and this money is going to be sourced from the Exim Bank and Standard Chartered Bank, both of the UK.

The terms of the loan include the following: We are borrowing Euros 270,266,042.15 from the UK Export Fund with a maturity period of 14 years, repayment period of 9.4 years and a grace period of four and a half years. The interest rate will be on commercial interest reference rate.

The second loan from Standard Charted Bank is Euros 37,110,585.9 with maturity of six years and repayment of five years. It is based on a six-month Euro Interbank Offer Rate (EURIBOR) and has an administrative fee of 1 per cent and commitment fee of 0.4 per cent.

I now wish to move to the observations we made while scrutinising the loan. First, it is certainly going to raise our debt to GDP ratio but we shall still be below the convergence point.

The committee observes that the cost of the loan is highly non-concessional and close to commercial terms. The committee was concerned and recommended that Government should ensure macroeconomic stability while at the same time rejuvenate economic activities to restore the economy to its historical annual growth of 6 per cent if domestic revenue is to rise to finance such projects.

In the absence of private sector participation, Government needs to participate in markets to increase productive assets that can create wealth for the country to repay her debt obligations especially for highly non-concessional debts like the one we are now examining.

Government should also ensure that execution of the project should be expedited on schedule for the country to benefit from the oil dividends, and to avoid a mismatch whereby the project needs to go on but some of the infrastructure needed is not in place.

In order to cushion the country against foreign exchange risks, Government should increase the level of export revenue by directly providing incentives to export oriented domestic enterprises and attract Foreign Direct Investments (FDIs) to boost our foreign reserves in the short and the medium term.

The committee also recommended that Government should ensure that any gains obtained by UKEF credit in the domestic economy are not eroded by unfavourable economic conditions to warrant significant capital outflows or unstable prices that could make the foreign exchange rates unfavourable. What we are saying here is that we need to see some of this money staying here. We require local content - Materials can be procured locally so that these dollars we have brought stay here in the market.

The committee further recommends that the Government should ensure availability of counterpart funds for projects at the minimum cost available, especially for domestic tax revenues, to minimise sourcing counterpart funds from expensive external sources, which is not provided for in the Public Debt Management Framework. Mr Speaker, I would like to inform Parliament that when we are examining these projects we now insist - it is one of the reasons why some of these projects committed to us take long – that we want to see counterpart funding ring-fenced in the budget. Where it is not shown, we do not proceed because we know it is the biggest impediment to implementation of projects.

The other observation is on due diligence on the contractor. The Government should undertake due diligence on the joint venture company to confirm its suitability to undertake implementation of the commercial contracts it has with Government of Uganda prior to project implementation.

On the resettlement action plan, Government should expedite any outstanding compensation bills in the Albertine region to avoid delays/disruptions in the implementation of the oil-related infrastructure, like construction of the Entebbe Express Highway, which has caused a delay of almost four years. 

On environmental and social issues of the project, the committee recommends that specific detailed studies to mitigate the potential impacts on the environment associated with the construction and operation of the proposed Kabaale International Airport be undertaken within the environmental and social impact assessment process of this project before beginning of construction. Also, noting that this airport is close to the wildlife, we need to do that to make sure that our animals, which attract tourists, are not disturbed.

On local content, the committee recommends that Government should empower the local private sector by developing a skills transfer programme that will make it more competitive, and provide avenues for low-cost capital to establish enterprises that are linked to the project and the oil industry. 

The contractor should also develop and implement a recruitment plan and ensure that local residents are given first priority for job opportunities. This is in addition to the development of specific employment programmes for women, the poor and other vulnerable groups. Government should ensure that the local content ratio in the construction site is at least 30 per cent.

On the contractor’s general obligations, the committee recommends that final approved designs for the new airport should be timely provided by Government to the contractor so as not to delay or obstruct, in any way, the performance and completion of the project. We have had cases where designs have delayed the project and yet the contractors have been mobilised and therefore they start charging for the lost time.

On the right of access to the site by the contractor, the committee recommends that Government should provide the contractor with the right of access to and possession of the site within the programmed construction schedule of the project. This will enable the contractor to proceed with the construction activities of the project without disruptions.

Members were concerned about the sustainability of the project. If the airport is being developed for oil and we know that oil is a depletable resource, how are we going to make this project sustainable? In order to ensure sustainability of the project in the long-term, the development of the airport should encompass other industry users with adequate facilities to achieve high returns from the investment, for example passenger transport, export of agricultural products and other exports from the area. 

On the debt sustainability, the committee recommends that the Government should expedite project implementation by ensuring project readiness is achieved prior to financing. Mr Speaker, this is where you will hear Government complaining that we are squeezing them a lot. This is because when we are looking at the loan, we also want to see that the implementation and procurement plans are ready. In some cases, we are also insisting that compensation must be done before they come to us.

As I conclude, I would like to request Government that the next time they are presenting a loan request, they should come with complete documentation. This is because this ping-pong of asking for documents takes a lot of time and in the process, the project implementation is delayed. One again, I request Government to provide all the necessary documents as they present the memorandum requesting for a loan.

The committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow € 270,266,042.15 from the UK Export Finance and € 37,110,585.9 from Standard Chartered Bank (London) for the construction of Kabaale International Airport in Hoima be approved subject to the above recommendations. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson. Honourable members, I am required to propose this motion for your debate. The question that I propose for your debate is the motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow €270,266,042.15 from and €37,110,585.9 from Standard Chartered Bank (London) for the construction of Phase I of new Kabaale International Airport in Hoima be approved. That is the motion for your debate that starts now. 

Can we agree on the time? Two minutes each and I will start with the member from Bunyole West.

4.00
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister and the committee because when you look at developed countries, it is only through oil that they develop very fast. 

Aware that technology is changing, I request Government to expedite the process of the construction of the refinery. This is because by 2020, developed countries such as Germany, France and others will stop the manufacture of fuel cars and move on to electric ones. Therefore, honourable minister, we do not want this business of dilly dallying. I request Parliament to approve this request but if you dilly dally, by the time we produce the oil, there will be no cars. (Laughter)

In addition, I would like to caution the minister against this business of giving briefcase companies contracts to build “air”. As Members of Parliament, we shall not be part of this saga in case it happens. This is kisanja hakuna mchezo.

Without wasting time, I would like to request the Members of Parliament that we approve this loan. Also, since the people of Kabale District thought the airport was going to them, I would like to propose that honourable minister buys them at least a small bus worth Shs 200 million. (Laughter) This is because they thought this airport was going to them and so politically, it may not augur well with them. I would like to thank you. For God and my country. 

4.02
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman representative, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I would like to welcome Members back from recess. I stand to support the motion to borrow money to construct the second international airport in Uganda and the first in the NRM regime. 

Mr Speaker, our key economy is driven by the tourism sector. Whenever tourists come to Uganda, they disembark from Entebbe and it takes them two to three hours to reach Kampala. It then takes them close to five hours to reach Murchison Falls National Park or about eight hours to get to Queen Elizabeth National Park or even the entire day to reach Kidepo Valley National Park. In a fast growing economy, whenever a key sector generates income, that sector is paid due attention. We need to focus on our tourism sector by creating access near to the areas where the tourists go. 

I believe this airport in Hoima is going to attract more tourists, especially those trekking to Queen Elizabeth and Murchison Falls national parks. With that said, I support the motion because we need this loan to hasten the entire process of constructing the international airport.

My second observation is in form of a proposal to the committee. The honourable minister intimated that this is Kabaale International Airport and not the other Kabale but the one of Hoima in Bunyoro Kingdom, and he has also said the name is long.  Therefore, I would like to propose that this international airport be renamed Hoima International Airport so that even the people out there are not confused. If even we in the House cannot tell whether it is the other Kabale down there, what about the public? (Interruption)

MR WAKABI: Thank you very much. The area of Kabaale where the proposed airport is going to be constructed is a parish in my constituency of Bugahya County. Therefore, as Member of Parliament from Bugahya County, I would like to propose that we name it Hoima International Airport. I thank you very much.

MS KAAHWA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I would like to support the proposal from hon. Bintu Jalia. I was seated next to hon. Baba Diri and when the minister mentioned Kabaale International Airport, she asked me, “Is it Kibaale or Kabale? Are they taking the airport to Kabale?” Therefore, I support the proposal that we rename it Hoima International Airport so that it is very clear. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS BINTU: Mr Speaker, if Members of Parliament can ask all those questions, what about the tourists and the general public out there? Once we make it clear and the name of the airport is changed to Hoima International Airport, we shall have answered many questions. 

Lastly, I listened carefully to the chairperson while she was presenting the report. However, I would like to urge that the relevant ministry and the companies that will be involved in the construction of the airport incorporate local content for Ugandans to be able to benefit. This will help our people to gain knowledge and skills –(Member timed out.)

4.08
MS KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like thank the chairperson for the committee report. 

I do not think it is a serious question of debate as to whether we need a second international airport in the country. Oil or not oil, we need a second airport. I believe this is something that we all need to support because of the significance of having an alternative airport in this country.

I would like to re-echo a point that has been made by the member for Masindi on tourism. You realise that it takes a day or even more for a tourist who has come for gorilla trekking in western Uganda to move from Entebbe to the other part of the country. For that reason, therefore, many tourists have actually preferred to use Rwanda so that they can move very fast, go and view these beasts and then go back to their countries. We therefore, need an airport which is closer to these very important tourism destinations of our country. We need an alternative airport for security reasons and easy communication. I think this is a loan request which we should all support. 

However, I have two issues that I would like the chairperson of the committee to clarify. Unfortunately, I did not read the report because my iPad could not open. I heard that the first loan is borrowed at a commercial rate. To me, this is a serious issue to borrow such huge sums of money at a commercial rate. You also said, if I heard you well, that the second loan has a maturity period of six years. 

I wonder whether you have worked out the repayments of these two loans and found out whether they fit within our flow of revenues. How can we borrow such huge sums of money at a commercial rate? How can we borrow such big sums of money at a short life of only six years?

Finally, (Member timed out.)

4.11
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to also welcome my friends from the recess. I think it is a very good idea to construct a second international airport in this country. I am even thinking that if we construct it quickly and properly, we may even be pushed into constructing a third one, and maybe this time it may go to the eastern part of the country so that we can balance the entire country.

I also agree that the airport should be renamed Hoima International Airport. I would like to request Members not to delay the process because this airport was needed yesterday, so that we could improve our tourism. I am calling upon every Member to support it and I urge that the construction should be completed very quickly so that we can develop our country. Thank you very much.

4.12
MR LAWRENCE BIYIKA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. However, I also have some few issues to raise concerning the loan request for construction of the airport.

First, it is true that this airport will boost our economy and more so Hoima because of the oil. It is estimated that we have about 6.5 billion barrels of oil with 1.5 recoverable. If we sell it at the current price, we have to do a cost-benefit analysis of how much money we are spending on oil extraction and also the airport, including the profits we shall make. That is very important.

By 2020-2030, the global situation will require us to decarbonise because we are party to the decarbonisation process. That means many countries will have to leave their oil underground because they would want to decarbonise. Therefore, the quicker we move with the airport and oil extraction, the better. If we do not do that, the agreements we have signed, like the Green Growth Agreement, will tie us down from getting some other funding. Therefore, it is important that we move quickly and sell our oil before 2030.

Secondly, as we think of Hoima International Airport, we should also think of Arua International Airport because it is very important for cross-border trade. 

That is all I wanted to say, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

4.14
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion to borrow money to construct the Kabaale International Airport. We need that international airport because of the oil and tourism we have talked about.

I would like to comment on the committee’s recommendation to carry out an environmental impact assessment. I thought this was already done. If you are still going to do the environmental impact assessment, how long will it take? Supposing it turns out to be the opposite of what you hope for, what will happen? These are the reasons why our projects delay; we get money even before we carry out environmental impact assessments.

Secondly, we support our local contractors but do they have the capacity to work on international airports? Let us give this to the experts who can really build an international airport. 

Thirdly, on compensation, we need a lot of land. If you do not compensate in time, it will delay the project. 

On the name of the airport, I actually thought it was Kabale International Airport. Let us use a name which is known by everybody. Kabaale is a small village; let us call it Hoima International Airport because we know where Hoima is, instead of guessing where Kabaale is. (Laughter)

Lastly, Mr Speaker, Arua Airport is one of the second largest airports in terms of aircraft handling. It is second to Entebbe and during Amin’s time, it was proposed that it should be an international airport and it deserves to be called an international airport. However, today they are telling us it is not called an international airport but it is an aerodrome, which can accommodate international airplanes. What does this mean? 

Arua Airport qualifies to be called an international airport. It must be supported. The building they put there was supposed to be very big but I do not know what happened and they put a very small building there-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are supposed to be relevant to the debate.

MS BABA DIRI: Yes, it is relevant –(Laughter)- because Arua is the most viable and it is second to Entebbe - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Somebody else is going to start talking about Gulu International Airport. Therefore, let us not go there.

MS BABA DIRI: No, Gulu does not have as many aircraft as that of Arua Airport. Arua Airport’s planes go to Sudan and Congo. However, I support the one of Kabaale on condition that Arua International Airport is also upgraded. Thank you very much. 

4.18
MS REHEMA WATONGOLA (NRM, Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I have only one statement to put across. 

My request goes to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I support this loan request but I would like to request him and other ministers that because this is a serious project, we need zero corruption. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I put the question to this motion? I put the question to the motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow €270,266,042.15 from the UK Export Finance and €37,110,585.9 from Standard Chartered Bank London for the construction of phase 1 of the new Kabaale International Airport in Hoima District - We cannot amend the motion now because the documentation is already like this. The technical people will deal with those issues and it will be done accordingly. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson and honourable members.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues for supporting the Kabalega-Hoima International Airport. (Laughter) It is my understanding that we have passed a loan request for Hoima-Kabalega International Airport. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I would like to raise a procedural point. Hoima International Airport, Hoima Industrial Park, Hoima Refinery land are going to change Hoima into a city status. You have heard Members from Arua say that they want a city and I am sure Gulu, Mbale and Kabale also want city status. In 2010, when we passed the Kampala City law, we found a lacuna because of the absence of a Kampala and other cities law. Even the Kampala law remains without the metropolitan conurbation which includes Mukono, Wakiso, Entebbe and Bombo. Would it not be proper now for Government to bring the other cities’ law – not only Hoima - mindful of the 2010 gap which remained deficit in legislation in Parliament?

The second procedural matter, Mr Speaker, is from the report. I would like to thank the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Works and Transport for fundraising for this money and calling it an oil and gas international airport. However, as the Committee on National Economy has rightly stated, we cannot make an airport for oil and gas alone. Can the two ministries report back to Parliament about the multimodal transport system? 

Since this airport is next to the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), when are you bringing in the water barges so that the Congolese of Bunya, Butembo and Isiro, when they land in Kabaale International Airport, find it easy to cross to DRC? How do my people in West Nile find it easy to connect back to West Nile, because that was the old route for people from West Nile? Also, the lake is navigable up to Nimule, Sudan. How can we bring a multimodal transport system for that region?

The other important issue is that area apart from oil which is temporary –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you rose on a procedural point.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I am requesting that a month from now, through your guidance, the ministry reports back on the multimodal transport system, including the tourism connection. This is because in that area, one can connect from Semuliki, Ntoroko to Hoima and Murchison Falls up to the North.

I did not raise it in the debate because I do not want to mix the passing of the loan request, which is an issue of fundraising, with the bigger picture. Our oil and gas policy says that we use the finite oil resource for a diversified economy. That is why I am talking of cross-border transport and tourism. Can we get that report? I would request, Mr Speaker, that you give a ruling that at least in a month we get a comprehensive report from the transport sector.

Finally, an airport without exports will be a waste. Can we ask for the airline and have export preparation because Uganda Air Cargo that was helping us is no more? When we have an international airport without reviving the airline, air cargo and domestic flights, it will be in vain. Can we get a comprehensive report in a month’s time or else I bring a motion to that effect?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, there are procedures on how we handle business in this House. If the chair of the committee responsible for this sector is able to capture those things, please capture them and discuss them in the committee and see if they can come back to the House in a form which can be discussed by this House. 

I cannot give a directive from the chair to deal with those very substantial issues. I cannot say, “Bring it in a month or two weeks.” It will not make sense. Can the committee please lift these issues out and see if this is a matter that can be brought in a formal way and then we have a discussion on it. You can interact with ministers of works and all these people involved in the sector and come back to us as a committee and brief us so that we can be guided on how to proceed with this matter. Is that okay? Please, lift these recommendations and proposals and see if the committee can interrogate them further, Madam Clerk, and then we see how to proceed with this. Thank you.

We are had skipped item No.7. I ask the Member to start by an apology to the House. If he is unable to render that apology, we will not proceed with that motion.

4.26
MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity and allowing me to apologise to the Members of Parliament. I was supposed to be here in time but somehow, the traffic jam delayed me. So I beg for your apology.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you beg for their apology?

MR MAJEGERE: I want to apologise to the Members of Parliament for waiting for me to present this motion. I was not here in time - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed. 

MR MAJEGERE: A thousand apologies. Mr Speaker, this is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to investigate the lawlessness of boda boda associations. The motion is moved under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS in the month of September 2017, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs presented a statement to Parliament on the lawlessness of the Boda Boda 2010 Association;

AND WHEREAS it was noted in the statement that-

a) 	the boda boda industry has grown phenomenally over time, making it difficult to estimate the accurate number of operators as well as effectively regulate them due to the fluidity of the industry;

b) 	members of boda boda associations are involved in criminal and other unlawful activities such as brutalising the general public and members of rival associations, which activities have caused insecurity;

c) 	complaints have been lodged against the Boda Boda 2010 Association wherein the Uganda Police acknowledges their involvement in acts of violence, arrests and torture of members of other associations and forcing them to subscribe to their association as well as confiscation and impounding of their motor cycles;

FURTHER CONCERNED that there are allegations that some of the boda boda associations are in possession of weapons and other harmful substances including batons, handcuffs, knives, guns, sprays, among other others, and these are used to extort money from their victims;

CONVINCED that the unlawful, errant and aggressive behaviour of the boda boda associations is a serious matter of national importance, which should be investigated by Parliament in a bid to forge a way forward and save the lives of the people of Uganda that are endangered by such groups of people;

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that Parliament constitutes a select committee to investigate the errant lawlessness of Boda Boda 2010 and other boda boda associations.” 

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The motion is seconded by hon. Aogon, hon. Akamba and hon. Lufafa. Would you like to briefly speak to your motion?

MR KYEWALABYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, you have been watching television, reading in the newspapers and even hearing from other sources how the Boda Boda 2010 Association has been harassing and torturing people.

Personally, I was not initially concerned because I am not from Kampala until they attacked one of my voters from Mayuge. That voter called me and said that they had arrested him and wanted Shs 200,000 from him after impounding his motorcycle. When I called them, they said, “Don’t you know Boda Boda 2010; you go to the police?” I came to the Speaker here who gave me an opportunity to come onto the Floor of Parliament and present this as a matter of national importance. Thereafter, the Speaker ordered the minister to present a statement. 

However, the day after I had presented that statement here, so many people thronged my office; you would think it was Namugongo Martyrs Shrine. People came with so many sad stories telling me how they were beaten, lost their motorcycles and how money was extorted from them. I am told there are some lives which have been lost because of this Boda Boda 2010. They even had the temerity to call for a press conference and threaten my life. They gave me three days. I am lucky to be still alive but I was given three days.

The minister came here and presented a statement. He accepted that there are criminal and unlawful activities being carried out by Boda Boda 2010. However, at the end of the statement, he was somehow exonerating this group and I realised that maybe they had intimidated the minister as well. Stories are everywhere; even on television, you see people being harassed.

Mr Speaker, that day when the minister presented a statement, the presiding officer of the House ordered me to sit down. It was unfortunate but maybe if I had presented this statement that day, even the school children who were beaten – I think you read about the school bus that was blocked and the children were beaten. 

Mr Speaker, I have a list of over 30 police cases that the police have not handled. These cases were reported at the police stations and they consist of people who have been beaten, harassed and whose motorcycles went missing. I also have medical forms of people who were beaten and discharged from hospitals. I have sad photographs of a few people who were beaten by the Boda Boda 2010. I also have photos of motorcycles and other tools they used to hit the people. 

The other day I read on social media that one of the main leaders of the Boda Boda 2010 had been arrested in Adjumani with a stolen vehicle. I have letters from the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) of Kampala and the Minister of Internal Affairs showing signs that they have tried what they could but they have failed to tame this association. 

The other day while I was watching TV, I saw the Minister of Kampala lamenting to the President, requesting him to help us tame this association. By the time it reaches that extent, then I believe there is probably no other institution which can come up and help the Ugandans apart from this Parliament, Mr Speaker. 

I have letters from the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Internal Affairs, also lamenting that he has failed to tame the Boda Boda 2010. I also have letters from KCCA and RDCs as well as some medical forms from people that have been harassed and beaten by this association. That is the extent we have reached. They say these people have even got guns and handcuffs; when they arrest you, they put you in handcuffs. I am told that they also have a store somewhere in Busega where they take those motorcycles. When they are taken there, someone will not see their motorcycle. Therefore, Mr Speaker, people are crying. 

I would like to end by asking your office, Mr Speaker, to allow a select committee to be constituted. This is because I have also seen the police on TV complaining that they cannot manage or handle this group. I beg that you allow a committee to investigate this association. There are so many people that are willing to come and testify against this association so that a solution can be found. I beg to move, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Do we have a seconder of the motion? Who is seconding the motion? 

MR KYEWALABYE: Mr Speaker, it was hon. Mwine Mpaka but he has just travelled from Mbarara and he has not yet reached here. He says that he is still on his way but I have other Members who can step in.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We need one seconder, please. 

MR KYEWALABYE: It is hon. Pentagon Kamusiime. 

4.37
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank my honourable colleague for bringing up this issue. 

About two months ago, I raised a point of concern here about the same group when they attacked a school bus in Busega and assaulted children, their teachers and other caretakers, including the police officers that were there. Therefore, this request is brought in good faith and it is intended to restore security in this country. 

After presenting here, I actually had a discussion with the Minister of Internal Affairs and he promised me that they were going to do something. However, I would like to say that if we still have such acts of insecurity, indiscipline, freedom to beat anybody and to even scare those in uniform, – our police officers - we cannot then question who is killing women and other people around Wakiso, Entebbe and elsewhere. It means that even the life of the common Ugandan, including us, is in danger because we still have an unruly group. 

I have interacted with a number of people, both in the boda boda business and others, and we have reliable information that indeed these people have dangerous articles; they have pistols, handcuffs and other weapons. They also have their chambers that act as prisons or cells in Kikoni, Bakuli in Mengo and other areas. They have the liberty to take your boda boda and hold onto it until they want to give it to you. 

There is enough evidence that can help the committee to find out who these people are. I have also discovered that when they arrest some people, they freely interface with some of our security personnel. According to some information from the people available, even when the police find them in action, they do not seem to say that they do not know them. 

Mr Speaker and Members, to help this country manage issues of insecurity and also help our police officers and other personnel to do their work without any form of contradiction from other unprofessional or unknown people, I think we need to let Parliament investigate this issue so that we can clearly know who exactly is behind the Boda Boda 2010. This is because probably that is why they are failing to discover who they are or to bring them to book. 

Therefore, I would like to also add my voice to request that you allow Parliament to investigate - (Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member for Bunya East and the Member who has seconded this motion. There are procedural issues here. If in your own motion you have said that the police and everybody else have failed, how will Parliament succeed? Parliament does not have instruments for arresting people or even jailing them. This Parliament will simply come up with its findings and make recommendations. Thereafter, it will still refer them to the same police and agencies that you have said have failed to do anything. Therefore, where do we end up with this? 

What recommendations will a select committee, a sitting committee of the House right now or a substantive committee of the sector come up with that will be of anything? This is because Parliament has no capacity to go and arrest people and do those things. 

4.42
MAJ. GEN. PECOS KUTEESA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not speaking in the capacity of a General but I have got a suggestion. 

Parliament has got a level that it can reach, but what we do is enact laws, which can be enforced. For most of the cases that we have here, everybody is arrested and they are taken to court but they say there is no law against them. Now, what are the laws that govern those boda boda formations? What procedures do we put in place to avoid such a thing? How many people have been arrested and the next day they are found on the streets because according to the law there was no case. I think Parliament should find a way or make laws that will govern how these people operate.

The police can only enforce a law that is already enacted but there is no law on this. I do not think we will do it; it is just fighting a losing war. How do you differentiate who belongs to this association? The law should be designed to regulate this. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The second issue the mover of the motion should help us with is: Are you talking of Boda Boda 2010 Association only or as you say in your motion, “further concerned that there are allegations that some of the boda boda associations are in possession of weapons and other harmful substances”? Do you want the committee to investigate Boda Boda 2010 Association or all boda boda associations in the country? You need to help the House so that we can see how to proceed.

MR KYEWALABYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The first issue is that the victims would like to be heard because nobody is hearing them out. They thought that Parliament would be able to give them that room to be heard.

Secondly, we can investigate all the associations, although most of the pointers are at Boda Boda 2010. However, of course sometimes they fight with other associations, meaning that if you allow, Mr Speaker, the committee can investigate all the associations of boda bodas in Kampala and their operations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the motion. Can I propose it for debate? The motion is for a resolution of Parliament to investigate the lawlessness of boda boda associations. That is the motion I propose for your debate and debate starts now. Let us first hear the point of procedure from Mitooma.

MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Members for educating me on the new technology. 

Mr Speaker, I wonder whether it would not be proper to send this motion to a committee so that the committee investigates. If we have agreed that they investigate all boda boda associations in Uganda, they can invite their leaders and listen to them and also some of the victims and then they bring a report and at that point we are able to have a thorough debate. I wonder whether we should not proceed that way.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We need to agree whether you want a select committee or a standing committee of the House, which is already resourced to go and carry out this study and come back and inform us. We need to take a decision for the Members proposing a select committee.

4.47
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. On several occasions we have seen members of the public coming out with complaints and crying, having been harassed or charged – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the issue is simple. We have agreed that there is need to investigate this matter; who should investigate it is what we are asking.

MR AKAMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. My view is a select committee should be constituted. It will ably handle this matter to a logical conclusion. The kind of report it produces will concentrate only on this matter. We should be aware that a standing committee will have other business referred to it by this august House. However, for a select committee, it will be only dealing with this particular aspect.

4.49
MS REHEMA WATONGOLA (NRM, Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to suggest that we give it to the internal affairs committee. I would like to add onto what my colleague has already said, that standing committees have a lot of work; what about those Members who are going to be selected on a special committee? They also have other work in their committees.

Therefore, I would like to suggest that since the internal affairs committee is already in place, we should use that committee. Thank you.

4.50
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the mover of the motion because it is very important. 

I would wish to go with an established committee of Parliament. It might be the human rights committee, internal affairs committee or another committee but not a select committee. I say this for quite a number of reasons. For accountability purposes, a committee of Parliament is more resourced and already knows what should be done because some of these things are not new. Some of these issues have been there, they have been discussed before and the only way to connect them properly is through a committee of Parliament.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I do not want us to condemn all the boda boda associations in this country and say we must investigate them. In Ngora, for example, I do not have this kind of crisis. We should not include them in this problem and I will never support that. It is only in Kampala here. Let us look at who is supporting them, who is the cause of the problem. 

He said that it looks like the police seem to be having a problem. My sister who has just left, one time in Kalerwe they were arrested and when they went to make a statement, they were told not to mention this because if they did, something would happen to them. This is at the police! That is why I will clearly say let us go for a committee of Parliament and not a select committee. Thank you.

4.52
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the person who moved the motion. 

I would like to report that in Kapchorwa as we talk, we have had serious issues with boda boda riders. About 10 people have been killed. My situation is different but it is also connected to boda bodas. They come and tell the boda boda rider to take them to such and such a place and that boda boda rider goes and ends there. For this crime to end, I would suggest that a select committee be given this work. 

Secondly, we should concentrate on Kampala first. If we deal with Kampala thoroughly, you may find that the issues in other areas may also be handled. If we discuss other areas, we may fail to move forward. However, if we concentrate on one area, maybe it will help us to calm the other areas. Otherwise, the issue of boda bodas is very serious. As a border district, we are worried; something must be done immediately. Thank you.

4.53
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to agree with the proposal that we have a select committee. With a whole committee, it would be introducing new business to that committee and it takes the whole committee. However, the select committee will be constituted by the Speaker by blending people from different committees with different expertise in order to handle this business. 

This is serious business and it cuts across the whole country. Personally, I have a similar experience, which happened in Mbale. They called me and told me that they had taken away the motorcycle from a young man from my village. I then called the RDC but the expression of the RDC was, “Aaah, these people!” That means that there is really a problem. Therefore, I beg that we go with a select committee, Mr Speaker.

4.54
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the motion and thank the honourable member for bringing this matter to this House. 

First of all, boda boda groups are very tricky countrywide; they have a big syndicate. If something happens, they can gang up and follow you wherever you are. One time in Muyenga, a muzungu slightly knocked a boda boda. They followed him, removed him from the car and started beating him up. Mr Speaker, if we do not handle the boda bodas carefully, they can cause menace in the whole country. Therefore, I propose a select committee to handle this particular group. 

They are not all bad in other parts of the country but basically in Kampala and surrounding areas, there is a problem with boda bodas. Therefore, we could investigate those registered groups and some other members of the boda boda associations. After Kampala, maybe the committee can interview people in other areas. I think it is important that the committee is selected and investigations carried out to be able to bring order to this country. Thank you very much.

4.56
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This matter concerns all of us. Where we come from, we have had different challenges. In my place, actually it is the boda bodas who are attacked. We have had about three cases where some boda boda boys have been attacked and their motorcycles stolen. In one incident, one of the boys was killed. 

I would therefore like to find out the role of the Ministry of Internal Affairs in this, because this is not a new thing. They are very aware that these challenges are happening. Therefore, as we compose the committee - First of all, I would like to suggest that we go with a standing committee of Parliament. This is because select committees are known for asking for extra funds and the time may also not be enough. If we go with a standing committee, I think it will do us good. However, as we compose the committee, I would like to suggest that the Ministry of Internal Affairs be part of this committee. 

I would also like to state that the boda boda system is actually a known transport system in this country, but what is the Ministry of Works and Transport doing? Do we have fully registered boda bodas everywhere? Are these associations we are talking about known by the ministry? These are the issues which I think the Ministry of Works and Transport also need to pick up; they need to give us a report on what they are doing to regulate further existence of illegal groups. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.58
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi East County, Kibaale): Mr Speaker, these are issues to do with security and we have the whole Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs that handles security matters in this country – the police and all security networks.

Mr Speaker, you have guided this House that we make recommendations and our recommendations are implemented by maybe the Uganda Police Force in regards to security matters, like the way we handled the issue of the women murders; it is the police that took action but of course following our recommendation. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I think if we can empower our Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, they can handle this. 

If we resort to referring each and every matter to a select committee, then we shall have many matters of national importance which can now be referred to a select committee as well. I beg that we empower the committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and they can handle this ably. The Uganda Police Force and the other security organisations fall under this committee. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.59
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Mr Speaker, straightaway I support that we put in place a select committee and I have strong reasons for that. Somebody talked about experience and somebody talked about training. We have all sorts of people here in this Parliament. I think in the wisdom of the Speaker, all these brains that we need shall be selected to do the right job for us. Therefore, we need a select committee.

Secondly, if you talk about a standing committee or sectoral committee of Parliament, they are already overloaded. This is something which is a priority, given the fact that we are going for Christmas now. 

The other thing I do not support is the idea of investigating everybody who is a boda boda rider. I would like to say that those whose activities have been reported should be the ones we go after. We are talking about Boda Boda 2010, for example, and we have the evidence about their activities; why should we go for people in Kumi who nobody has reported? You will be disorganising the economic system of the Ugandans who are doing work out there. 

Therefore, I would like to restate that let us support the idea of putting in place a select committee. It could even include me because I am also one of those people who know how to investigate. (Laughter)  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.01
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of boda bodas is very pathetic. However, the honourable member said the police and the army said they cannot do anything. I would like to request that if you have evidence that the Inspector General of Police (IGP) and the commander of the armed forces say they cannot handle, you table it and we upload on our iPads so that we know. Otherwise, you cannot say they cannot handle yet they have not come out themselves.  

I would like to request that since we have the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, they should go on and handle this issue. If all those fail, we have the local way. If things fail, Members, you can come; you have seen people being followed around by bees. (Laughter) We can handle that thing in a local way. Where others fail, you consult us. Thank you. 

5.02
MR ROBERT MUSOKE (NRM, Budiope West County, Buyende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to second the proposal that a select committee be constituted. 

I would like to give an empirical example. I come from Buyende and represent Budiope West County. Last year, from May to July the police in Buyende impounded all motorbikes without proper documentation and a total of about 150 motorbikes were impounded.  However, I did not see any single boda boda produced in courts of law. Therefore, if we entrust the structures that already exist, we might face challenges. Had I been given chance to ask where this case ended, then I would have grounds to argue otherwise but if - (Interruption)

MR KAMUSIIME: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving me the opportunity. Mr Speaker, concerning Boda Boda 2010, I would like to request that we constitute a select committee for reasons which I may not say here. However, it is alleged that we have big shots behind this group. That is the reason why they are so unruly. Therefore, if we follow the existing structures we have, we may not find a conclusive answer. Let us do this once and for all for the benefit of our time, money and security of all Ugandans. I beg to move.

MR MUSOKE: Thank you. As I conclude, I would like to say that a select committee should be constituted and given terms of reference. I have a conviction that clean work shall be produced in that way. Thank you very much.

5.04
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to also support the constitution of a select committee to investigate this matter. They would concentrate on the motion that is on the table now. 

Mr Speaker, I know some of the reasons as to why some Members are against a select committee and one of the reasons is financial constraints in Parliament. However, there is no cost one can attach to the life of a human being. I would like to think that as Parliament of Uganda, we would do whatever we can to support the people who would constitute the select committee. 

What hon. Majegere has brought forward is just an eye opener. We have had many cases. In spite of the fact that hon. Majegere has brought out the issues surrounding Boda Boda 2010, there are many cases where boda bodas have been conduits for criminals. They are aiding killings countrywide. 

I would like to even suggest that we should go further and plan for something, like the General said - putting in place rules and regulations. In some countries where we go to benchmark, you find a province or a district with different number plates but in the same country. Why can’t we do this in Uganda? I believe it can help us identify where these boda bodas come from. We could distinguish between a boda boda from Jinja and Kampala, for example. 

Why would you only concentrate in Kampala? I would like disagree – mine also comes from Ngora; I am all over. If we do not set rules and regulations for boda bodas countrywide, they will remain a conduit for criminals. Not all of them are bad but it is important that we put rules and regulations that can guide our boda boda riders to safeguard the lives of people and property. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you commission whatever committee you will decide on to do a countrywide investigation, then this term of Parliament will end before they have finished their work. That is fact. Almost every little trading centre has a boda boda association and they are many. You are going to have to do something that is realistic in the sense that you pick an area, do the study properly and use the findings there and see which aspects are of general application. (Applause)

I would like to therefore advise because I have ever participated in a nationwide select committee operation on election violence. First of all, our report never saw the Floor here and yet we went countrywide. We tried but we could not finish and it took a lot of time. Most of the time, we even missed business in the House because we were all over the place. It was difficult and I say this from experience. 

You might want to think about an outfit that is going to look at a good sample area like Kampala and even within Kampala, you may not finish all the associations because you might find that the in Kampala alone, there are those that are registered and those that are not but they are associations. I think you should think properly before we say go to Ngora, Buvuma Islands - Are there boda bodas in the islands? These are practical issues and they are serious challenges.

The purpose of this is to find some form of regulation so that you can use the regulations to apply everywhere. The first point of contact would be the Ministry of Works and Transport and we would urge the ministry to tell us why things have gone this way as if there is now complete disorder. 

With this guidance, therefore, I need someone to make a concrete proposal on what this House should resolve so that we can take a decision. I will not do it from the Chair - No, there is no adding; everything is clear. I have just requested that you make a concrete proposal so that we can take a decision; there is nothing to add. Just make your proposal along the framework that I have guided so that we do not spend too much time going everywhere and doing nothing. Would you like to make a proposal, mover of the motion? 

MR MAJEGERE: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank colleagues who have given many proposals. On the issue of a standing committee of Parliament, these people say that those Boda Boda 2010 -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  We have heard the arguments. Just make your proposal. What is your final proposal?

MR MAJEGERE: Mr Speaker, I would like to suggest that a select committee investigates the associations within Kampala but specifically focuses on Boda Boda 2010.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The proposal is that the investigation should focus in Kampala area. The incidences are similar countrywide but then the committee will see if they can be of general application. The next step is that it should be a select committee but not an in-house committee of Parliament. What would be the proper way? The mover of the motion thinks a select committee would do a better job.

5.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Given the fact that we are moving into a season of budgeting and that the standing committee would be engaged in a number of other issues, we need to treat this issue as a unique matter so that whatever results come out of this committee can inform Government and also improve on frameworks that we already have. 

It is true we have some regulations but the implementation has been an issue. I think we can learn from the committee’s work. I have no problem with having a select committee, within a specific period, looking at this unique issue and we resolve some of those challenges. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What period would be reasonable? 

MR AOGON: Mr Speaker, I suggest that the 45 days are quite enough. At the same time, I suggest that when we are investigating these people, let us not go for the entire Kampala. Let us go specifically for those for whom complaints have been raised. That would be more orderly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There will be terms of reference drawn. That will be taken care of in the terms of reference. Based on the general discussion that has taken place, I am sure the Clerk will be able to generate some terms of reference from what we have discussed. Therefore, it will be a select committee to handle this issue.

Honourable members, I now put the question to the motion as proposed and discussed. The substance of the motion is that Parliament constitutes a select committee to investigate the errant lawlessness of Boda Boda 2010 and other boda boda associations. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will now proceed to constitute the committee and purify the terms of reference, set a date and also provide a timeframe on when they should report if they are to be effective. If they take a year, then we will have lost the steam of dealing with these issues. Is that okay?

Thank you very much, honourable members. I have looked at the Order Paper and there being no other business for today, this House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock.
 
(The House rose at 5.14 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 29 November 2017 at 2.00 p.m.)