Monday, 12 November 2012 

Parliament met at 10.57 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Good morning, honourable members. You are welcome to this sitting. I have a sad announcement to make, which I will do later, in relation to the hon. John Odit, who has passed away and you have received messages to the effect that there will be a special sitting in his honour tomorrow. However, that sitting will not take place tomorrow, but Wednesday. The body will be brought at 9.00 a.m. on Wednesday and then we will do the rest of the programme. So, the special sitting will be on Wednesday. I will be making the proper communication at the right time. 

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

11.02
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, we had done something when we last met. Do you have something to report, briefly? 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, THE last time, when we adjourned, we were about to consider clause 20, but we had stood over clause 4. We have not harmonised on that clause, unless hon. Kasirivu wants to report. We have not yet harmonised it in as far as the definition of ‘land owner’ is concerned.  

So, I would like to report on clause 4.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Is clause 4 harmonised? 

MR WERIKHE: Yes, it is, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Is that the true position, honourable members? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, proceed. 

MR WERIKHE: On clause 4, we had stopped at a proposed sub-clause 2 and sub-clause 3 under clause 4 was substituted with the following: “A licensee shall contract a separate entity to manage the transportation, storage, treatment or disposal of waste arising out of petroleum activities.” 

We had an insertion of a new sub-clause 4 to read as follows: “For avoidance of doubt, the licensee shall remain responsible for the activities of the entity referred to under sub-clause 3.”

We should also substitute for the current sub-clause 3 with the following: “The National Environmental Management Authority in consultation with the Authority, may grant a licence for the management of transportation, storage, treatment or disposal of waste arising out of petroleum activities to an entity contracted by a licensee under sub-section 3, on terms and conditions prescribed in the licence.”

We also substituted sub-clause 4 with the following: “A person contracted by the licensee under sub-section 3 shall not carry out those activities without a licence issued by the National Environmental Management Authority.”

We had an insertion of a new sub-clause 7 immediately after sub-clause 6 to read as follows: “Regulations made under sub-section 6 shall be laid before Parliament.” I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that is the report from the harmonised position. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I was looking at clause 4(5) where we wanted to insert -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If you have no issues with the ones raised, can we put a question on this one first, and then come to you? Honourable members, the amendments proposed by the Chairman of the Committee on the basis of meetings for harmonisation. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We wanted to insert in clause 4(5) between ‘a licence’ and ‘commits’ the following: “Or fails to comply with the terms and conditions prescribed in the licence issued under sub-clause 3,” so as to read: “A person who carries on the management of the production, transportation, storage or treatment of waste arising out of petroleum activities without a licence or fails to comply with the terms and conditions prescribed in the licence issued under sub-clause 3 commits an offence and on conviction, is liable to a fine not exceeding 5,000 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding 10 years or both.”  
 
The justification: To provide for criminal liability for failure to comply with the terms of the licence. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Was that discussed? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Yes. 

MR WERIKHE: I remember, we agreed on the penalty of 5,000 currency points. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  So, was what was read by the honourable member for Lwemiyaga, an agreed position?  You agreed on the first; what happens to the person who fails to comply? Did you make some arrangement on that? Can we restate? Which particular clause are you talking about now? Is it an existing clause here? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Yes, clause 4(5). We said we should not look at someone who carries out activities without a licence, but we also said even that one who fails to comply. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   I think that is okay. 

MR WERIKHE: It is fine. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is fine. Could you restate it for the record? Just restate what you are inserting. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Clause 4(5): “A person who carries on the management of the production, transportation, storage or treatment of waste, arising out of petroleum activities without a licence or fails to comply with the terms and conditions prescribed in the licence issued under sub-clause 3, commits an offence and on conviction, is liable to a fine not exceeding 100,000 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding 10 years or both.”   

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is it clear?  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are we done with clause 4 now? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, only that clause 4(8) would be deleted because what it presents has already been covered; because it states that, “the licensee for the relevant petroleum activities, shall be responsible for the payment of costs to the entities referred to in sub-section 3 for the management of the production, transportation, storage and treatment of waste -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think that is taken care of in the amendments now.

MR WERIKHE: We did agree on that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The proposal is for the deletion of the existing sub-clause 8. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put a question to the entire clause 4.

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR WERIKHE: On clause 7, we agreed that Government has to participate. The principle is that Government will or shall participate in the agreements. The only bit, which we had not sorted out, was whether “Authority” is part of Government or not. But I think we have now agreed that “Authority” is part of Government; so, there is no way you can actually stop Government from participating in the agreements. I think that is the only issue, which was standing in the way, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, there is no amendment on clause 7?

MR KAFABUSA: No, there is none, except the committee –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, the committee has substantial amendments on clause 7 –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member for Ndorwa you accessed the microphone; anyhow, proceed.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, I was reminding the chairman of the committee that actually, clause 7 has a number of amendments, which we could pass.

MR WERIKHE: Yes, Mr Chairman. We propose to insert new sub-clauses 3 and 4. We agreed that a new sub-clause 2 be deleted. We had proposed in the report -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Which clause are we talking about?

MR WERIKHE: This is clause 7. But we are now proposing to insert new sub clauses to provide for Cabinet and parliamentary approval of model production sharing agreements or any other model agreements as the case may be as follows: 

“3) The minister shall develop or cause to be developed a model production sharing agreement or any other model agreement as may be entered into by Government under this section, which shall be submitted to Cabinet for approval.

(4) The minister shall lay before Parliament the model production agreements or any other model agreement approved by Cabinet under sub-section 3.

(5) A model agreement approved by Cabinet shall guide negotiations of any future agreements under this section.”

Those are the proposed amendments by the committee in clause 7.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That means that the existing and numbered sub clause becomes sub clause 1.

MR WERIKHE: Yes, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This is because when you start by 2, something should have happened to the existing paragraph after 7. That would be 7(1) now. Is that correct?

MR WERIKHE: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, we have not yet harmonised on clause 9, with colleagues who sponsored the amendment. I request that we continue standing over this for a while.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Clause 9 stood over.

(Clause 9, stood over.)

Clause 11

MR WERIKHE: For the same reasons that we gave, I think that clause too.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, Clause 11 stood over.

(Clause 11, stood over.)

Clause 12

MR WERIKHE: In clause 12, the committee had a small amendment; “Conduct of functions of the Authority”. In sub clause 2(b) insert the word ‘petroleum’ immediately before the word ‘activities’. The justification is to provide for clarity since the phrase ‘petroleum activity’ is defined in the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that clear, honourable members? I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18

MR WERIKHE: In clause 18, we proposed an amendment with regard to sub clause 3 -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We passed 2 and 3 already.

MR WERIKHE: Yes, that was passed. With that, as a committee, I do not think we have any -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Any other amendments on clause 18?

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, I propose that clause 18(2) where the word ‘minister’ appears, be substituted with ‘President’ and where ‘Cabinet’ appears, be substituted with ‘Parliament’.

Justification:  To ensure that Parliament approves the members of the Board appointed by the President, for purposes of transparency.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that agreed?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, Mr Chairman. We agreed since the Board of the Authority is going to be appointed by the President not the minister, the approval will be done by Parliament.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The approval will be by Parliament? Is that the position?

MR WERIKHE: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, in clause 20, the committee proposes to substitute in sub clause 1 for the word ‘five’ immediately before ‘years’, the word ‘four’. Also, insert in sub clause 1 the word ‘only’ between the words ‘re-appointment for’ and ‘one more term’. This is for clarity, to read as follows: “A member of the Board shall hold office for four years and is eligible for re-appointment for only one more term.” I just wanted to emphasise that the re-appointment should be for four years and for only more additional term.

In sub clause 2(b), delete the words ‘be appointed to’ appearing between the phrases ‘members of the Board shall’ and ‘hold office’. 

Justification: Re-appointment entitles members of the Board to hold office without further appointment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Could you clarify it to them? 

MR WERIKHE: Sub clause 2?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes. Read what it looks like now.

MR WERIKHE: It would, read, “Upon re-appointment, two members of the Board shall hold office…” We are proposing to delete the words ‘be appointed’ and instead use ‘shall hold office for three years while three members shall hold office for four years.’

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. Please, read again for clarity.

MR WERIKHE: “Upon re-appointment, two members of the board shall hold office for three years while three members shall hold office for four years.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that clear, honourable members.

MRS OGWANG: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I find this clause very discriminatory because we have the board members whose tenure of office starts at the same time; how are we going to discriminate that the three members shall hold office for four years while the other three hold office for three years? I feel that clause 1 is sufficient and we can leave out clause 2. Then the responsible authority will appoint the first four members while the remaining will be appointed after one year.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Then the board will not be fully constituted.

MRS OGWANG: Yes, but it is necessary for purposes of continuity. Because, if we start with five members at a go, then how are we going to discriminate? If we leave too much room for lobbying here and there, the members will not concentrate on their work, but they will begin lobbying straight away, to be among the three who will remain. Thank you. 

MR JAMES KYEWALABYE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I agree with hon. Santa Alum. Sub-clause 2 seems to contradict sub-clause 1, which states that, “Board members shall hold office for four years and shall be eligible for appointment for one more term.” That already assumes that the term of office is four years. So, you cannot now come to sub-clause 2 and say that for the second appointment, some of them will be in office for three years and others four years. That is a contradiction. 

So, I would propose that let nature take its course; it is possible that some members, for one reason or another, will not seek re-appointment or will not be available for re-appointment. Administratively, it is up to the minister to make sure that there are always some old members on the new board. Thank you.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think clause 20 should be given a little more concentration because as my colleague has said, sub-clause 1 says: “Board members shall hold office for four years and be eligible for appointment for only one more term.”  That means that the four years pronounced in this first clause sets the general rule for what will amount to the maximum term. 

When we go to the second clause and then talk of some members holding office for only three years, it will water down the provision of sub-clause 1. Therefore, related to what hon. Ogwang said, when we were in Munyonyo, we made it clear that for continuity, clarity and sustainability of the board, there should be some members who should hold office longer. I do not know where that amendment has disappeared. If they are supposed to hold office longer, then they will not be holding it longer in the sense that it is less than four years; it should be more than four years. 

That should be pronounced here. If we are saying the chairperson and vice chairperson of the board – maybe - in case they are re-appointed – should probably hold office longer by a year, then they should go to five years. But to go for three years while here we are talking of four years, to me it is a contradiction. There should be some clarification here. Thank you.

MR NAKABALE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would agree with the Members, but I would wish to say that for purposes of continuity and direction, more so in order to avoid collusion and manipulation, we are better off saying that only four of the board members become eligible for the second term. This would answer the question of why we need the powers of the minister, because at this stage, the minister should be able to advise the appointing authority on who should come back for the second term. If we leave it as an automatic thing that after the four years someone will come for re-appointment, there will be collusion and manipulation, because somebody will be leaving office. So, in order to allay those fears, we could say that four out of the seven are eligible for the second term. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, after necessary consultations, I think this provision creates more confusion than it intends to remedy. This is because, according to me, continuity should be seen in the process of re-appointment and depending on the efficiency of the board members. So, if the appointing authority finds that any of those members is worth re-appointing, that person will be re-appointed. By leaving this as it is, it pre-supposes that even where all the board members have not performed well, you may be bound to retain some of them, which in my opinion is a little bit anomalous. 

Therefore, Mr Chairman, this provision, after necessary consultations should be dropped. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, the operating word is in the “eligibility”. 

MR OGUTTU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I thought that if we wanted continuity – and this happens in many boards – we would find a cure in the first term of the first board, whereby we deliberately appoint some people for four years and some for three. After that, you do not need to anything – it will just be automatic that everybody will serve for four years. The first group which will serve for three years and those who will be replaced, will serve for four years. The cure should, therefore, be in the first term. That is what we should be looking for.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We just have to draft a clause that just allows the re-appointment because I am thinking of a situation where the entire board is involved in some sort of scandal. Wouldn’t the appointing authority’s hands be tied if he must re-appoint two of those who were involved in that scandal? We can just have an allowing clause and then we leave it to the discretion of the appointing authority, for institutional memory, to re-appoint other than for us to say “shall be appointed” which would mean that the appointing authority is bound to re-appoint two members of the board and that will tie his hand, even when circumstances are such that the entire board should actually go. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, in other words, you agree with the Attorney-General?

MR KATUNTU: We are saying the same thing in different words.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: When two Attorneys-General have agreed, what else can the Speaker do, apart from putting the question? 

Honourable members, the motion is for deletion of sub-clause 2. Of course, we have already carried the amendments to sub-clause 1. I put the question to the deletion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR WERIKHE: On clause 21, we have consequential amendments, Mr Chairman. In sub-clause 1, the proposal is to substitute, for the word ‘minister’, ‘President’ and in sub-clause 2, we are also substituting for the word ‘minister’ the word ‘President’. 

This is a consequential amendment because we have already said the appointing authority is the President with the approval of Parliament and certainly, when it comes to termination of appointment, it is not the minister, but it should be the President to do so. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, that would apply even in sub-clause 3.

MR WERIKHE: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, wherever the word ‘minister’ appears we would substitute it with ‘President’. Honourable members, that is clear.

MR WERIKHE: There is another amendment under 2(d). This is, “…for failure to disclose.” There is a word just after disclose, “…upon appointment or” - this is the word we would like to insert to read as follows: “…for failure to disclose upon appointment or at a board meeting, a matter in which he or she has an interest.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that clear, honourable members? I put the question to both that amendment and the consequential amendment changing ‘minister’ to ‘President’. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, clause 23 also needed a consequential amendment to substitute ‘minister’ with ‘President.’ 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The principle is captured. There will be consequential amendments on clause 23. The word ‘President’ will be substituted in place of ‘minister’. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28

MR WERIKHE: We propose an amendment regarding the appointment of the Executive Director. “The Authority shall have an Executive Director, who shall be appointed by the minister on the recommendation of the board.” Because, we feel if the Executive Director is appointed by the President, just as the board, which is supposed to recommend, really, they are at the same level and this will create a conflict. So, we propose that the Executive Director be appointed by the minister on recommendation of the board.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But that is what is in the Bill. 

MR WERIKHE: I am reporting; because there was a proposal, Mr Chairman, but that is okay. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, only that ‘oil’ is oil and we had initially thought it would be appointment by the President. I, however, agree with the chairman.                              

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, we propose as a committee to insert in sub-section (1) at the beginning of the provision, the words, “subject to this Act” - The Access to Information Act, 2005.”

The justification: To keep the non-disclosure within the limits authorised by the law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What were you proposing?

MR WERIKHE: We are proposing to have at the beginning of the provision under 33(1) to read as follows: “Subject to this Act, the Access to Information Act, 2005, a person who is a member of the board or a member of staff of the Authority shall not disclose any information, which he or she may have obtained in the course of his or her employment.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that clear honourable members? Do you have to subject it to the Constitution or that is grant? I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 34

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, in clause 34, we propose as a committee to delete paragraph b. 

Justification: To preserve the integrity of the Authority by insulating it from grants and donations, which may be compromising. 

To insert a new paragraph -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can I first deal with that? There is a proposal to delete b. Deletion of b; “grants or monies donated to the Authority with the approval of the minister responsible for finance.” That is what is being proposed for deletion. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WERIKHE: We propose to insert a new paragraph (d), which will become (c) as follows: “Any revenues in form of rentals, bonuses, sale of data packages and technical information prepared for bidding rounds and levies as the Authority may determine with the approval of the minister, but shall exclude revenue accruing to Government in form of royalties, surface rentals, signature bonuses, proceeds from sale of Government shares of production, and any other duties or fees payable to the government from contract revenue under the terms of the petroleum agreements.”

Justification: To empower the Authority to generate some revenue to support its financing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, have we followed this?

MRS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. While in principle, I agree with the proposal, I further propose that they re-draft the paragraph as follows: “Any revenues in form of rentals, training fees, bonuses, sale of data packages and technical information prepared by bidding rounds, but excluding revenue accruing to Government in form of royalties, proceeds from sale of Government share of production and any other taxes payable to Government”. The justification is for clarity. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, is that clearer than the other one?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Chairman, you agree that the minister’s draft is clearer?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, Mr Chairman.

MR NAKABALE: Mr Chairman, I seek clarification from you. In my understanding, we must ensure that the Authority focuses on its primary role of regulation. Why are we bringing in issues of revenue collection to the Authority? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That clarification cannot come from the chair. It would come from either the chair of the sector committee or the minister. Chair of the committee, is it a purely regulatory Authority?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, but it will need funds to manage its activities. So, funds will be appropriated by Parliament and also monies in its execution of the regulatory functions will also accrue from those sources that have been mentioned. But the collection will be done by the Uganda Revenue Authority; they will not be collecting the money themselves. The money will be generated as a result of their activities. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question on the insertion of the new paragraph – that is the draft from the minister. 

(Question put and greed to.)

Clause 34, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37

MRS ADONG: Mr Chairman, I propose this amendment on clause 37, to replace the word ‘minister’ with ‘Parliament’ and delete the word “Minister responsible for Finance”. This is because the power and right to borrow and lend money, guarantee or raise loans for any public institution, authority or person, is well laid down in Article 159, and the entire chapter 9 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda as amended in 1995. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, the Authority with the approval of Parliament. That is the proposal. How will the Authority access Parliament? 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, although, of course, I can see the background of her mind in this issue, certainly, there are powers of Parliament to approve loans; external loans as we understand it within the provisions of the Constitution. However, for the day-to-day running of the Authority, really, to stretch it to the extent of bringing all those borrowings to Parliament, would be even overstretching the powers of Parliament. 

In my opinion, I would be comfortable if we were to replace ‘Minister’ with ‘Cabinet’; to me that would contain the situation and make it more practical in terms of the Authority’s operations. But for every loan for day-to-day operations to have to come to Parliament for approval, is not tenable, in my opinion. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But there is a more fundamental question; what kind of borrowings are approved by Parliament within the Constitution? That is the bigger question we should be dealing with.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. If the borrowing is limited to internal sources, that can go to the minister or Cabinet as the Attorney-General has said. But when it involves external borrowing, that means Parliament by proxy must be involved because that is Government guaranteeing the loans of the Authority; so it must be Parliament. But for internal borrowings, let it be the Cabinet.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think let us look at the Constitution itself; Article 159, “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Government may borrow from any source”. However, under clause 2, it states: “Government shall not borrow, guarantee or raise a loan on behalf of itself or any other public institution, authority or person except as authorised by or under an Act of Parliament.” 

If you look at the spirit of this particular clause, it does not only stop at money usable by the Central Government. But it includes public institutions, authorities – and I do think this is an Authority we are talking about, and even any other person, except when Parliament has authorised.

The reason is very clear; you are going to commit a public institution to debt, and if you give the minister these wide discretionary powers of approval, then he can commit this institution to enormous amounts of money, which will affect either the public debt or the taxpayer to pay.

The issue raised by hon. Sebunya, therefore, does not apply. The Constitution is talking about any sort of borrowing, whether internal or external. 

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, I request that we stand over this.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I would like us to proceed with open minds and hands. A matter has been elucidated ably by the Constitution, which is the authority. With such matters, for the spirit of moving on with the Bill, it is prudent that like for this obvious one – because, really, allowing authorities or corporations to borrow on behalf of the people of Uganda is so serious a matter that you cannot just give away. 

Now that our hands are even tied, there should be no debate and argument about this. I propose that we proceed.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I understand the concerns expressed by the Member for Lwemiyaga. But the Shadow Attorney-General has referred to the Constitution - Article 159(2), which I agree with. “Government shall not borrow, guarantee or raise a loan on behalf of itself or any other public institution, authority or person except as authorised by or under an Act of Parliament.” Therefore, where the minister is saying that we stand it over, we want to look at the Public Finance and Accountability Act, in which the officers actually state that, the Minister of Finance can approve all loans if the need is originating from the responsible -(Interjections)– pardon me? 

In short, why we are standing over it – I do not have my Public Finance and Accountability Act with me, but they are getting the relevant provisions so that we look at them - because that is what the Constitution says - and then we agree on this matter at a later stage.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, the clause is stood over. They want to consult the law and then we move forward. Let us not spend time on it now. My guidance is that we move to the next clause.

Clause 38

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 38 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38 agreed to.

Clause 39 agreed to.

Clause 40 agreed to.

Clause 41 agreed to.

Clause 42

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, under clause 42, the committee proposes to insert in sub-clause 2(a), the word, ‘petroleum’ immediately before the word, ‘reserve’ so as to read as follows: “The report referred to in sub-clause 1 shall contain petroleum reserve estimates of Uganda” so as to be specific as to the type of reserves.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that clear?  I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I propose that we amend clause 42 where it provides that, “The Board shall submit to the minister,” and substitute that with, “The Board shall submit to Parliament.” (Interjections) No, Mr Chairman; sub-clause 3 covers this. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 42, as amended stands part of the Bill.


Clause 42, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 43
MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, under Clause 43, the committee proposes in sub-clause (1) to insert the words, “which shall be wholly owned by the State,” immediately after the words, “National Oil Company.” 

Justification: To ensure that the National Oil Company is fully owned by the Republic of Uganda.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, what will it read like now?

MR WERIKHE: It will read, “There shall be incorporated under the Companies Act, a National Oil Company which shall be wholly owned by the State to manage Uganda’s commercial aspects of petroleum activities and the participating interest of the State in the petroleum agreements.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that clearer now? I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WERIKHE: a) Insert a new sub-clause (2) as follows, “The National Oil Company may, with the approval of Parliament, offer its shares to the public upon acquisition of the required competencies and capacity provided that the State shall retain 67 percent of the shares in the company.”

b)Insert sub-clause (3) as follows: “Before the issuance of its shares to the public under sub-section (2) of this section, the shareholders of the National Oil Company shall be a minister who shall hold 99 percent and the Minister responsible for Finance who shall hold 1 percent of the company’s shares on behalf of the State.” 

Justification: To specifically provide for the ownership of the National Oil Company, its shareholding structure; and to empower the company to issue its shares to the public in a manner in which the State retains majority shares. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that clear? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, we had thorough consultations on this matter in which we accepted that it be under the Companies Act and we were so categorical on the floatation of shares; that it shall be owned wholly by Government on behalf of the people of Uganda. And at that stage, we had agreed that it shall remain as such. Should the need arise in future, Government will come back to Parliament for authority for approval of the floatation. 

Now, I do not know whether the chairman is reading from the old text or with the harmonised position because that was the matter that was agreed upon, to enable us to even abandon the corporation; because our initial idea was the National Oil Corporation; but we said no because in case in future the need arises to float the shares, we allow the company, but it shall be owned by Government, wholly.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Do you have a copy of the harmonised position??

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that we insert clause 44 under 43 to state, “Under the objects and functions of the company” to include, “The objects of the company are to manage Uganda’s commercial aspects of petroleum activities and the participating interests of the State of Uganda in the petroleum agreements.” Sub-clause (2), “The functions of the company are: To hold….” 

Having done away with 43 of your amendments, I propose that we proceed under 44, where we shall have the objects and functions of the company, and then we come to the powers of the company, the Board of Directors, qualifications, meetings of the Board, the MD of the company, finances of the company, accounts, internal audit, borrowing powers, powers of the minister under the company, and we end there. 

So, the one that you are now trying to insert be abandoned and we provide for a fully-fledged company wholly owned by Government, on behalf of the people of Uganda, not the proposal you are coming up with, Mr Chairman. In this way, we shall have scored as we shall all be on board because that was indeed the position we agreed with. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I appreciate the concerns raised by the honourable member for Lwemiyaga. However, I find the proposal by the Chairperson of the Committee worth following for the reasons that the proposal takes care of the honourable member’s worries because in any case that matter will still have to come to Parliament. Because he has said  that should the need arise, they will come to Parliament. So, what harm does this do because it still says the same thing? Should the oil company acquire such necessary competences within the national infrastructure and there is need to float shares, then the matter will be decided upon by Parliament. I do not see any harm.

MR KATUNTU: Of course, with the greatest respect to my learned friend, I find the amendment redundant. Parliament has got an inherent power to amend its laws. Should a need arise, then Parliament or the minister will move Parliament to amend section 10, clause now 43(1), and that’s all. So, why are we being speculative? Why are we anticipating something? If Government thinks that the institution has grown the competence and capacity, it will come and we amend clause 43(1) as to the shares;  period. 

In my view, learned Attorney-General, these amendments are very speculative and redundant.

MR NIWAGABA: In addition to that, we have recently passed an amended version of the company’s Act providing for a single member company. And the amendment proposed that this is a wholly owned state company. So, one member will be the Government of Uganda. So, we do not even need to say the Minister for Finance will hold 1 percent; this one will hold – it is just the Government of Uganda since it is going to be managed under the Company’s Act as a single member, wholly owned Government company.

So, we would need to amend this particular clause in light of those developments. 
 
MR WERIKHE: We are saying the same thing except in different words. If this is going to cause concern to other honourable members, we can provide for 100 percent owned by the state. In any case, the minister will come back to Parliament when there is need to float shares. I think it is okay.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, the amendment is in relation to state ownership. I put the question that clause 43,  as amended, stands part of the Bill. 

Clause 43, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 44

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to substitute for paragraphs (g) and (h) the following: 

(g) “To participate in accordance with the terms of the petroleum agreements in joint ventures in which it holds an interest on behalf of the state.”

(h) “To participate in meetings of the operating committees in furtherance of its participation in the respective joint operating agreements.”

Justification: To spell out the functions of the National Oil Company more clearly. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment by the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 44, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 45

MR WERIKHE: In sub-clause 1(b), the committee proposes to insert the word, ‘Petroleum’ immediately before the word, ‘activities’, to read as follows: “Plans regarding projects of major significance to the State’s participation in petroleum activities according to this Act.” 

Justification: To provide clarity since the phrase, ‘petroleum activity’ is defined in the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is clear. Honourable Members, I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, we propose to insert immediately after sub-clause 1, a clause on appointment of the Board of Directors of the National Oil Company to state thus, “The Board of Directors shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament.” 

Justification: To have the mandate of Parliament to oversee this important National Oil Company.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, we have just passed a clause where this is going to be incorporated under the Company’s Act. I do not know how the President is now going to come in, in appointing the Board of Directors. That is my worry. 

MR KATUNTU: We have also just passed a clause saying that where there is a conflict between this Act and the Company’s Act, this Act shall prevail. 

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, I do not agree with the proposal being advanced by the Members for the reason that the way the company is going to be set up to do business, will be in accordance with the Company’s Act, and that is what we are going to follow.

MRS ADONG: Mr Chairman, why we are proposing that the Board of Directors should be appointed by the President and approved by Parliament is because whereas the Authority and other bodies we have deliberated upon and concluded involve supervision and regulation of the oil activities, the National Oil Company involves the beef – the profits. If Parliament does not get hold of it, then we are not doing anything. 

So, I still insist and propose that Parliament should prevail over the Board of Directors of the National Oil Company. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It does not say Parliament. They are proposing the President.

MRS ADONG: Of course, the President appoints and Parliament approves. [HON. MEMBERS: “Aye.”]

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, you ruled here and gave Members a deadline within which they were to bring any amendments to Bills. This is a new amendment. (Interjections) It is a new amendment.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, this kind of proposal is in our proposed amendments, which we have been harmonising along the way. Initially, we had actually proposed to establish a national oil corporation with a whole governance structure and all the other clauses. So, this particular provision is the one we have agreed on, not only with the Chairman of the Committee, but it was also a subject of discussion in State House. And it is in the interest of every Member of Parliament to oversee this particular company which will handle the prospects of oil - the participating interests of the State. So, it should be too transparent for Parliament and the People of Uganda to know. I pray that my sister concedes on this in the interest of speed and justice, fairness and transparency.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Chairperson of the committee, was this discussed?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, to a certain extent, but there was no harmony over it. In the circumstances, I propose that we stand over it and get back to the drawing board. (Interjections) Yes, I propose we stand over it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we stand over it so that we polish it properly? 

HON. MEMBERS: No. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It’s not necessary?

MRS ADONG: Mr Chairman, I think the Board of the National Oil Company, as I said earlier on – let us look at the functions of the National Oil Company and those of the Petroleum Oil Authority. Others are just regulatory. They are going to handle the beef; sales of petroleum, the refinery, state interests, the actual sales and commercial activities. So, if we do not prevail over it as Parliament, then there will be no need for us to prevail over the Petroleum Oil Authority and others. Our interests are actually here. (Applause)

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. By the mood of the Members in the House and the no-harm by the President – I would concur with the opinion of the honourable Member for Nwoya that the President appoints, Parliament approves and then we move on. I hope we do not stand over this matter.

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, we stand over it because we have not discussed it; let us stand over it.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I would entreat the minister. More so, it has been cited that where there is a conflict between the Company’s Act and this law, this law takes precedent. The issue we are handling is very critical and now that we have come a long way in agreement, we should not fracture ourselves at this point in time. There is all the logic, this topic ‘oil’ that we are handling, - the State participation – it does no harm and I rise specifically to say that we better determine this question. There is no contention about it; it is only free-flowing. I had initially thought that we would go by consensus, but it is also provided that we can vote on this matter. 

So, I would imagine that the minister concedes and you put the question to this, Mr Chairman.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal is to insert a new paragraph, which will be (a), to read as follows: “The board shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament.” Is that the amendment? I will put the question to that amendment.

HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, I still move that we stand over it; we need to consult.

HON. MEMBERS: No!

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 45, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, under clause 47, the committee proposes to delete the phrase, “including the stipulation of rules relating to the duty of secrecy of board members and employees” appearing at the end of the clause. 

Justification: It is catered for under clause 150(3).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is the amendment clear as moved? If that is clear, I now put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put a question that clause 47, as amended stand part of the Bill -

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, clause 47 provides that the minister may issue instructions in respect to the National Oil Company, company’s execution of its management tasks under this Act including –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, we have voted on that already. We have voted on the last bit. We have deleted it. That is why it is important that we are together in this meeting. 

I put the question that clause 47, as amended, stand part of the Bill.

Clause 47, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 48

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We have to re-commit now. 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, under clause 48(1), the committee proposes to substitute for the word ‘shall’ with the word ‘may’ so as to read as follows: “The minister may open up areas for petroleum activities.” 

Justification: To give the minister discretion in deciding whether or not to open up new areas for licensing. For example, based on a strategic environment assessment, it may be good grounds for the minister not to open up parts of an area considered for opening up.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that clear, Members?

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, we had expected that we would move an amendment to substitute the word ‘minister’ with the word ‘authority.’ The justification is that this is purely a matter related to the technical aspects of the sector. Therefore, it should be the Authority to open up these areas.

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, no. I do not concur with that proposal. It is the responsibility of the minister to open up these areas for petroleum activities and not the Authority. So, I do not agree with the proposal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What did we pass on licensing? 

HON. MEMBERS: We have not.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON|: Okay, we have not. So, can we stand over this as well, in order to harmonise the two? Okay, clause 48 stood over - but what about the amendment on the word ‘shall’? [HON. MEMBERS: “We have passed that one”] Okay, we have passed that one, whoever may, whether it is the Authority or the minister, may open up areas for petroleum activities. 

I now put a question to the amendment to replace the word ‘shall’ with the word ‘may.’

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The rest of clause 48 is now stood over unless there are other amendments.

MR WERIKHE: Yes, there are other amendments. The implication of clause -  insert a new sub-clause (4) as follows -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: After (3?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, after (3). “The minister shall submit to Parliament a report detailing the areas to be opened up for petroleum activities, and the evaluation and impact assessment conducted under sub-sections (2) and (3). 

Justification: To inform Parliament right from the beginning of petroleum activities.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay? I put the question -

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, I do not agree with the committee’s proposal because environmental aspects are adequately dealt with under clause 4 of this Bill, which deals with issues of environmental aspects adequately.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But what is the amendment saying? The amendment is saying, you will submit to Parliament new areas you want to open. So, what is environmental about that?

MRS MULONI: It is okay, Mr Chairman. I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is okay. Let us now improve. Member for Bukedea wants to improve on this.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have listened to the amendment that the chairperson is introducing, but he does not provide for the timeframe within which the minister should report to Parliament. I think it is very important that that timeframe is provided for. I would like to propose that these reports are made quarterly to Parliament. Thank you

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, but it is saying, ‘before’. If it is before how can it be quarterly?

MS AKOL: Okay then, it can be just before the activities are granted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, that is what is proposed. I put the question to the amendment from the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Any other amendment on 48.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, in sub-clause (8), the committee proposes to substitute the following: “Where the views and comments under sub-section (5) are negative, the minister in consultation with other relevant Government agencies shall consider and take into account such views and may declare an area open for petroleum activities.”

Justification: To require the minister to consult on the negative use in order for him or her to make an appropriate and well informed decision.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But how do you consult with some anonymous group? You are also leaving out who to consult to the discretion of the minister? Who will the minister consult?

MR WERIKHE: The relevant Government agencies like NEMA, Wildlife - Government agencies and institutions. That is what the committee had in mind.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Or you want to deal with the issue of the negative. So, whoever originates the negative issue would be the person to be consulted. Is it?

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think this proposal is redundant because this is in the day-to-day work of the minister, and consulting relevant authorities is also part of his work. He cannot do without consulting. So, I would think this is redundant because we are now doing his work already. We are prescribing how he does his work. So, let us give him a benefit of doubt to make the judgement himself.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see the negative comments are in (5); and the people who can generate the negative comments are interested parties. The interested parties are not named; so, whoever has shown a negative aspect, I think is the person who if you want to consult, would be consulted under (8), but not to make a general -

MR NAKABALE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would wish to second the chairperson, reason being that, at a certain stage, the minister is asked to provide some information through gazetting and the public may pick interest. But if we limit it and it remains redundant, it may not be fair because in such a scenario where we shall be gazetting, the minister will be undertaking that responsibility. Such interested parties may need to come up. So, I would support the chairperson.

MR KAKOOZA: I would support the clause to remain as it is because the fear of hon. Nakabale is in 4. The minister will publicly announce. So, the agencies which are interested will take part. And, in 5, the clause which they are trying to substitute, the minister will review the petroleum activities. It is in clause 5. So, I do not see why we insert another clause, which is redundant. All their fears are covered in clauses 4 and clause 5.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is it clear now?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, Mr Chairman. Let it stand deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Stand over it?

MR WERIKHE: No, we should actually delete it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Delete which one? We cannot delete what is not there.

MR WERIKHE: No, we withdraw the amendment as proposed under the new sub-clause (8).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, now there is no amendment to sub- clause (8), but the clause still remains stood over on account of this issue of whether the minister or the Authority - Is it okay?

Honourable members, in 48, the discussions are on ‘minister’. We were about to stand over this clause because of the issue raised about the Authority. Do we still think it is the Authority or it is the minister here?

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, I seek your guidance. When you look at most of the clauses we had indicated to you, among those we intended to bring amendments on, from 48 to almost 87, they have a lot to do with clause 9. So, the more we stand over clause 9, the more we stand over very many clauses. 

Can I suggest, Mr Chairman that we go back to clause 9 and finish it, because we want to finish it either way. Then, we will substantially have considered a big number of the clauses and in an hour’s time, we may be through with this Bill. That is my suggestion.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, because many of the amendments which form part 4 - licensing - are actually dependant on clause 9; the whole thing about licences. So, once we agree on who will do the licensing, the rest of the clauses will just run. So, can we go back to 9? Have you done your final consultation on clause 9?

Clause 9

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Should I put the question.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. I had proposed that sub-clauses 9(a) (e) (f) and (h) be deleted. I had given the reasons in my previous submission on Wednesday. So, I propose that we take a decision on this one. Honourable colleagues, when you raise this Bill like I have done and I am sure many of you have done, - the minister is mentioned 520 times in this Bill. It is all about “the minister”. 

We need to have a system of checks and balances; who does what and who supervises what. And as I had said before, the minister will have the ultimate authority of approval because that is a policy function; to see what the technocrats - the experts - have done and negotiated. If it is in conformity with the policy of Government, then the minister will approve the transaction. Without approval, then, that transaction cannot take place.

We are trying to delete the minister from the daily business - from the crude commercial negotiations and leave her with his or her legitimate duty and function of a political supervisor. A supervisor who will say, “No, as a government we will not allow this, because you cannot sign a contract with a company  - may be from Iran, - we have problems with that,” and that is quite legitimate for the minister to have that authority.

So, Mr Chairman, in my view, this function should rest and indeed, the legitimacy lies with the Authority other than the minister. It is also further justification against Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets, because this is a public procurement.

I want to emphasise this; it is the NRM Government policy to leave politicians out of business and handling of money. It is a policy of this government, and that is why they came up with the PPDA. That’s why, whenever politicians have gone against this policy, they have found themselves in problems and they have messed up issues; and we have a history. The reason we do not have some of our colleagues on the front bench is because of this particular reason. 

So, I really implore the minister; this power you are asking for is going to choke you as day follows night; and it has chocked your friends before. We have always had a problem of having to discuss our colleagues personally involved in some of these businesses - shoddy deals.
These people belong to this House and they taint the integrity of this House. So, I do propose and quite strongly too, that this function should rest with the Authority and the minister will have his or her legitimate functions and powers of ultimate approval. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal is for the deletion of sub-clauses: (a), (e), (f) and (h) from clause 9 and transferring those functions to the Authority. That is the proposal from hon. Katuntu.

MR LOKERIS: Mr Chairman and honourable members, these activities we are trying to get involved in are a replica of the activities of other countries. If you read from the Internet what Australia does, it is the minister who plays these roles. If you go to Norway - you can Google - it is the minister who does that. This is just because this is a strategic resource that the government values very much. Even  our own policy which we passed in 2008;we were saying here, this Parliament passed, among other provisions, the minister is present in our policy, negotiating or PSs. When we are talking about a minister, we do not look at that minister as one person, we are talking  of a directorate of professionals who will negotiate with these people and the minister also comes and reviews. There is a directorate and then in the ministry there is also a directorate. (Interruption)

In that paper you have, the ministry has its own policy where the directorate is a feature. Therefore, in order –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, you all know that for huge resources which involve Government, it has to be a political decision. Take an example, where World Bank lends money to Government, who signs these contracts and who goes for negotiations? What about the commercial interests of these huge resources; is it left to technocrats, it is the ministers.

What about the macro-economic planning, which will be a result of these resources, who will take part? It is a political decision. So, if, in order for a minister to licence he or she must go to Cabinet and be given powers, will the Authority take a collective responsibility? 

You can Google - I was trying to look at countries which have got oil and where a political decision is taken. In Sweden, this Authority you are talking about is composed of about nine people, but you can imagine if they resigned after taking a wrong decision and the country takes a political decision, who takes that responsibility?

This oil we are trying to get has a lot of external, internal pressure and a lot of planning that even Government must be part of it.

So, honourable members, we should not make this law because we think that may be ministers who are here today are corrupt; how about tomorrow? You will be on this side. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are you debating now, honourable member?

MR KAKOOZA: No. I am giving information.

MR LOKERIS: I cited countries where the minister is responsible for this. Why should you try to exonerate the minister from being involved? If the minister becomes corrupt, we arrest him or her; why not?

Let us look at this Kazinda. You are saying, no; civil servants; is Kazinda a minister? Or is Obey a minister? If the minister messes up and goes overboard, the laws of the country exist.

So, these jobs of licensing should be left to the minister. Let the minister handle his or her responsibilities. If anything goes wrong, the laws are there. Every time you say we free ministers - free them from what? When we are there, we are free, and things can still go wrong. This is what I wanted to inform you about. So, if you want the activities of the petroleum industry to thrive well in this country, the Government must be involved. Finished.

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am seeking guidance. As we discuss these functions, we should critically look at the functions of the minister in relation to policy and decision-making issues. 

I will give you an example, because hon. Katuntu referred to issues of daily functions, that we should exclude the ministers from the daily functions of the petroleum, oil and gas activities.  But we should also look at whether the issue of granting and revoking licences is a policy-making or a decision-making issue. Because when you give the powers of granting and revoking licences to the Authority, will it be a regulator of the same function? Now, when you get to that level and you cannot say the Authority will grant and revoke when it is a regulator, it defeats the real essence of separation of powers in the functions. 
 
Secondly, on negotiating and endorsing petroleum agreements, if you refer it to the Authority, what is the regulatory role of the Authority when it comes to assessing development plans, recommending to the minister and giving technical advice; you will have swapped the roles of decision-making and policy-making with the regulatory end, which is not right. 

So, Mr Chairman, as we debate, we need to concentrate on issues of policy and decision-making, and separately them from the regulatory functions. I thank you, Mr Chairman. 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I stand to support the proposals made by my colleague, the Shadow Attorney-General, hon. Katuntu. When you look at the proposals made by the Shadow Attorney-General, for example, the proposal to delete (e) - negotiating and endorsing petroleum agreements. If we allowed, the minister to do this, we shall be turning the minister into a business person, committing the government in agreements to do with petroleum. 

The beauty about separating these functions is that the minister will have a supervisory role in whatever the Authority does and, therefore, it is possible to bring the Authority to account.
 
I am mindful of the submission of the hon. Lokeris, the Minister in charge of Minerals, when he cites examples of Australia and Norway, which are well-developed countries with systems whereby when a minister faults, he or she is decent enough to say, “I throw in the towel; I shall not continue in this role; I have been found to be wanting and, therefore, let somebody else take over.” This does not easily happen in our beloved country Uganda. 

So, the proposal made by hon. Katuntu safeguards the minister. I am not trying to insinuate that hon. Irene Muloni is a corrupt person. No. I am not even trying to insinuate that the person who may replace her may be corrupt. No. But the question that this House needs to ask is, suppose we have a person who is not morally upright in this position, what happens if wrong decisions are taken?

We have grappled in this House over bad agreements in different sectors - the road sector and energy sector. Last time we were talking about Umeme here; I know there is a big report that is about to come here. The other time we were talking about companies that provided thermal energy to Government. Now, if we had so many heads taking a decision on this, we would probably not have faltered when it came to making agreements. 

I would like to implore this House, Mr Chairman and colleagues, to support this deletion, after all, the role is just only being transferred from the minister, who is one, to the Authority which has a number of people, and really, giving the minister does not exclude the responsibility of the minister to oversee what the Authority does and the decisions that the Authority makes. I wish to submit. 

MS KWIYUCWINY: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to make an observation on the functions of the minister and also on the functions of the Authority. I think the functions rhyme very well because they promote team work and provide for checks and balance.  When I look at the functions of the minister: “a) Granting and revoking licences,” and also look at the functions of the Authority: “i) Ensure that licences uphold laws, regulations, rules and contract terms,” I think this is really enhancing working as a team. And as the minister grants or revokes the licences, she or he is not doing it on their own, but in consultation and working together with the Authority. 

I look at the function of the Minister (e), and I relate it to (e) of the Authority, which says: “Advise the minister in the negotiation of petroleum agreements and in the granting and revocation of licences.” Then I also looked at (f) of the functions of the Minister, and (d) of the functions of the Authority, which says, “Assess field development plans and make recommendations to the minister for approval, amendment or rejection of the plan.” And that of the minister is saying: “Approving field development plans...” So, I really think that these functions tie the minister and the Authority together in a way that they can move forward as a team. So, I would propose that the functions of the minister stay. (Applause) 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I rise to further strengthen the honourable member for Zombo’s position, and further seek for guidance from the Chair as to how to harmonise these two provisions, clauses 9 and clause 11. The drafters of this provision, I believe with no doubt that as they were creating the functions of the Authority, they had the role of the minister being a politician, in mind. I am afraid to say that we are reducing the minister into the boardroom to negotiate contracts.  When you look at the functions of the Authority here, with regard to negotiation, the minister only does negotiate and endorse agreements after being advised. If we gave the same function to the Authority, who would then advise it? There is need for technical input. 

It is a known principle of legislation that you do not try to have – the law must be as blind as it is being made. I know that – I understand, but when I looked at section 11, there would be no need whatsoever to challenge a mere rubber-stamping role of the minister - the granting and revoking of licences. But when you come to the Authority, he or she – we take it that the minister now is a female – cannot do that without the input of the Authority. 

How do we want to do this, Mr Chairman?  We remove it from the minister? Why do we want to legislate the Executive out of this and yet Parliament is legislating itself into the petroleum area?  We cannot legislate Parliament out of this - we should also be able to allow the Executive to have some semblance of power. And I am saying this in good faith. (Applause)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Of course, nobody is legislating the Executive out of this because even the authority is appointed by the President and approved by Parliament and it would be largely composed of the ruling party. So, nobody is legislating the Executive out of this.

However, I feel, this Bill looks like it was drafted to give a lot of power to a certain group of people and access to the oil industry, and Parliament is trying to legislate to cure that. That is what is informing some of our decisions and input. We are trying to make oil in Uganda curse-free.

Examples have been given of Norway and other countries. Those countries do not have CHOGM and some of the scandals we have had in this country. We are trying not to make it easy for people to be tempted to cause trouble for themselves.

The Authority will be a high calibre Authority and we should put members who understand the oil industry and who are going to help this country. Therefore, to put the minister into negotiating - first, when they are negotiating, the minister will never access what they discuss. They are provided with this crazy law. We cannot access what the minister is negotiating. We can access the minutes of the Authority, and we are trying to make this industry as transparent as possible; that is why we are all arguing in the interest of Uganda.

We have been battling here because the minister would like to have power and exclude everybody. For instance, in (e) the minister should not negotiate at all. If you want that passed, remove the word “negotiating” then the minister can endorse what has been negotiated by the technical people. Why does the minister want to negotiate alone while we cannot access what he has negotiated? (Interruption)

MR KYEWALABYE: I thank you very much, hon. Wafula, for giving way and I thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I thought that I should give this information to my colleague. When he talks about the minister negotiating an agreement, it does not mean the minister is negotiating as an individual. It means the office. In other words, if you look at the Ministry of Energy, there are technical officers under the Ministry of Energy, for example, the Directorate of Petroleum and so on. These people will support the minister in carrying out these negotiations and the minister will come in at the very end.

As provided by the law, these negotiations will also be in consultation with the Petroleum Authority. So, I think we should not look at the issue of negotiation as an individual issue. The minister is just a representative of the ministry and Government.

MR OGUTTU: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving me the information but I don’t think it was very useful to me. Nevertheless, thank you very much. 

Why do we think that the Authority cannot competently negotiate on behalf of Uganda? Why do we think that only the minister can negotiate competently on behalf of Uganda? Separate powers and have efficiency and transparency. This is what we are looking for, Mr Chairman.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to begin from where the honourable member for Nakasongola said that we need to delineate between policy and decision-making. If you talk about policy, decision-making and regulation, there was a futile attempt, Mr Chairman, on which you guided well, where the committee wanted to delete the responsibilities under (b) for the policy to be deleted from clause 9. And, we said no, the minister is solely responsible for policy because when you add policy and combine it together with decision-making, I don’t think this would be the best legislation we shall make.

Those responsible for policy must ensure policy, and as you see, even clause 14 reinforces the minister’s role and powers under policy, but when you come to the day–to-day technical aspects like the negotiation and endorsing of petroleum agreements, granting and revoking licenses, these are technical in nature.

If the Members are proposing that now the minister will come in at the tail end, that is where a middle ground amendment can come in to state, “…granting and revoking of licences by the authority, with the approval of the minister.” That could be a middle position, but for us to leave it standing as it is offends the principle. You are putting the minister in charge of the policy to ensure that he or she monitors the policy -(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to also thank hon. Ssekikubo for yielding the Floor. We have an example, and I am sorry I am forced to mention names here but if we must then we have no choice. The hon. Hilary Onek, then Minister of Energy, went ahead and invoked his powers solely to cancel the licence of Tullow. This was under the powers he had under the law without recourse to the Permanent Secretary Mr Kabagambe Kaliisa.

One of the contentions during the oil debate, if you remember, were the letters laid, and which were now being denied by the ministry that they did not know about it, but the minister had already cancelled the licences. So, to the gentleman saying that it is not being done by the minister or an individual, if the minister is specifically given those powers like he is being given in this Bill, he can exercise them without recourse to the department we are talking about, because it has happened before. Let anybody dispute that the hon. Hilary Onek never cancelled licences without recourse to the department you are talking about. The minister who was his state minister is in the chambers now. Can you deny it?

MR PETER LOKERIS: That was discussed at that time.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we have some order? Had you finished?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Chairman, I have heard some colleagues submitting that clause 11(e) involves the authority because the minister will be advised by the authority. I happen to chair a Committee on Presidential Affairs where you have about 90 Presidential advisors. On a daily basis, the President is always taking decisions even without taking advice from these people. In most cases, when you are tendering the advice the minister is at liberty to even reject it – it is optional! And this will put at risk the interests of Ugandans. When it is a team of people making a decision, we are a little bit safer than when an individual sits in his or her office and says, “I think Uganda should go this way.”

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you. Mr Chairman, if Members can recall that on 10th and 11th November last year, we held special sessions and part of the spirit we came up with was that let the bygones be bygones because fortunately we are going to make a law that will stop the minister from unilaterally exercising those powers. Honourable colleagues, if you can remember that in those special sittings we heard that the minister was awarding licences singularly. You remember, we agreed that we cannot go back to revoke those particular licenses, but instead we have the opportunity to have this law, and the law is now in our hands, to rectify that historical mistake. Up to now, there is uneasiness about the licences, which were awarded singularly. We have witnesses, as hon. Katuntu has mentioned, that a minister cancelled a licence. We said we could overcome that dark chapter by having a new law in place. 

Honourable members, we now have the opportunity to have the law in place and we should cure that disease so that it does not recur. That is why if we transfer these roles and functions, we can augment them by saying, “granting and revoking of licenses with the approval of the minister” meaning that without the minister, the approval or revoking remains a nullity; it would not take effect. That is why, if it is in the good faith and good spirit of this country, let us transfer this, but we still retain the minister’s powers so that any approval, licences, granting, negotiations and endorsing of agreements will have the minister as central and will be reverted to at that opportune moment. 

Mr Chairman, I beg to propose that we embrace that proposal and we move forward because it will be a win-win situation for all parties.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. There is no doubt that mistakes have been made in the past, but as we all know, that law must be blind. I am sure we have all learnt from the past mistakes, including those of CHOGM and those where ministers have taken decisions individually. I want to believe that when Parliament says that “a minister shall do A, B, C.” it is not saying that a minister will act solely as an individual, but that they will act because they are taking the overall political responsibility. And so, I want to argue that the minister is most suited to negotiate the agreement because the minister has the entire machinery of technical officers at his/her disposal. 

We have also seen authorities that have grown larger than the ministers - and larger than life indeed – and they have become unmanageable. So, it is very important that this authority is under the minister and that way Parliament will have a stronger say in these matters because the minister is answerable to this Parliament. 

We must also have strong political responsibility and supervision over our oil resource. That is why these powers should and must be held by the minister rather than the authority. Thank you. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, hon. Kamateeka, for giving way. I am seeking clarification from you: If the minister must have supervisory powers – which I agree with entirely – then why should he or she engage in negotiation? Who will he or she be supervising if he or she is actually the one negotiating?

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Chairman, either way I fear forwarding arguments that are self-defeating. If you say that the authority should be the one to negotiate agreements and yet in the same law we are saying that the authority should be supervising, why shouldn’t the minister do the same, if you are giving those powers to the authority? The authority is regulating and so it should not at the same time do the supervising. Thank you.

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We should be clear on the functions of the minister and those of the authority. When you read these functions closely, they are actually conflicting; the minister who I take to be the overseer of what the authority does, he or she is again involved in functions like approving field development plans, promoting and sustaining transparency in the petroleum sector, and approving data management systems. Then what is the use of the authority, the technical people? I do not expect my minister to do such work; my minister should be an overseer. Let us not make our ministers clerks; this is not a role of a minister. If I were to become a minister now you cannot give me these responsibilities and I accept them. I know what a minister should be doing. For a minister to approve data, what will the technical person be doing? I would expect the minister to oversee the authority, and if the authority does wrong, then you bring the matter to Parliament and we help you. 

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, hon. Tayebwa, for giving way. Mr Chairman, I have heard some of our colleagues try to define a minister as though it were an institution. When you read the interpretation section of clause 3 - the definition of the minister - the ministry is not mentioned at all. It says: “A minister means the minister responsible for petroleum activities.” And when you look at the cardinal principle of insulating Government from civil liabilities, the principles of political supervision, then these roles that we are suggesting should be removed from the minister and be brought to the authority give credence to our position, which I request Members to support.

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you very much for that information. I hope my ministers have now heard it. Mr Chairman, this is an authority which is going to be in charge of our petroleum. Even one of the functions like, “(c) The authority will review and approve budgets submitted by a licensee.” That is okay. So, let us have the authority and then the minister becomes the overseer. But giving these other powers, which you have given the  authority and the minister also does it, suppose the minister approves these reviews of planning and then the authority does so too, and they conflict, don’t you see that you are messing up the law? 

So, Mr Chairman, the role of the minister should be to oversee, but giving him all these functions which are similar to the functions of the authority, then the authority is going to be redundant. Thank you.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have been seated here wondering, actually who is the minister? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The one responsible for petroleum.

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, looking at the Bill, the minister is defined. The minister means the minister responsible for petroleum activities. When you say that a function is given to a minister, that it will be done in consultation with the departments, the PS - that is not what the Bill is proposing. It is empowering the minister. The definition of “the minister” is known. So, the minister will actually remind her PS that, “Look at the Act, the minister is myself and not you, the department, not you, the PS.” So, why don’t we institutionalise these functions? Why do we want to institutionalise an individual or an individual position?

Two, Mr Chairman, we are also proposing that the authority, the executive director or head is appointed by the President on the approval of Parliament. So, will be the board and teh minister too. So, we are saying, “Look, we are not removing any powers from the Executive,” because I have been trying to think, why are we opposed to institutionalising these functions? So, it appears that there is a worry that actually the Executive is losing some powers. No. All this is still being done largely by the Executive, but we are saying, let us pick bits of the functions and put them under a given authority that has highly qualified persons to run our sector. 

So, it is an appeal that let us not imply that there is an intention whatsoever by this Bill - there is no proposal in this Bill, that there will be a consultation between the minister and the department of oil and gas or the permanent secretary. The minister is the minister and the precedent has just been mentioned, where the minister has acted singularly. So, why don’t we institutionalise? It is my question. Members, let us agree together on this. It is for the good of this country. Thank you, Mr Chairman. 

MR NAKABALE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, keep your remarks brief.

MR NAKABALE: Thank you Mr Chairman. The greatest measure of performance is empowering. Why I stand to support the minister’s powers is that we do not need to create a power vacuum and more so, a functional conflict. Here we are, and the minister is a policy driver. And again, here we are and the authority has the role of regulating, overseeing compliance issues, the day-to-day activities, and here we want to ensure that we have good governance. In this respect, Sir, many times we have even taken live examples in our committee meetings where technocrats do come and we seek ministers to come and clarify the matters. 

So, I would urge Members that if we would wish to see transparency and more so segregation of duties, you cannot make somebody who is going to be doing the day-to-day overseeing of the running of the petroleum industry, that is the authority, and then make him/her be in conflict with giving the licence, which licence is ensure that it is well implemented. I think we shall have created a power vacuum. To that effect I would urge Members, to support the powers of the minister because all that we want to see is accountability. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think everybody in the House agrees that the minister should have a role. But what should that role be? And also, that this law should be able to provide for checks and balances. In my opinion, I see the minister’s role being a strategic one; and we have done this in other Bills, for example, the UCC Bill. Because of the nature of the telephone companies - the security element of it - we agreed that the minister should be the one to finally issue the licences for these companies. That was for the security of the country. Now how about a resource like petroleum?

I hear the voices in the House coming to a consensus that maybe if we said the authority can issue a licence with the approval of the minister, that can be something that is reasonable. So, this is probably an idea that we can start building consensus on.

But, as we debate we need to differentiate among all these roles that we have given the minister. Which one is strategic? Which one is operational? Because it is also important that we give strategic roles to the minister, and operational and regulatory roles to the authority. I think that is what we should be looking at. 

So, maybe we can continue to debate and build consensus around it. But it is important that finally, the minister must be the one to approve and invoke the licence. 

HON. MEMBERS: Aye.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, there are really two areas that could help us in reaching a consensus on this issue. The first one is: What is the current practice in negotiating agreements and loans by Government? 

Two, if you look at the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the functions of ministers are defined, and I want to draw the attention of the House to Article 111 of the Constitution. It reads: “(1) There shall be a Cabinet which shall consist…” and they define who will be ministers.

“(2) The functions of the Cabinet shall be to determine, formulate and implement the policy of Government.”

So, you formulate, you determine and you implement. When you relate this function in the Constitution to the Bill we are debating, here the minister is required to negotiate - he is negotiating on behalf of this country. That is what I am assuming. You are negotiating on behalf of this country. You are negotiating petroleum agreements for the country.

Let me also draw your attention -(Interjections)- Mr Chairman, you can see I am respecting the laws of this land, but there are some hecklers. Seriously, let me just draw the attention of the House on the functions of the minister; No.9, when you read it together with No.11, the functions of the authority, you will realise that in No.9(e) negotiating and endorsing petroleum agreements - which is a function of the minister as defined in the Bill, is also consistent with No.11(e) which states: “The minister shall be advised by the authority in the negotiations of petroleum agreements and in the granting and revocation of licences.” –(Interruption)

MS AURU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The information I want to give the minister is that, we are dealing with part three, which is institutional arrangement. And when we go to the arrangement, we have the minister, whom we shall be giving all these powers. Let us now go to (e); “The function of the authority is to advise the minister -”. So, I would like to inform the minister that advice is just advice; one may take it or not. 

So, when you talk of the functions of the authority including advising the minister that means the minister can take the advice or not. So, I propose that we take in some of these powers to the authority which is regulated by Parliament. Thank you.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much for the information. But, Mr Chairman, ultimately, you must have a minister with authority and power to make governance of this country possible. You are crippling the minister beyond capacity even to negotiate. In fact, if you want to guard against the fear of powers of a minister, the power really lies in Parliament vetting ministers. Simply vet a minister who cannot abuse those powers, that is all. 

Otherwise, institutionally, there is no minister who would ignore technical advice, which is sound –(Interjections)– let me put this point across. Institutionally, even the President as an institution is advised; ministers are advised. If you look at the Constitution and look at the powers of a permanent secretary, he is the chief adviser to the minister. And anyone who has been a good minister knows that you have to take advice. 

So, when you say, “minister”, it does not mean that individual ignores everybody –(Interjections)– the fault was in your voting; not in the institutional provisions of a minister. Just vote for a good minister who does not ignore the technical advice rather than crippling him in the law. It hurts the country. The country must be governed; you must give the powers to make effective governance. Otherwise, if he is crippled by the law, you have a harmed country.

So, my conclusion is that the minister should have the powers to negotiate and should be advised by the authority as provided for in this Bill.

LT COL (RT) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. On page 9 of the Bill, the minister means the minister responsible for petroleum activities. I can see Members arguing to create a minister who is responsible for petroleum, but with no role to play. I find it a very big problem. 

Secondly, you cannot be a regulator and at the same time be the one giving out licences. We must separate the powers. –(Interruption)– Let me develop my point. There are two previous speakers who attempted to cure this problem. One of them said that at least, it must be prepared in the process, but with approval of the minister.

I think there is a requirement that the minister should never commit Government without the involvement of the Attorney-General’s Chamber; and this is the practice throughout. So, Mr Chairman, we should draw a distinction. We should not dig a hole to fill another one, by stating that you are empowering the technical department of the ministry to do regulatory services and also licensing –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Chairman, and hon. Rwamirama for yielding the Floor. One of the tools of regulation is licensing. How does it happen; let me use this particular sector as an example. If you think you want to go slow in the exploitation of your oil, then you grant less or even decline to grant licences. If you want to exploit the oil resource as soon as possible, then you grant many licences. If you want to attract more investors in exploiting, then, when you are negotiating, you put your prices low. 

So, the point you are making is actually the one we are making. One of the first tools of regulations is licensing; there is no conflict at all. 

Secondly, you have advised that before the minister enters into contract, he must be advised by the Attorney-General - actually that is constitutional. But let me ask a question, has it helped? Look at the history of our country; we are not arguing this in some obscure way; we have a history to refer to; they are facts. 

Lastly, I wrote a note to my friend hon. Kamuntu; I wish he had shared it with others. (Laughter)

So, hon. Rwamirama, we are saying the same thing. We understand that the law should be blind - I agree with hon. Kamateeka that the law should be blind. But in legal interpretation, there is what we call the mischief rule. How do you interpret a law? You realise there is a problem, and the law comes in effect to particularly cure that problem and in that case the law should always have a bright eye - to cure the problem. And the problems we have are the –(Interruption)

LT COL (RT) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, hon. Katuntu for that argument. But I want to maintain my position that the spirit of this debate is to make a good law. When you say that in the past some people have broken the law – if somebody breaks the law, the law catches up with him. So, if you lose a child, it does not mean you are not going to produce another one, else you will be a failure. 

So, Mr Chairman, we must make sure that we separate powers and give some powers to the minister –(Interruption)- who is accountable to this House. Finally, the proposal to take away the minister’s powers, to me, is actually making this Bill almost totally detached from the Executive.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I have listened to the discussions on this topic and there seems to be some agreement. Let me see if I can process it since I have listened to the arguments. 

The argument is on institutional arrangement. That the authority should have some powers and functions, and that the minister should have some powers and functions. But in all this, somebody must get in touch with Parliament, and Parliament should know what is going on; and that is the minister. So, there should be a proposal that can link the authority with the minister and Parliament. That is the only way that we can get this thing together. 

And the proposal for the minister to have approval of some of the operations of what can be done by the authority or of some of the things that can be done by the authority - from what I have listened, it does now seem that sub-clauses (b), (c), (d), (g) and (i) are not contested as part of the  functions of the minister, okay. 

Now, there has been a proposal of introducing the question of approval of those functions that are going to be passed to the authority. What if you looked at it this way - and I will just give one example and then we see if it can work: “The minister shall be responsible for the approval of the grant and revocation of licences.” Would that be okay? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.     

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Because the final authority will then rest with the minister to either allow or disallow it. Honourable minister, I wish you could listen - then the final authority will rest with the minister whether to approve the grant or revocation of a licence. If you look at (e) that talks of approval of negotiation and endorsement of petroleum agreements; that will be the responsibility of the minister to do those approvals. In (f), to approve field development plans; and in (h), to approve the data management systems; because what it would mean is that the minister is taking these decisions, and then will brief Parliament on the ordinary course of how these things are done. Would that cure the difficulty? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Aye.     

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Would it, because still the final political authority will rest with the minister whether to allow it or not? The learned Attorney-General, would that deal with the - just take the example of approval of grants and revocation of licences; because if she does not approve, then the licence will not be granted or revoked. Those are the powers of the minister. Is that okay? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.     

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, this would solve the – okay, hon. Chemaswet. 

MR CHEMASWET: I think that some ministers are looking for trouble because of one thing; when you talk of looking for powers, they need powers on the Floor of the House, but when we talk of corruption, they run away and they say, “It was not me!” (Laughter) Now we are trying to help the minister by really saying that somebody should do something somewhere and then it should be her to approve the same decision that has been taken. But now, she is saying no; but when it comes to corruption, they say, “It was not me. It was somebody else.” But they should accept right now what Parliament is saying that the role of the minister should remain with the question of approval.

MR ATIKU: I thank you Mr Chairman. I think we all agree that this is the fairest deal both the Executive and this House have got on this position. 

Considering your advice, Mr Chairman, first and foremost, we are looking at a situation where within the Ministry of Energy there should be room for checks and balances, and that is why we are having the authority; the minister and the technical arm within the Ministry of Energy. As they do their business, there should be room for checks and balances for the minister to advise and for the authority to advise the minister, and also the technical persons within the ministry. So, it will be a fair deal for the minister as an authority in that institution or the ministry to approve whatever has gone through the processes of sharing information. 

So, I think that my Minister for Energy should be comfortable with this position because we have actually recognised her role and powers because when she stands up on the Floor of Parliament to tell us that she has refused the granting and/or revoking of a licence, then that is the power that we want to hear, and I think that is the power the Executive will be exercising. So, there should really be no contention over this, honourable minister. This one is in good faith and we think that it is a position that you should take. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The Leader of Government Business.

GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Chairman, I want to ask that we stand over this because I want time for more consultation on this particular matter. So, I beg that we either continue with the other parts and we stand over this one for more consultation. I thank you. 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Really, Rt Honourable, the time we have taken on this matter is long, and I think that there has been some tendency towards a concession on this.

MS MULONI: I thank you, Mr Chairman. I agree with the proposal by the Leader of Government Business. The fact that when you amend this to read, “approve, granting and revoking of licences” what does that mean? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Exactly that!

MS MULONI: Now what is going to happen to the other side of the authority? You cannot look at this by itself without looking at what the other functions are going to be for the authority. Mr Chairman, let us stand over it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, if you say the minister shall be responsible for the approval of, grant or revocation of licences, and if you read that together with the functions of the authority in (e), “Advise the minister in the negotiation of petroleum agreements and the granting and revocation of licenses”; so, it is the minister to approve when they have finally made those recommendations. 

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, to my recollection, when I got up I said the minister needs some semblance of power and not many people read into what I was saying. If we go by that proposal, that the minister shall be responsible for the approval, is there any possibility that the minister will refuse? (Interjections) If it is the drafting and we are saying, “the minister shall be responsible”, we are saying, do the rubber stamping. Should the minister refuse, the Government will be sued, unless we are changing the drafting right now. 

The guidance I am seeking is: can we get a harmonised proposition? If you are saying, “I shall approve”, do I have any power to say otherwise? I beg your guidance, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The provision is not saying the minister shall approve. It is saying the minister shall be responsible for approval. 

MR OBOTH: Even in that provision as it is, can we get a middle road position?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Could you propose it.

MR OBOTH: The problem I have, Mr Chairman, is that this is purely the work that I thought could have been handled. The approval would be much more of the work that Parliament is doing in this sector. To say that the minister shall be responsible for the approval, unless I have limited knowledge in this and I must confess, I need some guidance as to whether as it is in that proposal, the minister shall have leeway to say, “No, hold on.” I would be glad to be educated on this.

MR NIWAGABA: Let me give you information using the experience of appointments by the President with approval of Parliament. The Constitution says the President shall appoint a Cabinet minister with approval of Parliament. There are many instances where Parliament has used its discretion to disapprove. So, the approval is not mandatory; it is discretionary. That approval includes disapproval. However, if we want it to be worded that way for purposes of clarity, we can say “approval or disapproval of granting and revoking of licences.” 

MR ANYWARACH: Additionally, Mr Chairman, when we are using the words “shall be responsible”, it means only the minister and not any other person shall be responsible. It does not mean that it is mandatory or it is a must that he or she must approve.  

MR OBOTH: Taking what my senior colleague, hon. Niwagaba, is saying, and going by the proposition that he said about “the President shall appoint with the approval of Parliament”, that gives Parliament the leeway. My only difficulty, and I admitted, was the proposition that the minister shall be responsible for the approval. If we stopped there, I would have difficulty with –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: When you read it another way, the phrase “the minister shall be responsible” means that it shall be the responsibility of the minister to do this; whether to approve or not to approve, that shall be the responsibility of the minister. That is what the “shall” here is talking about. It is not saying that whatever happens, the minister shall approve. The minister will remain eternally responsible for approving. It will be the responsibility of the minister to approve. That means it carries with it the responsibility to also disapprove. The “shall” declares that the sole responsibility rests with the minister and nobody else. As to what the minister does with that responsibility is subject to the minister’s discretion. 

MR KAKOOZA: I do agree with your proposal, Mr Chairman. However, when we are making laws, we must know what we want to do. In this House we have created a precedent, and when you are making a law you consider other laws. This House passed a law and said the minister shall grant and revoke licences in the electronic media sector, and now this is the section we are talking about. Why don’t we –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Kakooza, this law is distinct. We have just given the President the authority to appoint the directors. That makes it different.

MR KAKOOZA: Can I finish my submission?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, you cannot because you are misleading us. (Laughter) We have already said that this law is different. That is why we are giving the President the authority to appoint with the approval of Parliament. So, that makes it different. 

MR KAKOOZA: Why don’t we move clause by clause –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is already different. By doing that, we have already made this law different from the one you are citing. It is breaking into new ground and it should receive that treatment. So, do not take us back to laws that have been passed. This kind of law has not been passed by this House.

MS KWIYUCWINY: Mr Chairman, I stand on a point of guidance. I thought we were discussing the proposal by hon. Katuntu to transfer the functions (a), (e), (f) and (h) to the Authority.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No. We have moved from there. We are trying to see how to keep it there but with modifications. 

MS KWIYUCWINY: That was my question. If we have already moved from there, are we already making amendments? That is what I want to understand.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable Katuntu made a proposition and it has been debated for the last I don’t know how long now. They are now trying to move forward and build on that proposal and the minister’s proposition, to see if they can reach a middle ground and we move forward. That is where we are. We left hon. Katuntu an hour ago.

MR SEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We have deliberated for an hour and you ended up guiding us. For us to move forward now, I propose that those amendments we proposed are put in black and white so that the clerk reads them out and we pass them, as you guided. We cannot debate the same issue for many days. I propose that you consider the amendments proposed and we make a decision. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The only other guidance I can give is that the parts that are agreed on, (b), (c), (d), (g) and (f), should form the first sub clauses of this aspect. If you want to call the next four and give them a different description, that can also be dealt with, so that that generation of powers or functions are given different introduction words, which will give it the emphasis and difference. 

We already said that paragraphs (b), (c), (d), (g) and (e) are inherently functions of the minister directly. Now we are saying that paragraphs (a), (e), (f) and (h) are functions of the minister that he or she carries out in the process of doing things with other people, for example the Authority or others, and the minister would be the final person. If you would want to give it a different grouping and a different introductory phrase, that would make sense for me. We can categorise them separately. I am only going to entertain people with drafts now. If we agree that we cannot do the drafting, then let someone do it and get back to us.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, I hardly appreciate people, but as a matter of fact, in the wisdom of William Pitt in the House of Lords, he said that there is something beyond the throne greater than the king. I think we have been struggling here and there, involving our political interest and other issues, but finally the ruling you have made is beyond being excellent. Whoever disagrees with this position is the enemy of this nation. So, I would like to propose that the amendments as you have suggested be re-stated and then we move on to adopt them. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The proposal I have made for you to consider is that the minister shall be responsible in (b), (c), (d), (g) and (i) directly. The next category of licences, negotiations, approval of sealed plans and data management systems can be introduced with the word “approve”. That will help us capture that category of functions as separate from the other direct ones.

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, I would like to draw your attention to clause 59 (1) on the grant of petroleum exploration licences. It reads as follows: “Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Minister may in consultation with the Authority and with the approval of Cabinet, on an application dully made, grant, on such conditions as he or she may determine, a petroleum exploration licence in respect of any block or blocks.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Precisely, that is what we are talking about. So, why have we spent all this time? Unless the Shadow Attorney-General is coming with a final proposal on this, can I –

MR KATUNTU: No, Mr Chairman, I only would like to propose that I move a formal motion to adopt the proposals as advised by the Chair, so that we formally adopt them before they are redrafted. If that is okay, I therefore move that this House do adopt the proposals made by the Chair to emend clause 9 to have paragraphs (b), (c), (d), (g), and (i) as the first functions of the minister and paragraphs (a), (e), (f), and (h) as the ones to follow but as advised by the Chair. I do propose.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That formulation will be similar to what you have just said. That is the spirit. So, I now put the question to the amendment on clause 9.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 48

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Will what we have adopted now solve the issue in clause 48 or is there any amendment?

MR NIWAGABA: I think it will now be a consequential amendment to be worded, “by the Authority with the approval of the Minister.”

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I think in clause 48, the amendment will be consequential because we have already agreed that the minister shall carry out those functions categorised in those parts. So, still the minister will be responsible. I think the minister shall still submit to Parliament a report detailing the areas to be opened up for petroleum activities. The minister shall still be obliged to submit to Parliament an evaluation and an impact assessment report conducted under subsections (2) and (3).

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, chairman. I do propose that sub clause (1) should read as follows: “The minister may open up new areas” and we delete the word “shall”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We have already amended that one.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, the spirit captured under clauses 9 and 11 would certainly come here as a consequential amendment. If that is the true picture, then I think “Minister” should be replaced with “Authority”. We should also include the phrase, “with the approval of the Minister.” I am saying this because ultimately, the final authority will lie with the minister.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, this is about the opening of new areas for petroleum activities. Hon. Ssekikubo, I think this is okay the way it is. It is in respect of the new –

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I think we should have good lunch for the minister. I therefore concede. (Laughter)

MR CHEMASWET: Mr Chairman, still on the same issue; hon. Ssekikubo is just conceding, but it is a fact that we will need the Authority and then the approval of the minister comes in. I am saying this because we are now dealing -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 48 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 48, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 49

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to insert at the end of sub clause (3) the words “and shall require the applicant to comply with environmental restoration conditions as may be determined by the National Environment Management Authority in consultation with the Minister.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can you restate it? This is clause 49(3).

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, we addressed this clause earlier on and the chairman conceded.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Was it handled?

MS MULONI: Yes, it was.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I agree with the minister. We did handle it, actually.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 49 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 49, agreed to.

Clause 50

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to insert a new sub clause (2) to read as follows:
“The Minister shall announce all reconnaissance activities in the local languages, on local media, of the area where the permit applies and shall designate a local contact office from which or a person from whom the public can access information or register their concerns.”

Justification: To inform the public that will be affected about the reconnaissance activities.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is clause 50. Have we agreed? I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 50, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 51

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to insert a new sub clause (3) to read as follows:
“Where reconnaissance activities are to be carried out in an area that is a gazetted habitat for wildlife, they shall be conducted in a manner that takes into account the breeding and migratory patterns of the wildlife in the area to minimise interruption to the breeding and migratory patterns of wildlife.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The people who are capturing the Hansard should understand what the amendment is. So, read the amendment.

MR WERIKHE: The proposal is to insert a new sub clause (3) to read as follows:
“Where reconnaissance activities are to be carried out in an area that is a gazetted habitat for wild life, they shall be conducted in a manner that takes into account the breeding and migratory patterns of the wild life in the area.” 
Justification: To minimise interruption to the breeding and migratory patterns of wild life.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are we agreed on that? I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 51, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 52, agreed to.

Clause 53

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to insert a new sub clause (2) after sub clause (1) to read as follows:
“The Minister shall, within fifteen days of approval by Cabinet under subsection (1), report to Parliament all areas open for bidding for a petroleum exploration licence.”

Justification: To require the minister to bring Parliament on board to enhance Parliament’s oversight mandate.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that clear, Members? I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to split sub clause (2) into two sub clauses, (3) and (4), to read as follows:
“(3) The announcement referred to in subsection (1) shall be published in the Gazette and in newspapers of national and international circulation and in other electronic and print media.

(4) The announcement shall -
(a) state the area open for petroleum exploration;
(b) stipulate a period of not less than three months for making applications; and 
(c) contain such information as the Minister may consider necessary.”

Justification: for clarity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is just to clarify; it is not changing anything in the existing sub clause (2). I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, insert in the original sub clause (4) the words, “this Act and regulations made under this Act” immediately after the words “in accordance with”. Also, delete the words “procedures prescribed by regulations or by the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2003 and any other relevant laws in Uganda.” The new sub clause therefore provides as follows: “The bidding process shall be carried out in accordance with this Act and regulations made under this Act.”

Justification: To specifically provide that the relevant law for the bidding process for a petroleum exploration licence shall be the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Act and regulations made under this Act. Consequential amendment –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that clear, honourable members? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 53, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 54

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to insert the word “the” immediately before the word “exceptional” and substitute the word “include” with the words “shall be”. This is to define the exceptional circumstances in specific and certain terms to close avenues for abuse.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, can you read it again. Read what it will look like now.

MR WERIKHE: Notwithstanding section-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Just go with what is there. They will do the cross-referencing later.

MR WERIKHE: “Notwithstanding section 53, the Minister may, in the exceptional circumstances, in consultation with the Authority...” No, there is a problem here.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In view of our amendment in clause 9, don’t you think that actually this could be a consequential amendment to substitute the Minister with the Authority but with approval of the Minister? These are now applications for a petroleum licence and it is the Authority to grant them with the approval of the Minister. So, why should the applications go to the Minister and not the Authority?

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. I would like to question the whole provision for direct application for issuance of an exploration licence. I would like to submit that the purpose of sub clause (1) of clause 54 is contained in sub clause (2), where it is stated that the exceptional circumstances will be where there is no applicant, where the area is adjacent to an existing reservoir, and also for the promotion of national interest.

My submission is that all these possibilities, in my view, would have been explored earlier by the Authority under the supervision of the Minister. Therefore, in my opinion, the danger to national interest will not arise at this stage neither will there be the possibility of having an area gazetted for exploration be adjacent to an area where there is exploration already taking place or where the licensee’s reservoir will be compromised.

In my view, this particular clause serves no useful purpose and instead of us splitting hairs about having to amend it, we could delete it altogether. I beg to move.

MR WERIKHE: I have got it; there was an error and actually the amendment is in sub clause (2) of clause 54. It will read as follows: “For the purposes of subsection (1), the exceptional circumstances shall be -
(a) where there are no applications received in response to the invitation for bids;

(b) application in respect of areas that are adjacent to an existing licensed reservoir; and...”  That means we delete “and” and replace (c) with, “the need to enhance the participating interest of the State.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You have said in the opening paragraph of sub clause (2) “For the purposes of subsection (1), the exceptional circumstances”. You are proposing to insert the word “the”. What was the other one?

MR WERIKHE: Under (b) is where I have taken out “include” and put “shall be”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It does not have to be “shall be”. You took out “include” and replaced it with “are”. You now will say, “...the exceptional circumstances are...”,  so that they are specific exceptional circumstances captured by the law.

MR WERIKHE: We wanted to define the exceptional circumstances in specific and certain terms to close avenues for abuse. That is the justification.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I can see the amendment is intended to close the exceptional circumstances to these three. That is alright, of course. However, in drafting, especially of statutes, even if you say “include”, you will be restricting yourself to these three or only those things which are similar to these. That is called ejusdem generis rule of interpretation of statutes. So, the usual word used is “include”, just in case; you do not close yourself in a tight box. However, to use “include” cannot have anything outside the ambit of what is here in the three. I just wanted to say that this is a normal way of drafting statutes and it has no danger.

MR OGUTTU: Honestly, I do not see the need for this clause. The minister approves, so why is it that when people have not responded to an advert or the bid, this application should now go directly to the minister? We do not see sense in that. Even when there is a reservoir, it should have been known. The minister can even refuse if the application goes back to the Authority. So, why should this application go to the minister directly? We do not see why this is being provided for. We are legislating for failure. Mr Chairman, I want some clarification on why this clause should be there at all.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, thank you. It is common practice that when no applications are returned to an advert, you re-advertise. Considering this as an exception, in my opinion, is erroneous. When you look through the entire listing and you talk about promotion of national interest, this is definitely a very sensitive area and before advertising any portion of your land, you should have studied the strategic interest of the nation in relation to the interest.

Even when you talk about applications in respect to reservoirs that are adjacent, this is highly technical and this is why we have an Authority. We have all these technical people. You have to conduct surveys before coming to a conclusion about the availability or non-interference of a particular reservoir by exploration activities neighbouring that reservoir. This can all be scientifically and precisely assessed and determined. So, in my view, other than serving the purpose of giving the minister exceptional powers, which powers could be abused, this particular provision serves no useful purpose and should be struck off this particular Bill and not be made into law.
 
I wish to appeal to my colleagues for understanding. You know this world is full of crooks and this particular provision gives a crooked minister the opportunity to bring in a contractor of his or her own choice, which we are legalising here. I think this is not useful for this nation. It is only going to be used by the minister to carry out underhand activities. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal is for deletion of clause 54.
 
MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, I thought that these exceptional circumstances which are being mentioned here, like promotion of national interests, are the gist of this national company which would have been established. You know, in business you must have promotions because you are going to compete with other countries. Where there are no bids, the Government has to take an initiative to float shares, to invest them. That is what this is talking about. So, if you say you are striking this off - these are your resources which would have been floated but Government is taking interest because nobody has applied and there will be no competition. This is what investment promotion would be, and the government must take it on - (Interjections) – Let me finish. 

In (c) it says, “Promotion of national interests”. Government should have floated these shares because Government needs to invest in those resources. What will happen if nobody has got interested? The Government must take it upon itself and say, “We have got shares and we are floating them; companies, these are the terms and conditions”. You cannot just leave it to anybody. It must be Government to take it up. That is why I thought that this is very important.
 
MR MUTENDE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to support the view of the previous member on promoting national interests under (c). Sometimes investments come up, which the country believes are strategic for itself in terms of employment, export values and whatever value and yet the initial outlay may be very heavy, and so Government may have to come in and co-invest. Now, to do so, Government will have to be very careful in choosing who to come in and co-invest with. 

So, there should be a provision for that, so that when certain investments are available, Government may have to go and do direct sourcing for competent investors with whom it can share the risk but not just put it out there for anybody to bid. After all, it would have failed in the first place. The circumstances are clear; in cases where there has been no response, for instance, it is important that we make a provision for Government to directly source and hunt around the world in the investment community to get a competent investor to co-invest with it. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
 
MS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Let me clarify so that members can appreciate the essence of this clause. One, we are listing the exceptional circumstances that may arise, and I want honourable members to understand that once we pass these Bills, in future licences are going to go through bidding rounds where people are going to compete. Now, the exceptional circumstances which are being highlighted are: one, where there are bidding rounds and there is no response. You put up a block for bidding and no one responds the first time. You advertise again and no one responds. You advertise the third time and no one responds, and then later on someone comes. So, those are the exceptional circumstances.

Two, in respect of an area which is adjacent to an existing licensed reservoir; because those reservoirs are underneath, you cannot be one hundred percent sure to what extent it spreads underneath. If there is an area which is in close proximity with an existing area which is already licensed, if you bring a different person they may end up drilling from the same well. So, consideration has to be made for those exceptional circumstances.
 
Three, promotion of national interest; you all appreciate that we are setting up our national oil company and the competition is going to be rife. So, these are exceptional circumstances where we can decide to allocate a block to our own national oil company. So, it is important that we actually understand and appreciate these exceptional circumstances because indeed they do exist and can happen.
  
MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The reason which the minister has given would equally justify the Authority giving out those licences under exceptional circumstances. I do not see why it should be the minister and not the Authority. I thought the reason why we put the Authority in place is to intercept and to insulate the minister. So, I do not see why – (Interjections) – Mr Chairman, can you protect me from sycophants? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The honourable member for Dokolo District is holding the Floor.
 
MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have read this document and I have also been following the debate, but the justification which the minister has given is not convincing. I believe that the Authority can do the same. I do not see anything exceptional, which the minister has done. So, I agree with the earlier proposal that clause 54 (1) be deleted. I thank you, Mr Chairman. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think let us move by our understanding and agreement. If we covered clause 9, which has a direct bearing on this, even clause 54 provides that,  “notwithstanding section 53”. Section 53 involves the announcement of the areas for petroleum exploration licensing by the Minister with the approval of Cabinet, and we agreed to this. Once the Minister has performed that, these exceptional circumstances will fit well within the Authority with the approval of the Minister. 

Colleagues will remember that we stood over this in order to first resolve clause 9. Now that we have already done that, we cannot lose sight of that and, therefore, I propose that we move this as a consequential amendment to clause 9.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think there are two things we are dealing with. We are dealing with the principle of whether there should be any exceptional circumstances. That is what we are dealing with now. The other one as to who this matter would be referred to is already resolved. What we are dealing with now is whether we should recognise exceptional circumstances. I think that is the issue.
 
MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I listened very carefully to the Minister of State for Trade, the hon. Dr Mutende, especially on how he ended his submission, that Government is going to hunt, and I got worried. I have also listened to the Minister for Energy who in her submission  said that there are going to be circumstances when in the promotion of national interest, the national oil company will not be competing, in a business sense, with other companies. I get worried.

I have been convinced right from the beginning that this national oil company is going to be run purely as a businesslike company. There should be no circumstances under which we bring politics into business. If that is one of the reasons we are enacting this law, then I do not support it at all. We are now going to fall victim to the problems of parastatals, which we got rid of, pumping money and public resources for purposes of promoting what they call “national interest” and eventually having problems.

Mr Chairman and honourable colleagues, I have seen countries that were deserts. If you went to the United Arab Emirates years back, like I was privileged to, it was purely a desert, but it has been turned around because of the business sense in the running of the oil industry and it is now a paradise. A desert is now the first destination for tourism. So, do not vulgarise business with politics. For Dr Mutende to say that we shall headhunt; how! And you want me to be party to this legislation; I will not be. We should run away from this.

Mr Chairman - (Interjections) Hon. Kakooza, of course you know about these particular issues, at what level I am informed. (Laughter) The point I am trying to make is that there should be no circumstances like these. If it is as the honourable Minister of Energy explained under (b) - an application in respect to areas that are adjacent to an existing licensed reservoir - then the licensing authority should be able to take into account any application because that is their job. You do not need a direct application to anybody to take political consideration. If there is a reservoir there and if you drill it will call for adjustment to the one which has already been licensed, then they will not license the new one. Those should be the grounds for licensing. These are business and commonsense decisions and not political- (Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I really do not see the problem in this clause because I thought it was fairly clear. Where there are no applications received in response to invitations repeatedly, why do you think it does not make sense to try and get some renowned investor in this area and persuade them to come? What is the problem? I do not see any problem at all. There is absolutely no problem in that.

Promotion of national interest; this is a very important point.  You see, we live in a real world and I can tell this House – (Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I want to seek clarification from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. In reading sub clause (1), he seems to give an impression that receiving direct applications entails sourcing directly by moving around and encouraging people to apply for a licence like other exploration licences. If I may read it: “...in consultation with the Authority, receive direct applications for an exploration licence”. I do not know whether this does not mean you source for applications directly, maybe by writing to potential applicants or interested people.


Secondly, I want to observe that under clause 53, you advertise, and I would assume - in fact it is stated here - that you have to advertise internationally. So, you are saying to the world, “Look, I have an opportunity here.” Now, these fellows who may be somewhere in their nooks surely should see this application if they are in the business of petroleum. I do not know whether, as Parliament, our understanding should be whether or not our oil is attractive and we make it even more attractive, rather than trying to move the extra mile of going to knock on everybody’s door asking whether they will have our oil. 

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, nobody has a monopoly of knowledge, but some of us who are students of accounts, when we are dealing with business, we know what we invest in shares. This is accounts, and it is business; it is not law! There is no way any company is allowed to float shares without considering its own marketing strategy in case you are stuck with cash flow. This is in the national interest of a country.

There is what we call a free cash flow in floating shares; the government must take interest. What are the earnings per share that you are going to float? Companies are going to compete and if they are stuck, what is going to happen to Government? Government must take interest, and this is what we are talking about. We are not arguing about law but about business when dealing with this clause.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I was making a simple but fundamental point, and this is not a new point by the way, and I will give an example. If you looked at the history of the establishment of UDC by Governor Cohen, what was the purpose? The whole idea was for Government intervention in order to attract private investors in particular fields. 

You may have a situation where the private sector is not attracted, so why do you want to deny yourself the possibility of intervention in order to attract bigger investments when the obvious benefits come out? If you have wells that may not appear to be big or attractive to these big players, why can’t we licence our own company even if there is no competition or bidding? These are (Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you for giving way. I hope we are talking about clause 54, which is about an exploration licence when we have not yet known the existence of wells. So, how do we bring in an argument of a well when you have not actually explored? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: But you see, where there is a well, there is already a discovery. I am talking about attracting people to explore in circumstances which, in our own assessment, may not appear to be attractive. Why do you want to shut the state out? The purpose of this is simply to open up, and as a state it is our duty to do so. 

If I may say, let us take Kanungu for example; everybody knows that Kanungu is the wealthiest part of this country. (Laughter) I know that even hon. Katuntu sometimes does not know everything, but he ought to know this. Now, if you look at the mineral map of Uganda and you want to know where gold, diamonds – (Mr Ssekikubo rose_) - Just a second, let me complete my sentence. I will give you way. I thought hon. Ssekikubo was behaving himself today and I shook his hand when I came in, but he is beginning to be himself. (Laughter) He is my friend today. 

When we carry out an intervention, for instance to go into Karamoja, it is expensive. But why do we do so? It is because we know that there is wealth which the private sector cannot invest in unless there is infrastructure. So the only – (Interruption)

MR OGUTTU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like the Prime Minister to convince us as to why this work being transferred to the Minister cannot be done at the Authority offices.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Wafula, that one was settled long time ago. The issue we are dealing with now is whether there is any need for exceptional circumstances which will require a direct application. That is the matter we are dealing with.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Good. I am glad that my brother is now clear. So, it is possible, therefore, that circumstances will arise where we need part (a) in order for this country to exploit its oil resources. Now, on promotion of national interest, I can see circumstances where we may have bids but it may not be prudent or wise to simply act on the basis of what hon. Katuntu was calling “business sense” because we live in a real world.  We have geo-politics, global politics and all sorts of things to consider.

Mr Chairman, let me tell this House that when Heritage Oil was trying to sell its interests in the oil well, obviously there were many oil companies interested like Total, Exxon, Eni and others, but we took a line that we should not put all our eggs in one basket. We had to look at our interest as a country. We know the history of our relationship with certain countries and therefore, we thought it was in our best interest to balance out these matters, to have links with the old players in the field. This was deliberate action in order to protect national interest. There is nothing wrong with that and you cannot avoid it. 

That is why we have governments. That is why this country is not run on a laissez faire basis. It has a government, the country has a particular line it tows and it has its own interests which it must protect. Therefore, it is clear that the need for giving room to handle situations like this, which are called here “exceptional circumstances” – (Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: I thank the Prime Minister for yielding the Floor. There is this animal called “national interest” which if not clearly defined, like it is not defined in this Bill, it becomes subject to abuse. It becomes anybody’s consideration as to what they think national interest or public interest is because it is not defined here. So the clarification I am seeking is: what is your view of national interest, before you take a decision that actually this matter is of national interest?

Secondly, there is a lot of bad faith because when you look at clause 54(1), we are talking about somebody who has just come later with an application, yet the argument being given by the Prime Minister, and indeed other ministers, is that they are just going ahead to start headhunting. If that is what you intended, why weren’t you clear in the Bill? Why didn’t you put it in the law that “we shall headhunt”, other than saying, “we will receive direct applications”? This insinuates that some applicants might come later on their own, yet what you have in mind is that you are going to solicit for applications.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: This thing called “national interest” is in our Constitution, Article 8A, which I invite my good brother, the Shadow Attorney-General, to read. This term is used throughout the Constitution, and exceptions are made related to national interests. 

MRS OGWAL: Mr Chairman, is the Prime Minister just discovering Article 8A in the Constitution now? The reason why we are labouring to understand each and every clause – Remember, you spent the whole Saturday studying this document and I did the same. We both worked here on Saturday to study each and every clause. Now, we know that if the law is not properly done, the entire sector may be mismanaged. 

We are conscious of that section in the Constitution and yet that section has been there and Government has been abusing that section. We now must come up with a good law that will stop them from further abuse of that constitutional provision. So, is he in order to continue misleading us when he knows that there has been a lot of corruption going on despite that section in the Constitution? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That was a strong submission from the honourable member from Dokolo District.

MR KATUNTU: I am sorry, Mr Chairman. I have said it before and I repeat it, I have immense respect for the Rt Hon. Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda, hon.  Amama Mbabazi. Not only do I have respect for him as an individual but I also have immense respect for him as a lawyer. The only disagreement I have with him is when he purported to be the Attorney-General and I said he was not because of his appointment. 

That notwithstanding, when he cites Article 8A - For the benefit of colleagues who do have the Constitution, let me read it. It says, “National interest. (1) Uganda shall be governed based on principles of national interest...” - a repetition of national interest - “...and common good enshrined in the national objectives and directive principles of state policy. 

(2) Parliament shall make relevant laws for purposes of giving full effect to clause (1) of this Article.” 

Actually, the Constitution does not define what national interest is. My own honest view is that to continue even using this word in subsequent laws and then anybody interprets what national interest is, makes it vulnerable to abuse. People will say, “We did this in national interest” and we have no recourse to any legal regime where we can define this national interest. So, let us not bring this amorphous something called “national interest” and then we refer to almost a full chapter on National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy. It does not work. For us to legislate that this is national interest, we actually should know what this particular Bill envisages as national interest.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I hear my learned friend, hon. Abdu Katuntu. I hear his argument and of course I respect him. However, I am not sure that I know exactly what he is saying, because all I did was to point out that in the Constitution itself we use “national interest”, not once but many times. There are other provisions in the Constitution where they make exceptions. Where there are certain restrictions or limitations, we make exceptions in public or national interest in the Constitution itself and other pieces of legislation that we have passed. 

He is making a good point, of course, that this Parliament is under duty by command of this Constitution in clause 2 to make a law to give full effect to that; in other words, to give it full meaning. That Parliament has not done that cannot stop us from talking about national interest because national interest exists. When we are ready to talk about it, we will come and talk about it. 

Like we did in the Constitution itself, we will continue to talk about national interest because there is such a thing called national interest. Even if it was not enshrined in this Constitution, we all know it. Obviously, you know this is a country and a country has an interest, and that interest equals to national interest. Simple logic! - (Mr Ssekikubo rose_) - Hon. Ssekikubo, do you want clarification? Go ahead.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is always known to be precise, concise and accurate and right now when he says it is common knowledge, we are aware that common knowledge is not always common. Can he help this House to clearly understand how national interest should be defined? I can see him scrambling for the Constitution but I know in Article 257, the interpretation article, there is no where national interest is defined. So, for you to allow us to meander in the wilderness - Can you kindly specifically guide the House on what you mean, as you usually do? I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. What is surprising me particularly about this clause is to find that an issue of promotion of national interest becomes an exceptional circumstance. What this would mean is that in the situations where the minister is not working in national interest, she will follow the other procedure. However, where she is looking at national interest as a priority, then we can have direct applications to the minister. Mr Chairman, I want clarification here. Should we say that when affairs of this country are being handled in national interest, procedures should not be followed in the normal way? Is this what we are trying to suggest in this particular clause here? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The honourable member from Bulamogi rose on a point of guidance and he has guided on the question I wanted to ask. Is there any situation where there is no national interest? Is this whole Bill itself in national interest? Should national interest be an exception or should it be the rule? There was a point of guidance raised which I have not yet- 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, notwithstanding 8A (2) of the Constitution, 8A(1) specifically states that national interest is enshrined in the national objectives and directive principles of the state. When I look back at the national objectives, there are democratic principles, national unity, national sovereignty and fundamental human rights. Isn’t that what is enshrined and implied by national interest, which we are trying to define. It would also have been expressly articulated, according to 8A(2), by an Act of Parliament. However, despite this Act not being there, isn’t this sufficient to guide us on what national interest is all about? I need your guidance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that really a point of guidance from the Chair of the House?  

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for giving way. Mr Chair, I want to agree with what the rest of the honourable members have been saying. The question of national interest, just like public interest, has not been clearly spelt out by this Constitution. Article 8A(1) is clear on that, and also Article 43(2) mentions public interest; it tries to explain that public interest under this article shall not permit political persecution, detention and so forth, but does not specifically define what public interest is. 

That said and done, I now seek clarification. My understanding is that we are trying to give an exception in clause 54 to clause 53. Clause 53 is as simple as, to put it in my language, food has been prepared for the visitors and the visitors have not shown up. So what do you do? Should you pour the food or you eat it? Sub clause (1) of clause 53 tries to impose a duty on the ministry to announce, but not only announce; sub clause (2) says, please publish; sub clause (3) says, please lay down conditions to be met by applicants; and in sub clause (4), you bid for a discovered well or oil.

Now, the minister is right to say that if there is no application, should we just leave our food to get spoilt? The provision under clause 54 says, “Notwithstanding section 53, the minister may, in exceptional circumstances, in consultation with the Authority, receive direct applications for an exploration licence.” Mr Chairman, I do not agree with that – (Interjections) – I am coming to that – (Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I gave way thinking he was seeking clarification but he is arguing now – (Interjections) – You will have your turn. My understanding - correct me if I am wrong - of clause 54 is that if having applied according to clause 53 and nobody shows up, and you even do it the second time and nobody shows up, the law says in (a) do not give up; use (a) now.  

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Chairman, I seek clarification on (2)(a) where there are no applications received in response to the invitation of bids. The clarification I would like to get is, after how many adverts? I think under PPDA, which we waived under 53(4), it is very clear that when you advertise the first time and there is no application, you go for the second time and there is none and so forth. In this particular circumstance, you are using the word “repetitive” but I do not see it anywhere here. So, can we be clear? There are no applications received after how many attempts?

Secondly, when you look at part (2) (b), you are looking for exceptional circumstances that include applications in respect of areas that are adjacent to an existing licensed reservoir. The clarification I would like to get is: what is adjacent? How do we define “adjacent”? If by adjacent you mean that the new licensee will actually drill into an already licensed reservoir, then why don’t we apply 59(2) because it is already provided for: “A petroleum exploration licence shall not be granted in respect of a block which is comprised in a licence already granted.” In that case, why do we need (2)(b)? 

Thirdly, (2) (c), promotion of national interest; I need clarification again on this one. What is national interest? If we knew that a certain area falls within national interest, why do we proceed under 53 to advertise it? Why don’t we say, since this is in national interest, it should not be advertised? Isn’t this a clause which needs further refining and further definition?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Let me begin with that last one. Let me see if I can give circumstances that would convey the point. I want to inform this House, as all of you know, that we have very good relations with the Republic of Sudan. However, at one time - hon. Katuntu is a witness because he did a wonderful job there when he was representing Uganda - we had terrible relations with Sudan. You remember when they were promoting LRA and so forth? So, supposing we advertised and only Sudanese companies applied, what would you do? – (Interjection) - Advertise again, of course. However, if they are the only ones who apply, what do you do?  

All we are saying is, if all is well, then the exceptions do not come in; exceptions come in only when exceptional circumstances exist. That is the point. How can you not legislate for exceptional circumstances? Even in the Constitution, we said that in budgeting we must provide for contingencies. They are unexpected. This is the normal and prudent way of managing things. 

On public interest or national interest, the fact that we have not legislated as Parliament as commanded by Article 8A (2) cannot possibly be a reason for not using that term in our legislation. Even in the Constitution, I was trying to demonstrate that we used it. When we finally come up to do what we ought to have done already, we will take all this into account. So, in clause 54, the idea is where exceptional circumstances exist and those exceptional circumstances are defined, it is not going to be at the discretion of any authority; this is in accordance with the law. 

Hon. Lubogo was talking about procedure. This is the procedure we are setting up. That is precisely what you are employed to do, and that is what you and I are doing now. So I urge colleagues, please support this because it is necessary. 

I do not remember what hon. Ssekikubo asked because I think he had the answer. He was asking something for which he had the answer. He thought that I was not clear; now I am very clear. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, at the beginning of the debate on this clause, the chairperson proposed an amendment to (c), promotion of national interest. They proposed that instead of “promotion of national interest”, it should be “the need to enhance the participating interest of the State”. So, there would be no issue if we agreed that that should be replaced. The whole issue of promotion of national interests would fall by the way side. 

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, I think that the issue that is not clear is the definition of “national interest”. If we brought in the word or phrase, “participating interest”, are we not coming from the frying pan into the fire? We are denying ourselves what is quite common to us. Unless we want to admit that we do not know what national interest is, and if it is this Parliament admitting so, God forbid! Can’t we be able to define what national interest is? I have heard members here rising up on matters of national importance; who defines for them what national importance is? (Laughter)

Mr Chairman, I seek your guidance on harmonising. If the other learned Attorney-General could give me time, I know he is my senior. When the big drums are not drumming or sounding correctly, can’t the small ones be heard? Must I keep quiet because they are bigger and larger drums from Bugweri and other sides? I am saying, why do we pretend that we do not know what national interest is? National interest can be so flailed as it can be so rigid, and that is the more reason why it cannot be defined. I would like, if there is somebody in this House who has done jurisprudence, to bring out one country at least on planet Earth where national interest is defined. I would rest my case.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member for West Budama, under clause 121 on State participation in petroleum activities, it says, “The Government may participate in petroleum activities under this Act through a specified participating interest of a licence, or contract granted under this Act and in the joint venture established by a joint operating agreement in accordance with the licence and this Act.” So, the phrase, “participating interest” is actually illustrated in 121. However, I also see that there is a proposed amendment to that clause and I do not know what we will agree on. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I think the thrust of clause 54 (2) (c), promotion of national interest, is really used in a context different from the context that is being proposed by the chairperson. I think (2) (c) should be sustained as is under clause 54. 

As my colleague, hon. Oboth Oboth, is saying, to say that we should not use the expression “national interest” simply because it is not defined is not sustainable. Even in Article 8A (1), which has been cited by the Prime Minister and expounded upon, you look at the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy and all other relevant laws to come to what you want to get or to understand by national interest.

On Article 8A (2), I agree that we need an enabling law to operationalise Article 8A, but that is for purposes of giving full effect. You read it carefully. It is for purposes of giving full effect, but it does not mean that it is not effective as it is - (Interjections) - Let me finish my submission, please. 

I do not have the relevant law but I remember that there was a case in the High Court involving interpretation of Article 5 (a). Of course, I know that it is not the Constitutional Court, but that issue came up - whether the administration of Kampala became operational by the passing of that particular article without the enabling legislation being passed. The court said that the article was self executing. It was not the Constitutional Court but – By the way, it is not only the Constitutional Court that must actually give meaning and understanding to all the provisions of the Constitution, unless there is a contention. That was actually not a contention but a reference was made to that particular article as being self executing. I can always look for the citation. 

Mr Chairman, having said that, let me actually remind you of a ruling - at least this one I carried it with me. This is for purposes of understanding how you have to look at the provisions even by the way of the directive principles of state policy. There was the popular case of Paul Ssemogerere and Zackary Olum v Attorney-General, Constitutional Petition No. 3 of 2000. Justice Twinomujuni, while referring to the judgement of Justice Manyindo, the Deputy Chief Justice as he was then, ruled that:  

“The entire Constitution has to be read as an integrated whole, and no one particular provision destroying the other but each sustaining the other. This is the rule of harmony, rule of completeness and exhaustiveness and the rule of paramountcy of the written Constitution. The third principle is that the words of the written Constitution prevail over all unwritten conventions, precedents and practices.” The last leg is a given, but the idea that is being propounded by my brother, hon. Kamuntu, is that 8A (1) refers you to the directive principles of state policy to understand what the common good is, to understand what national interest is. It should not be taken for granted. That is what should be done. 

Finally, exceptions exist even in the extreme cases of fundamental human rights; where people kill there are exceptions to the cases of murder. (Interjections) - Yes, when you are provoked or attacked by a thief at night and you use proportional force and you kill, it is a defence. There must be exceptions. The provisions that I have personally come across, most of them, if not all, carry exceptions. This is why we say there must be an exception to the general rule. 

We have not looked at clause 55, but if we looked at clause 55, it may help us to understand that even by putting in place clause 54, there are safeguards against abuse. To me, if members were actually saying let us strengthen clause 55, that would be fine. I even find clause 55 (1) and (2) sufficient. If you wished, that is the clause to be thought of to be amended. For clause 54, I think the exceptions are justified - (Interjection)- clause 55? Most of us have got the Bill. 

Clause 55 says, “Publication of notice of applications. The Minister shall, within fourteen days after receiving a direct application under section 54, cause a notice of the application to be published in the Gazette and in at least one national newspaper of wide circulation in Uganda.

(2) A notice published under subsection (1) shall -

(a) indicate the receipt of the application for a petroleum exploration licence;

(b) contain a description of the nature and location of the proposed undertaking;

(c) inform members of the public that the application may, within the limits of commercial confidentiality, be inspected at the offices of the Minister;

(d) invite directly affected parties and local authorities in areas affected by the project who object to the granting of the licence, whether on personal, environmental or other grounds, to lodge with the Minister an objection within a specified time, being not less than thirty days from the notice.” That is what clause 55 says. Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I may have to give some clarification on some of the issues raised. The National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy were provided in the Constitution in that formulation in 2005 by an amendment moved by hon. Dr Crispus Kiyonga. What was outside the Constitution now basically became an integral part of the Constitution. Some lawyers have been trying to argue whether the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy are actually not justiciable as of now because of Article 8A. 

These particular National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy are actually inspired by the Indian Constitution. In the Indian Constitution, it is chapter 7 or 8 inside the Constitution, but in Uganda they had decided to put them outside the Constitution. I think hon. Dr Crispus Kiyonga must have read the Indian Constitution to bring this thing into the Constitution. So, it is now part of the Constitution. 

On the issue of whether you can implement a provision of the Constitution directly where there is an authorising clause in the Constitution saying Parliament shall enact laws to that effect, I think that case was also settled by the Supreme Court on an appeal of the decision of the Constitutional Court in the same case of Paul Kawanga and Zackary Olum. They had challenged the referendum that was held under the provision of the Referendum Act, which was declared null and void by the Constitutional Court. 

The question was whether that referendum itself that was conducted under the authority of a law that had been declared invalid was itself valid. I remember the judgement of Justice Kanyeihamba; he stated this very carefully and said that the referendum was then held under the authority of the Constitution not the expunged Act, and that is what stood in that situation. 

Honourable members, it is coming to 3.30 p.m. and we have not broken for lunch. I am going to suggest that since we have been very late for lunch, we can as well do one more hour and then we adjourn to tomorrow instead of coming back here after lunch because that would be almost impossible. So in the next one hour, which hon. Abdu Katuntu has agreed to, I am going to suggest that we deal with those clauses where we have had no problem at all and pass them, so that we see how much of the work is remaining. There are clauses that we have identified as non-contentious. We could pronounce ourselves on those and then we come back to these other ones and deal with them when there is sufficient time and more consultation has been done. 

If that is carried, which I order it should be, I now propose that we stand over clause 54, in the circumstances of how we are operating, and go through the Bill the way we had gone through it earlier. Let us see which clauses we can pass in the next one hour, so that we reduce on the size of the Bill and when we come back, it will look much smaller than it actually is. There are clauses that have been agreed upon. Can we do that?

Clause 55

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Clause 55, any amendments? We stand over clause 55 because it is dependent on clause 54. 

Clause 56

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are there any substantial amendments to clause 56?

MR WERIKHE: Just the head note, Mr Chairman. Substitute the word, “activity” with the word, “licence” in the head note because this is a section dealing with licensing. It cannot be “objection to a proposed petroleum exploration activity”; it should instead be “licence”. Justification: Part IV deals with licensing and clause 56 should provide for objection to petroleum exploration licence, not activity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What about sub clause (1); it also uses the same phrase, “proposed exploration activity”?

MR WERIKHE: Consequentially, even sub clause (1) will be amended.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you. Mr Chairman, I thought clauses 55, 56, 57 are all dependent on the decision we make on clause 54; apparently, even 58. Could I then suggest that we proceed from clause 60?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Clauses 56, 57, 58, 59 stood over. 

Clause 60, agreed to

Clause 61

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If it is substantial, we stand over it.

MR WERIKHE: It is not substantial. We are substituting the word, “operations” appearing in the second last line with the word, “petroleum activities”. This is to provide clarity and consistency since the word “petroleum activity” is used and defined in the Bill. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The proposal from the committee is to remove the word “operations” and replace it with the word, “petroleum activities”. Is that correct?

MR WERIKHE: Yes. Insert in paragraph (b) the words –


THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, we are now handling clause 61; we have already handled clause 60. Is that what you are proposing to amend? Is clause 61 okay? Okay, I now put a question that clause 61 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 61, agreed to.

Clause 62

MR WERIKHE: The committee proposes the insertion, in paragraph (b), of the word “subsequent” immediately before the word “period”. The justification is: to emphasise a renewal period. In other words, that paragraph should read thus: “…for a subsequent period not exceeding two years where the licence is renewed under section 65 except that the licence shall not be renewed more than twice.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now put a question to the amendment as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 62, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 63

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, in view of the amendment of clauses 9 and 11, clause 63 should be a consequential amendment by substituting the word “Minister” with the word “Authority”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is on the application for renewal of a petroleum licence. Yes, that is consequential based on 9 and 11. Since we already agreed on the principle, this would be a consequential amendment. Is that okay? I now put the question to clause 63 as a consequential amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 63, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 64

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes the substitution, in sub clauses (1) and (2), of the words “subject to any modification contained in a petroleum agreement” with the words “subject to this Act”. 

We propose the insertion of a new sub clause (3) to read as follows: “For purposes of sub section (1), a block which is stratigraphically delineated shall be considered as a block before it was stratigraphically delineated.” 

The justification is that the relinquishment should be made in accordance with this Act; and secondly, to cater for stratigraphically delineated blocks for purposes of relinquishment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there was supposed to be no amendment on clause 64. Where is this coming from? 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I did mention this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That amendment is on which particular sub clauses?

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, it is on sub clauses (1) and (2).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Does that make sense, honourable members? If that is the case, I now put the question to the amendment proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 64, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 65

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, in clause 65, sub clause (4), we propose the insertion of the words “as may be prescribed in regulations by the Minister”. The justification is: to empower the Minister to make regulations to prescribe the special circumstances thereby creating certainty. 

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, clause 65 must also be amended consequentially to what we have amended in clauses 9 and 11.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, all the subsequent clauses are improved as per what was agreed on in clauses 9 and 11. But there is a proposal made by the committee in sub clause (4). Have we dealt with special circumstances in situations of renewals? We have not even dealt with the other special circumstances; we stood over that clause. Now there are special circumstances to justify the granting of a renewal. We have not examined the basis for exceptional circumstances on the renewal of a licence. Have we done it anywhere in any clause?

MR WERIKHE: We have not, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, can we stand over this clause 65?

MR NIWAGABA: I thought the proposal by the committee, that those be stipulated in regulations which will be laid before Parliament, can pass so that we do not stand over very many clauses.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, you think when we approve the amendment by the committee it will take care of that?

MR SSEGGONA: My concern with what my brother from Ndorwa is suggesting is that the regulations will then effectively amend the Act. I would only agree to the extent that if we provide the general power in here, we only allow the minister to prescribe those special circumstances by a statutory instrument. Otherwise, if we state that the minister will be the one to provide, my fear is that the minister may actually encroach on the powers of Parliament in making this law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But that is the power of Parliament, to make any statutory instrument.

MR SSEGGONA: Yes, that is why I am saying that in principle, we allow the minister to do only one thing, prescribing those circumstances, and then we approve that statutory instrument. The approval I am talking about is that there are certain statutory instruments which the minister may make but we reserve the powers to approve them because, like they told us, this is a special law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. Chairman, can you now state the amendment again in sub clause (4). 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, in sub clause (4), our proposal will read as follows: “The minister shall not grant a renewal of a petroleum exploration licence if the licence is in default unless the minister considers that special circumstances exist which justify the granting of the renewal, notwithstanding the default as may be prescribed in regulations by the Minister.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What will be prescribed?

MR WERIKHE: The special circumstances.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Don’t you think it may be smarter if you extracted it and made it a standalone provision? You could say that the special circumstances referred to in sub clause (4) would be done by the minister either with approval of Parliament or whatever. Wouldn’t it be better if you extracted that part and inserted a new sub clause after sub clause (4) to say that the special circumstances in sub clause (4) would be prescribed by the minister with approval of Parliament or whatever? That would take care of it instead of trying to squeeze it in there.

MR WERIKHE: It can take care of that, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, can you restate it properly so that it is clear. If you just put a comma and say,  “as prescribed by the minister”, you do not know whether it is the “default” or - Would that be good? Can you restate it properly, honourable member? It might be better to put the authority of the minister under a separate sub clause.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, we could say “the minister may, by statutory instrument approved by Parliament, prescribe the special circumstances referred to in sub clause...” I think if the principle is captured then-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay? So, we put the question to that amendment on the issue of the power of the minister to prescribe what those special circumstances in relation to renewal of licences would be, and that would be with the approval of Parliament? Is that the consensus? Okay, it is captured. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 65, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 66

MR WERIKHE: In paragraph (a), the committee proposes to insert the words “and carryout” immediately after the word “commit to”. In paragraph (d)--

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Wait. We have not got that. “Commit to carry out”?

MR WERIKHE: “commit to carry out a minimum work programme in both the primary exploration term and any subsequent extension.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay, members? I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WERIKHE: In paragraph (d), Mr Chairman, the committee proposes the insertion of the words “a minimum number of” immediately after the word “drill”. So it would read, “drill a minimum number of exploration wells...”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In other words, after the first word “drill”, it will say, “a minimum number of exploration wells as the basis for the data acquired...”

MR WERIKHE: Insert the word “and” immediately after the word “wells”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: On which one?

MR WERIKHE: Under (d).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, there is an insertion after “drill” then another insertion after “wells”? What is that?

MR WERIKHE: “...and carry out any other exploration activity stipulated in the minimum work programme.” That is how we drafted it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, read what you have redrafted in (d).

MR WERIKHE: What I have redrafted here is: “Drill a minimum number of exploration wells and carry out any other exploration activity stipulated in the...” No, there is a problem here. Delete the words “as the basis for the data acquired from the activities referred to in paragraphs (b) and (c)”. I think let us stop at inserting the word “and” immediately after the word “wells”.

MR SSEGGONA: I think, Mr Chairman, the amendment is even more confusing because, first of all, when you add the word “minimum”- (Interruption)

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I think that one will stop at “minimum of exploration wells”. There is a proposed paragraph (e) which states that, “carry out any other exploration activity stipulated in the minimum work programme”. The justification is: to reflect that it is the minimum work programme that specifies what activities the licensee is obliged to carry out during the exploration phase, and for clarity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, is that okay? I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 66, as amended, agreed to.


Clause 67

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to insert in paragraph (d) the word “report” immediately after the word “evaluation”. It will read as follows: “Submit the technical evaluation report to the Authority as soon as it is complete.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay, members? I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, we already agreed on the question of the Minister, so there is a consequential amendment to clause 67.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, those will be consequential amendments on the basis of what was agreed in clause 9 and 11.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I wish that we take note that even here it applies, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The records capture that those amendments will be reflecting what was agreed on in clauses 9 and 11.

MR SSEKIKUBO: In that case, Mr Chairman, may I propose that the same applies to the following clauses: 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 93, 100 and 101.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Those are consequential but we want to deal with the other amendments that have not been handled.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I did this so that we do not have to rise on them.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We have already declared that any changes arising from clauses 9 and 11 will now be consequential wherever they appear. Let us now deal with substance of the amendments if they are new. Is there anything new on clause 67 apart from what the chairman has proposed?

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, we propose to substitute sub clause (6) with the following: 

“(6) Where petroleum is discovered in an exploration area, the Authority may require by notice in writing served on the licensee from time to time to submit in writing within the period specified in the notice particulars of -

(a) the chemical composition and physical properties of the petroleum;

(b) the stratigraphical position and depth of the discovery; and

(c) any other matters relating to the discovery specified by the Authority in the notice.” 

It has been redrafted to achieve clarity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The redraft is on the operating provision of sub clause (6). Is that acceptable to members? I now put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 67, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 68, agreed to.

Clause 69

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, we propose to insert a new sub clause (2) to read as follows: “The exclusive right referred to in subsection (1) applies only to reservoirs included in the application and any other prospect or discovery within the area which the application covers may be required to be stratigraphically delineated or relinquished.”  Justification: to accommodate licensing of stratigraphically delineated areas.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that ok, members? I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WERIKHE: Insert the following clause immediately after clause 68: “Disposal of petroleum during exploration. Any petroleum extracted during exploration period for- 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Which sub clause?

MR WERIKHE: This is after clause 69; we are inserting a new clause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You want to propose a new clause after clause 69. Can we take a vote on clause 69 as amended? I put the question to clause 69 as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 69, as amended, agreed to

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, this is the head note, “Disposal of petroleum during exploration”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is before clause 70?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, before clause 70. “Any petroleum extracted during the exploration period for purposes of testing the reservoir before the issuance of a production licence shall be dealt with in a manner agreed upon by agreement by the Government and the licensee.”

Justification: to enable Government and the licensee dispose of any petroleum extracted during the exploration but before the issuance of a production licence, and to avoid flaring or reinjection into the well of the said petroleum. Currently, there is no provision in the law on how to deal with this.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I believe that amendment has a very good spirit, but why do we say that it be disposed off in accordance with a manner agreed upon with the Government? Why don’t we subject the disposal to the provisions of this Act, since the provisions cover matters to do with environment and the like, such that Government does not contract outside the provisions of this Act?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, what would it be now? 

MR WERIKHE: Let me read this and maybe he can fill in: “Any petroleum extracted during exploration period for purposes of testing the reservoir before the issuance of a production licence shall be dealt with in a manner – (Interjections) - in accordance to the provisions of this Act”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can you now restate it for the record?

MR WERIKHE: “Any petroleum extracted during the exploration period for purposes of testing the reservoir before the issuance of a production licence shall be dealt with in accordance with provisions of this Act.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the introduction of the new clause immediately after clause 69 in terms proposed by the chair of the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 70, agreed to.

Clause 71

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, in clause 71(2), the committee proposes to insert the following new paragraphs immediately after paragraph (h): “(i) an assessment of the potential effects of the petroleum activities on the environment, social and other relevant activities.”

Justification: To require the licensee to carry out an impact assessment in connection with the submission of any field development plan, to allow for a wider scoped impact assessment and not only be limited to an environmental impact assessment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That one is clear. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WERIKHE: We propose to amend sub clause (3) as follows: In paragraph (a) insert the words, “use or” immediately before the word “disposal”. Insert the following -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Wait, we have not got that one. It says in (a), “...including the method for the disposal of associated gas”. So, what are we proposing?

MR WERIKHE: I am proposing in paragraph (a) to insert the word “use or” immediately before the word “disposal”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: “...for the use or disposal of associated gas.” It is clear. I put the question to that amendment.
              
(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, insert the following new paragraphs (b) and (c) immediately after paragraph (a) to read as follows:
“(b) the applicant’s assessment of whether the development and production of the reservoir should be subject to unitisation or joint petroleum activities in accordance with this Act;

(c) the applicant’s assessment of how to coordinate petroleum activities with other licensees, including the joint use of facilities subject to this Act and any other applicable law.”

The justification is at the end of the third amendment - to ensure efficient and coordinated petroleum activities in relation to any mainstream operations planned, in close coordination with the upstream activities. 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, we are not objecting to the text, we are only saying we improve on the legislative drafting. Instead of saying, “in accordance with this Act” we simply say, “in accordance with the provisions of this Act.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay? Can I put a question to these two proposed insertions? 

HON MEMBER: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would also like to move together with the rest. Here it is saying it should be subject to unitisation or joint petroleum activities. I just wanted to understand in this context what unitisation refers to, so that I can approve what I know.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Unitisation, Mr Chairman? 

MR WERIKHE: In assessing the development or the production of the reservoir, there is a measure which is applied in determining the quantities and the scope of the activities enshrined in this business. It used in determining the quantum of the reservoir that will be exploited. So, unitisation is a unit of measure.   

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is it clear now? I put the question. 

MR KATUNTU:  Mr Chairman, I think the law of diminishing returns has set in. We seem not to be at the same page. Maybe at this point we request you to have this matter adjourned until tomorrow. Otherwise, we seem not to be following.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, we have approved up to clause 70 with three clauses stood over. We should be starting on clause 71 and they are saying we adjourn. 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, let us finish clause 71 so that we begin from clause 72. I wish to wind up with the last amendment on this. Immediately after paragraph (l), insert the following new paragraphs: 
“(m) information as to how the facilities may be disposed of when petroleum activities have ceased; and

(n) where the development is planned in two or more phases, the applicant shall provide information on the full development to the extent possible.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is it clear, honourable members? I put the question to those amendments proposed by the chair.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 71, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME 

4.03
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Irene Muloni): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

MOTION FOR THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE 

4.04
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Irene Muloni): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill, 2012” and passed clauses 1 to 71 with the exception of clauses 37, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, which were stood over. 

4.06
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Irene Muloni):  Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. This has been a marathon and I congratulate you for sitting up to this moment.

Honourable members, Parliament of Uganda has learnt with sorrow the news of the death of hon. John Odit, former Member of Parliament for Erute County South. He was Member of Parliament for this county in the Seventh and Eighth Parliaments. He passed away on Friday, 9 November 2012 at Mulago Hospital after a long illness. 

Burial details are as follows: on Wednesday, 14 November 2012 at 10.00 a.m. the body will arrive at Parliament and lie in state in the South Wing lobby for public viewing. At 2.00 p.m. on the same day, there will be a special sitting of Parliament in honour of the late John Odit. After that, the cortege will depart for his residence in Luzira for an overnight vigil. The vigil will be at his place in Luzira.

On 15 November 2012 at 9.00 a.m., there will be a funeral service at All Saints Cathedral after which the cortege will depart for Lira Town where the body will lie in state at the deceased’s residence. On 16 November 2012, a funeral service will be held in Lira - that is still tentative - after which the cortege will leave for Agali Sub County in Erute. On 17th November at 12.00 p.m., burial will take place. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 


MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When you closed the sitting last week, you directed the Minister of Finance to update us on Uganda’s candidature in OIC. I can see the Minister of Finance here. Are we likely to hear from him now?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Minister of Finance, what is the situation with the OIC candidature and our contribution on the membership fees and related matters? Honourable minister, you have to be on record. Any sign language may not be recorded by the Hansard. (Laughter)

4.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. Last week I did mention that this issue is being handled by my senior colleague and we have informed her accordingly to make a report.

MR MAWANDA: Mr Speaker, I would like to get clarification from the honourable minister as to whether he is aware that on the 15th of this month, which is two days from today, there will be a meeting of OIC in Djibouti where they are going to vote for a new post of Assistant Secretary-General for African Affairs, and this is where Uganda is expected to participate. I am wondering whether Uganda will be able to participate when it has not subscribed.

Mr Speaker, I am wondering whether the Minister of Finance is very serious with this matter. We had even asked the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to come and inform us on this. People from the Executive seem to be hiding regarding this matter and I am wondering why. I do not know whether you can make some substantial directives as far as this matter is concerned, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, making a directive on issues of finance would be very difficult for the Speaker because those are financial matters and the Speaker cannot make directives on financial matters. We need a statement from the minister as to when these things can be rectified. What is really happening in the ministry, honourable minister? We needed to have cleared with these things so that we can have our candidate considered.

4.12
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Justine Lumumba): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. This issue has been raised over five times in this House and I have stood here twice, committing myself on behalf of Government that we are going to make a statement. I want to finally direct the Minister of Finance to make a statement here tomorrow because as we talk, there is going to be a conference in Djibouti from 15th to 17th November to create a new post for Deputy Secretary-General in charge of Africa for OIC. So we do not have time on our side and we should come out as Government to make everything clear to this country. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So tomorrow as soon as Parliament convenes, the honourable minister shall show up with a statement. That is a directive from the Leader of Government Business who is also the Government Chief Whip.

Honourable members, can we re-convene at 10.00 a.m. tomorrow? We can see if we can go without lunch again. Today we have made significant progress and if we continue like this tomorrow, it will be very good for the progress of this Bill. House adjourned to tomorrow 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 4.13 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 13 November 2012 at 10.00 a.m.) 

