

Thursday, 19 November 2020

Parliament met at 2.33 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this Special Sitting, which has been convened to pay tribute to the late hon. Rehema Watongola, Member of Parliament for Kamuli Municipality, who succumbed to COVID-19 on Saturday, 14 November 2020, at Mulago National Referral Hospital.

The untimely demise of hon. Watongola is a great loss to the nation, her immediate family, the people of Kamuli Municipality and Kamuli District in general. The Government of Uganda and the Members of Parliament who have been working with her shall greatly miss her.

On behalf of the institution of Parliament and the people of Kamuli, I extend my sincere condolences to the bereaved family, the voters of Kamuli Municipality and pray that the Almighty God gives her eternal rest.

Honourable members, certain primitive, baseless and malicious allegations were made at her funeral, which should be dispelled. First of all, the body is not here because under the instructions of the Ministry of Health, any person who succumbs to COVID-19 cannot be brought to the public. That is why the body is not here.

It is also not true, as her husband said, that Parliament did not contribute anything to the funeral arrangements and that an individual supported the funeral. The Parliamentary Commission budgets for the death of Members of Parliament to the tune of Shs 60 million. I can confirm that Uganda Funeral Services expended Shs 52,252,000 on this funeral and therefore, it was sponsored by Parliament.

Further, there were also allegations that she had been poisoned or strangled in the hospital. For that, I shall invite the Ministry of Health to read the post-mortem report to this House for the record. In the meantime, I invite Members to rise and observe a moment of silence in her honour.

(Members rose and observed a moment observed a moment of silence.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. REHEMA WATONGOLA, MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT, KAMULI MUNICIPALITY

THE SPEAKER: The mover of this motion is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Maybe we can start with - we gave notice and I have a text of the proposed motion here signed by the Prime Minister. Perhaps we could ask the Leader of the Opposition - Can a Member from the Government side present this motion? I do not see the Prime Minister or his deputies.

12.02
MS VERONICA ERAGU BICHETERO (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Rehema Watongola, former Member of Parliament, Kamuli Municipality, for her diligent service to the Republic of Uganda. This motion is moved under Rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.
     
“WHEREAS, Parliament of Uganda received with grief the sad news of the untimely demise of hon. Rehema Watongola, which occurred on 14 November 2020, at Mulago National Referral Hospital;

AWARE THAT hon. Watongola has been a Member of Parliament representing the people of Kamuli Municipality in this Parliament and served on the Committee of Public Accounts, Local Governments and the Committee on Physical Infrastructure;

NOTING THAT prior to joining Parliament in 2016, hon. Watongola served a as a councillor of Kamuli District Local Government from 1997 to 2011, where she held various positions as Chairperson, Works Committee from 1997 to 2001 and Secretary for Gender from 2001 to 2006, positions she devotedly served;

APPRECIATING THAT hon. Watongola was a dedicated and hardworking legislator who was passionate about her work and ably represented the people of Kamuli Municipality and her country Uganda with dedication and patriotism;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:

    1.  That Parliament collectively conveys its deepest condolences to the bereaved family, the people of Kamuli Municipality and the entire country for the loss of a distinguished daughter of Uganda.

    2. That Parliament takes cognizance of the distinguished service rendered and contribution made by hon. Rehema Watongola to the people of Kamuli Municipality and Uganda as a whole;

    3. That we pray to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved and grant hon. Watongola’s soul eternal peace.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? (Members rose.) The motion is seconded by all the Members of the House present. Please, justify the motion.

MS BICHETERO: Madam Speaker, this is a very sad moment for Parliament. It is also a very sad moment for the family of the late Watongola and the people of Kamuli Municipality. 

It is also sad that COVID-19 is real and it has entered our institution. Madam Speaker, this is the second time we bury a member of Parliament, who has succumbed to COVID-19 circumstances. It brings to reality that the disease is real and we have to be careful. 

Madam Speaker, this is the official justification of a motion for a resolution of Parliament, to pay tribute to the late hon. Watongola, who has been a member of Parliament for Kamuli Municipality.

We are yet again here in a sad mood to pay tribute to our fallen colleague, who passed away on Saturday, 14 November 2020. This news has left the country and all of us in deep sorrow. She breathed her last on Saturday morning from Mulago National Referral Hospital, where she had been receiving treatment for COVID-19.

The late hon. Watongola was born on 24 September, 1966. She completed her primary education in 1980 from Kamuli Girls’ Primary School and attained her Uganda Certificate of Education in 2002, from Wanyange Girls’ Secondary School. In 2005, she obtained a certificate in Public Administration from Busoga University. In 2007, she attained a diploma in Public Administration and in 2010, she graduated with a Bachelor’s degree in Public Administration from Busoga University.

To strengthen her career, in 2014, she attained a certificate in Business Administration from Makerere University. In 2016, she attained the Uganda Advanced Certificate of Education at Good Shepherd Secondary School in Nansana. 

Hon. Watongola is survived by her husband, Badru Watongola and five children; two boys and three girls. Hon. Watongola first tried out self-medication and later tried out treatment from other small health facilities. However, her health worsened, upon which she was rushed to Mulago Hospital. She was immediately put on intensive care after scans showed that she had COVID-19, which unfortunately progressed and damaged her lungs.

Madam Speaker, COVID-19 has so far claimed 154 people with 8,038 recoveries. The disease has so far infected 16,020 people across the country. It is, therefore, important for us and the public to up our guard against this deadly virus by observing the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) at all times.

From 1988 to 1999, the late hon. Watongola started on her first job as a store keeper with Busoga Grower’s Cooperative Union. From 1997 to 2011, she was Kamuli District Councillor and also worked as chairperson of the Kamuli District Works Committee. In 2002, she became Secretary for Gender and Community Development. Later in 2006, she became the Secretary for Health and Education. 

Further, from 2005-2009, she worked as the patron of Tugezeeku Women’s Development Group in Kamuli and from 2005-2015, she was the Director of Pearl Models, and also Director of Twebaze Cultural Group. From 2013, she was the Vice Chairperson of Busoga Women Leaders’ Association, a position she held until her death.

Hon. Watongola joined Parliament in 2016, representing people of Kamuli Municipality until her death. 

The late hon. Watongola was a good cadre of the National Resistance Movement (NRM) philosophy and she has been a member of the NRM taskforce since 1997. She was designated as a member on the Local Government Accounts Committee and the Committee on Physical Infrastructure.  She advanced the development of the entire country above her own interests and also ensured that there was value for money in Government projects and programmes.

Placing above self the well being of the people that she, and all of us represent in Parliament, the late hon. Rehema Watongola is applauded and will be missed by all of us. 

She was indeed a reliable, religious, respectable, dependable, dedicated and committed servant of Uganda. We shall surely miss her. 

We extend our deep condolences and sympathies to the family, friends, constituents and the country at large. May the almighty God rest the soul of hon. Rehema Watongola in eternal peace. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Bichetero was a delegate of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Can we ask the Prime minister to complete the tribute, if there is anything else to add?

12.15
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Bichetero for a very good piece of work in moving a motion and giving the justification. 

This departed sister is someone who was known to all of us. One time, I visited Kamuli, where I represented His Excellency the President of Uganda to open a newly built residence for her and family.

I was impressed to see the degree of mobilisation and support that she enjoyed and the function went on very well. I would like to commend her work in Parliament.

As all of us know, she has been a very active member of Parliament, articulate, very active in debates and bringing out issues of concern of the people she represented.

She represented the people of Kamuli Municipality very well and indeed represented the interests of the people of Uganda. She was a patriotic cadre, Parliamentarian who has gone prematurely but has left great examples for us in Parliament for the country to emulate.

I, therefore, reiterate and join my sister hon. Bichetero in conveying our sincere condolences and sympathies to the Watongola family, Kamuli Municipality and the people of Uganda for losing such a dynamic and patriotic member of Parliament. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. Can I now invite the Leader of the Opposition to second the motion?

12.18
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE	(FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to hon. Rehema Watongola, who was a strong mother, an extraordinary social worker and a determined Ugandan. 

It is barely a month since the demise of the Pallisa District Woman member of Parliament, hon. Faith Alupo who passed away on the 15 September, 2020. It is sorrowful that hon. Watongola has now become the second Member to succumb to COVID-19.

I extend my deepest condolences to the family of the late hon. Watongola and the families of all the people who lost their lives due to this virus in Uganda and around the world.

In addition, I send my sincere sympathy to the people of Kamuli Municipality as well as Busoga sub region. It is not only excruciating but also terrifying when a legislator and social worker passes on. I commend her for her noble service. It is unfortunate that she has not been able to complete her tenure of duty. 

Hon. Watongola died at the stage when COVID-19 is at stage 4, which is termed as community transmissions and the infections are on increase with recorded cases at 16,563 and 150 deaths.

Government seems overwhelmed by coronavirus as it is now informing the public that those who lose relatives to the disease need to bury them, citing financial burden upon undertaking burials.

Thereafter, I call upon the public to up their guard against the deadly virus and also observe SOPs.

Furthermore more, as a form of precaution taken by Parliament in partnership with the Ministry of Health, members of Parliament and staff have been cautioned to go for voluntary testing. I appeal to you my colleagues to go for testing, which began on the 17 November 2020 and ends today 19, November, 2020.

Lastly, to the family of hon. Watongola, may the Almighty have mercy on her soul. The ones we love are never gone for they live in our hearts. Muslims usually say, verily we belong to Allah and verily to him do we return. We pray that the Almighty forgives all her past trespasses and grants her paradise. 

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much Leader of the Opposition. 

12.21
MR TONNY AYOO	(NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute the late hon. Watongola who succumbed to COVID-19. I worked with hon. Watongola as a Chairperson of the Committee on East African Affairs and when she joined Parliament, she immediately joined my committee.

She was always the first person to get into the committee meeting and the last to leave. Her contribution would keep the committee together, encourage other Members to participate in committee activities.

I became her very close friend and even when I left the committee, she still continued referring to me as chairperson of the committee.

Hon. Watongola loved people. She loved to serve and when she died, I felt very sad. That is why I had to come to pay tribute to her and to the family. It is God that gave us hon. Watongola and God has taken her.

Just like other Ugandans who have succumbed to COVID-19, Parliament would like to say that Ugandans need to take COVID-19 seriously.

All the information that regards prevention has been given to the people. It is unfortunate that COVID-19 came at a time when we are going for general elections.

As leaders, we should always remember that we have reached stage 4 in the spread of COVID-19 and we should check our movements. Otherwise, by next year, the situation may overwhelm us.

As we mourn our dear one and other Ugandans who have died due to COVID-19, this responsibility must rest on our shoulders as politicians both at Presidential, Parliamentary and Local Government elections. 

We carried a test in Kwania District and some of the departments of the district have been closed because very many staff are infected. However, what surprised me – and Ugandans must take this message - is that three youth, who tested positive to COVID-19, were asked to do self-insolation but they decided to go to political campaign meetings and rallies.

When I got to know about it, I raised it to the attention of the Resident District Commissioner (RDC). This is where we are and this is how we are not taking this issue seriously. (Member timed out.)

12.25
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, today is a very sad day for us. I knew hon. Watongola almost 16 years ago when I was a mobiliser for the NRM in the Busoga sub-region.

Kamuli has lost a leader, mother, mentor and great social worker. I would like to say that Kamuli has lost her at the time she had just started exhibiting her efforts. I request that as leaders of this country, we must be stakeholders in passing the message to our people to guard against this pandemic.

However, some people have made it an intention to use such events to defame other leaders. How can a statement come from a senior leader that Parliament did not give a contribution? I condemn it highly – majorly the leaders who gave statements on the burial in Kamuli.

This was uncalled for and this was not the time to make such statements. Such leaders are disciples of division, not only in Busoga but eastern Uganda at large. We should condemn them because the time for mourning should be the time to unite all the people.

Additionally, I call upon the husband of the late to build confidence in the health system of this country. If the post-mortem report says that our colleague died of COVID-19, that is it. We should trust the health system of our country and believe in what the health professionals have told us.

Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, you are the National Chairperson of the COVID-19 Task Force. All your ministers have run for political campaigns and that is why you are seated alone on the front bench.  However, I believe that in such a moment, the ministers in charge of Health should be around so that Ugandans know that we have people and we are fighting together as leaders of this country.

Secondly, the messages about COVID-19 from your office and the ministers in charge of health have gone very silent.  They have left it to the spokesperson of the Uganda Police Force who is now acting as the Minister of Health. 

Madam Speaker, we believe that this is the time when Ugandans would like to hear more concerning the SOPs and protecting themselves against COVID-19. We need ministers hon. Aceng, hon. Nabbanja and hon. Nabakooba to talk like they used to. Ugandans must know that Uganda is on COVID-19 fire and especially we, who come from border districts such as Busia. 

In Kenya, there is a big problem although I know that Kenyans keep quiet on such issues because of trade. Government needs to talk about this problem.

Madam Speaker, Cabinet must wake up. Ministers must be sent to various parts of the country to give a statement that COVID-19 is killing our people and something must be done and the time is now.

I would like to send a message of sympathy to the family of hon. Watongola that it is God who gives and takes. Let us be strong and believe in God. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.29
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for allowing us to talk about our colleague. She is a person I knew very well as a jolly and hardworking member of Parliament. I saw in her attributes of being a unifying factor in whatever circumstance that we went through here. She was a great leader.

Losing such a person is a great loss not only to the people of Kamuli but Uganda in general. That is why, on behalf of the people of Ngora and Teso in general, we convey our sincere condolences to the family and people of Kamuli for this great loss. 

I know it is a very difficult time and sad period as the Prime Minister has clearly indicated. It is a sad period for us as members of Parliament and the country because over 145 people have succumbed to COVID-19. 

I appeal to the Government over the issue of self-insolation, which has become a challenge. I am worried that many people are going to die because of self-isolation. Discipline among Ugandans in terms of managing themselves within a given confine seems to be a problem. I request the Government to review this issue of self-insolation just as my brother said earlier on because it is going to cause problems to the community.

Otherwise, I thank the Parliament of Uganda for the support rendered towards the burial of our colleague. I also thank the Government of Uganda for the support they rendered. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.32
DR NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, I would like to join the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and my colleagues in expressing not only shock but sadness that we have lost one of the finest members of Parliament I have seen over the many years I have been around.

Her passing away invites this nation to look at COVID-19 in a new way. What you see today is that whichever part of the nation you visit, there is a considerable degree of complacency and carelessness. The I-don’t-care attitude is prevalent everywhere among those we lead and our leadership. Therefore, Government needs to look at this matter more seriously.

We leaders need to show commitment and love for this nation by adhering to SOPs, which the ministry concerned has enunciated over and over again. However, there is carelessness and determination not to accept or to respect those SOPs.

Hon. Watongola was a fine legislator, a friend and an amiable person, the kind of which I have not seen over the years I have been here. It is a very big loss. 

Finally, Madam Speaker - and I am glad the Rt Hon. Prime minister is here - this invites us to look at this pandemic in a new way. The old way we are accustomed to is not working. We, therefore, need to be more radical and assertive. I think that some degree of compelling the nation is needed urgently.

I commiserate with the family and pray that God will give them strength to continue serving this nation. I beg to move.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Kisa, hon. Angura, hon. Abott and hon. Byandala. You are each using three minutes.

12.35
Mr Stephen kisa (NRM, Luuka South County, Luuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Luuka South County and on my own behalf, I would like to convey condolences to the bereaved family of the late hon. Rehema Watongola Tiwuwe.

Hon. Rehema Watongola Tiwuwe was a very good mother and a committed servant to the people of Kamuli. One time, when I visited her in her constituency, I found her distributing tents and chairs to the community. She was indeed a very hardworking lady because I learnt a lot from her and I started doing the same to the people of Luuka.

This situation is very sad to the people of Busoga. At the beginning of this Parliament, we lost a gallant daughter in Iganga. Again, as we come to the end of this Parliament, we have equally lost a very serious gallant daughter of Kamuli. I pray to the Almighty God that this will be the last person, the people of Busoga have lost in this particular Parliament.

Madam Speaker, I would like to address myself to the Minister of Health and Government in particular. COVID-19 is a public disease known to everybody and so, if someone gets it, it should be known. The people who have been identified with this disease should be informed about their results in time. 

I was very devastated when I attended the burial and a member of the family said that the late demanded for the results but she was not given, until her death. This is a public matter and I think it can help us to avoid unnecessary divergent views of saying that people died of poison, witchcraft etcetera. If such public information is given in time, there would not be such things. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this is a very serious matter. We have attended burials but people bring in divergent views; they divert people from the real cause of death. Therefore, I pray that the Ministry of Health –(Member timed out.)

The Speaker: Conclude your prayer.

Mr kisa: I pray that the Minister of Health and the doctors - once someone is checked, I do not see any reason why he or she is not informed about the results. This will ensure that everyone is aware of their status. Otherwise, we shall get to the other time when HIV/AIDS had just started and people were thinking about A, B, C, D. Thank you.

The Speaker: Honourable members, this sitting was convened with the knowledge of the Minister of Health. I expect them to attend and inform the country about this matter.

Honourable members, in the gallery, we have –

    1. Hajji Badru Watongola - husband of the late Rehema
    2. Baronda Kavanga 
    3. Derrick Kasadha
    4. Mariam Mutkubwa
    5.  Ismail Kyezidu
    6. Martha Mutunda

The other relatives include:

    7. Abu Isabirye,
    8.  Rev. Margaret Kizito
    9.  Bakwane Jesca
    10. Nangobi Sarah
    11. Kyobula Deborah, and
    12. Tibafanana Victoria.

They have come to attend the sitting.

12.39
Mr Fredrick angura (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me, on behalf of Angura family to thank the House, the Prime Minister and the entire Government for supporting us, when we lost our mother on the 26th of last month. She was buried on the 29th. Thank you very much, colleagues, for the support. 

I stand here to pay tribute to the family of hon. Hajjat Watongola. I join the people of Kamuli to empathise with the family. A young municipality that Hajjat Watongola had started to guide in the direction, where we were expecting to see more and better development- her death has put us in a situation, where we need to support the activities she had started. 

Hajjat Watongola was someone unique in her own way. Some time back, she visited my constituency, when I was not around. Out of courtesy, she called me and said “I’m in your constituency. I’m going to tell people what you are doing in Parliament and the good work that you continue to raise, as far as the interest of the people of Tororo County are concerned.” As far as development is concerned, I found Hajjat Watongola to be a good person who could support it.

Here in the House, she was a loving person. She counselled us many times, especially, where she saw that there was need to comfort a person.  We miss Hajjat Watongola. The people of Kamuli and this country all miss her. All I have to do is to pray that the good Lord that we serve, may give her a comforting place, as she rests in peace. Thank you very much.

12.42
Mr George ouma ABOTT (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Madam Speaker, allow me to also join friends to mourn our gallant daughter, Hajjat Watongola. 

Just as my colleague has said, we were with her in the Committee on East African Affairs. Death usually comes at a time when people need each other. It is sad that our sister has left at a time, when we are facing a hard time to elect leaders for this country.

The Bible says that it is He who gives, and He who takes away. There are no other words we can use to console this Parliament, the people of Busoga, the husband, family members and children than entrusting them to the Almighty God, so that they turn to Him because He knows how to console people, especially, at this time, when they are devastated and have lost hope. 

Madam Speaker, Coronavirus is real and we see people dying every now and then. What is necessary is to make sure, as members have said, including the Prime Minister, that we look at all those procedures put in place by Government to make ourselves safe so that we can continue living and serving this country. 

May God console the family.

12.44
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Luweero and members of my family, we convey our deepest condolences to the family of the late Rehema Watongola. 

When I received the news, I could not believe it. Madam Speaker, to be sincere, I had heard of many people who had died of this disease but I had never been touched like when I heard that hon. Watongola is gone. This disease is serious and it is there. 

I was a member of the Physical Infrastructure Committee with the late hon. Watongola and she was a very effective contributing member who respected knowledge. She would contribute but where things became scientific and she was not good at them, she would ask for clarification. 

Madam Speaker, everybody knows that the most effective way of not spreading this disease is by wearing a face mask, practising social distancing, washing your hands and the rest. I have met many people in this country, Uganda, who have not yet received the masks that were promised by Government. Two weeks became two months and now I think it is more than two months. 

In the country now, your biggest job, Madam Speaker, is to instil confidence in the people in regard to the way Government is handling COVID-19. People have lost confidence in Government. Masks have not been received, Government is withdrawing from burials and is advocating for self-confinement. All these are signs that Government is running away from something serious. What is this you are doing that is better than life? Tell us what it is. 

Government, you have made people lose confidence. We have heard that the frontline workers of this disease have not been paid the money we passed here. However, Government has not come out to deny or confirm this. We have heard doctors saying that they have not received their pay. Nurses are also complaining. All the frontline workers have not received their money. Where did it go? 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when you go back to Cabinet, work out a plan to instil confidence in the people of Uganda to know that this disease is serious, it needs to be addressed, and that Government is serious. Why are you withdrawing on essential things? Tell us why you have not given masks to everybody. What police are saying now is that people are going to these places without masks yet they have not supplied them with the masks. You made the promise and we passed the money. Why are you withdrawing from confining these people? You are not paying for medicines and yet you are now saying that you are not paying as if this is no longer a serious thing. Life is the best and most important thing, Madam Speaker. 

I appeal to the Leader of Government Business to go and seriously sit down – Please, respect and value life. I wish hon. Watongola a peaceful rest. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as I invite hon. Tayebwa, I would just like to confirm that in my meetings in the constituency, only a quarter of the people who attend these meetings have got masks. The bulk do not have masks. It is a very serious issue.

The other issue my voters raised is the cost of testing. One of my chairpersons said he wanted to test his family of 12 but he could not afford to pay for these tests at Shs 350,000 per person. They asked me to raise that and see whether Government can bring down the cost or make it possible for them to get tested.  

12.48
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda North County, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sure if it was not for the current conditions we are in, Hajji and family would have found this House full of members on both sides; Opposition and Government side, paying tribute to hon. Hajjat Watongola and also thanking you, as a family, for allowing her to come and join us here. She made friends and contributed to national development. We thank you, as a family, because some families do not allow their wives and children to go into politics but you gave us the gift of Hajjat. We thank you for that. 

Madam Speaker, some of us are still mourning because in that same period, I lost my constituent and senior member, Col Shaban Bantariza. He was from my village and constituency and also passed on as a result of COVID-19. We also lost the chairman of the youth in Ibanda. 

I am talking about this because there has been a misconception, which the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as the Government representative, needs to tackle. Young people think that they can get COVID-19 and the next day, they are okay. They think it only kills the old and vulnerable but the youth chairman of Ibanda was very okay. Hajjat Watongola was a young person. Hon. Margaret Muhanga also lost a cousin; Chris Ibaale who happened to be my O.B at Makerere. He was a young person. We need to come up, as Government, and show that things are really bad –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Alupo was 38 years old. 

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, even the restrictions we are putting – I do not know what we are going to do because the President announced the closure of bars but people are watching him from bars and house parties. To some people, life is going on normally.

For us who come from rural areas, we notice that thousands are attending burials and life is going on normally. If you talk, it looks like you do not want people to socialise. Therefore, we need to put in place measures, like what the Rt Hon. Speaker and hon. Byandala have raised. We need to give our people masks. 

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to say that you find a Government official with five masks. His whole family, including workers, have Government masks and yet they can afford disposable masks. However, the rural people are dying and we cannot give them masks yet we passed the money here. 

Finally, wherever His Excellency goes, the people he meets are tested for COVID-19. I think it is an NRM arrangement but we should put in place mechanisms of ensuring that other presidential candidates and the people they are going to meet are tested for COVID-19. This would help us to control these crowds. If police came up with a list of people that are tested of COVID-19 - We can afford it, as Government. I propose we also look at that. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker and I convey my condolences to you, as a Woman Member of Parliament for Kamuli, for losing your great member. 

12.53
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion as moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to pay tribute to our colleague, as seconded by the Leader of the Opposition.

I served on the Committee of Physical Infrastructure with my late colleague. I had never seen an NRM person who cuts across the political divide. I can tell you that hon. Watongola’s best friend was hon. Nzoghu and you know how erratic hon. Nzoghu can be. However, she blended so well with us in the committee. When it comes to work, she would come - that was her nature.

On 30th of last month, we sat as a committee because we wanted to conclude a report on the vehicle inspection by SGS, we agreed that on the 6th we go to re-verify. We decided to divide ourselves into two. Hon. Watongola and the team were to check the one of Entebbe and Masaka Road. I was on the team with chair for Kawanda and Namanve. When we were heading to Namanve we got a call that hon. Watongola had lost a brother so she had to excuse herself and leave for the village.

Therefore, when the news came about her death, we were all shocked. This colleague was with members and was not sick. However, because she had told her colleagues who were with her on the other team what had taken her brother, we started contemplating what could have been the problem. We were all shocked and what we could only do was to tell our colleagues who were with her in that team to go and check.

However, as you have heard here, why isn’t the Ministry of Health releasing the results on time or not at all? I have tested in this Parliament three times but have one result. I remember you even raised that matter here that they only informed the Clerk that three or four members are sick but they do not tell us the people who are sick.

Why should the Ministry of Health withhold the results? Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can you help us and tell the Minister of Health? There is nothing to shy or run away from. Even for AIDS, people declare whether they have it or not. 

What is the Ministry of Health hiding? When we lost the owner of Teso Coach, I talked with the Minister- hon. Nabbanja - she told me, if you get a problem, please run to Mulago because this week, we would have lost two colleagues if they had not run to Mulago. 

The following day I heard that we had lost a colleague and now we are just hearing rumours that there are 14 colleagues in Mulago and others are saying there are two- who are these, because we could have interacted with them. Why are we not being told the truth? Why are we not told who is sick and who is not so that we go and test?

Madam Speaker, I know there are people who have contracted COVID-19 and recovered on their own. I can testify as an example. I carried a colleague in a car three weeks ago. She had tested but results had not yet come. 

However, as we were driving, she received a call from the doctor that her results were out but that was after a week. She was positive but told that she was on recovery level. She was advised to go home. I felt like jumping out of the car but I could not. I delivered the member home and came back. I have been testing for the last two weeks, thank God, I am still okay.

Therefore, some members could have been infected but recovered without knowing. Therefore, it is very important for colleagues to test and the results must be declared so that we know what is happening.

As I conclude, the issues of the masks. We allowed ourselves to go for elections; some of us said that we postpone these elections but we were defeated. Now, we passed money for the masks- of course, I am grateful, the people of Serere and Kasilo got but there are only 71 districts that have received masks. What happens to the other districts? 

When you go to my village, it is like Owino Market, so how can you be able to control? We have opened the open markets. Yesterday, the people of Kasilo were jubilating for being in the market but there are places where people do not have masks. 

I think we must learn to live with this but Government must provide the basics such as masks and testing kits. Let people test so that they get to know and get treatment and recover. I know colleagues who have even recovered at home. The whole family was infected except one child. Hon. Isiagi Opolot- I am not ashamed to name - was sick, confined home and survived. He is moving and back to normal. That was two months ago, so why should they be scared and not tell people the truth so that people can be able to protect themselves.

Madam Speaker, also want to thank you for having cleared - I went to attend the burial because I was a close friend to the late. However, I was disappointed when I heard one of the leaders saying that Parliament did not contribute towards burial arrangements. I was so disappointed having been a commissioner. I called one of the commissioners to ask whether it was true and he told me no, the Commission had taken full charge to pay Uganda Funeral Services. Why would a leader go and lie to Ugandans that Parliament has not given a contribution? 

Having been a commissioner, I was disturbed. If this was true, why would it happen? Moreover, the Speaker who is the chair of the Parliamentary Commission comes from the same place. I was disturbed. Why would leaders go to that length to lie because of politics? This is bad. I think leaders must learn to tell the truth and the truth shall set you free.

Madam Speaker, one other thing that touched me about my colleague when we were there, she had supplied tents to the municipality. When I read the writing on the tents, because I know she was a Muslim, the writing was, “There is time for everything.” I was touched. Indeed, there is time for everything. There is time to live, die and jubilate. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I just want to reiterate again for the sake of the public that the Parliament fully paid for that funeral. Everything was paid for by this Parliament. However, it intended to portray Parliament in bad light and particularly to show that the Speaker did not like the member. They know very well that Parliament supported but they wanted to depict us in bad light.

Secondly, honourable members, I want to confirm that we have facilities for testing, please test before you go back to your constituencies. The facilities have been here since Tuesday.

1.01
MR GIDEON ONYANGO (Independent, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me extend my tribute to the family of the late Rehema and to you as the Woman MP of Kamuli.

The late was such a person with a unique character. She was social, loving and a counsellor to most of us who have been at lower age as compared to hers.

She was hardworking and committed to success. When she lost her seat due to a court case when we had just come, we were sympathising with her but she assured us that she is a hardworking person and she would come back to the House and indeed, she made it back.

Madam Speaker, we have lost a commendable character, a useful person to this nation.

Madam Speaker, COVID-19 is serious. I am one of the people who are not shy to mention that I contracted it and recovered. I would like to extend my appreciation to hon. Pamela. She was always in touch with me to find out how I was progressing.

Madam Speaker, this disease is being treated as a private disease. I do not know why the Ministry of Health has not come out clearly to emphasise that this disease can be managed. 

Madam Speaker, I did my test from Mukono Health Centre IV – it is now a hospital – and my situation was managed at that local level. I have indeed recovered fully. I have done a number of tests now and I am okay. My family is safe. 

I would like to urge the Prime Minister, as the national chairperson of the taskforce, to put the Ministry of Health to task to have these –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR ONYANGO: It would be appropriate if the Prime Minister, as the chairperson of the national taskforce, emphasizes that the public should be free. If someone tests positive, it is a disease and it is normal; let us learn to live with it because it is not going away soon. 

Like it is happening elsewhere, let us make our status known. When I contracted the disease, some colleagues wanted to interact with me and I openly told them, “I have the disease, I am undergoing treatment, please stay away from me”. That is how useful it is when people get to know their status and they freely associate with the community with caution, not spreading the disease like hon. Okupa said. We are going to die in ignorance because the Ministry of Health is not encouraging the public to live with this disease freely, like is the case with HIV.

In Busia – I am very sure I contracted it from Busia during the NRM primaries – two weeks ago, we lost one of my campaign managers to COVID-19. This means that this disease has spread to the communities and the ministry and Government should do a lot to protect the people. 

The SOPs should not be implemented in isolation or segregation. Let them be uniformly implemented. Let masks reach everywhere. Let the police implement these procedures universally. People should not be looked at in terms of whether they are powerful or not, and then some people are arrested and not others; some bars are operating and others are not. Let us follow the guidelines as they have been stipulated right from the start. Thank you.

1.07
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Kapelebyong): Madam Speaker, I stand here to second the motion that was moved regarding the loss of our colleague. 

Madam Speaker, as Members of Parliament, who you lead, we are very disturbed because hon. Watongola is the second person that this Parliament is losing to COVID-19. This Parliament should not shy away from raising our heads to face the reality on the ground. Today, we are paying tribute to our colleague but we should not stop at that. We should go the extra mile to try to put pressure on Government to see to it that we come up with measures to control the problem. It would be very humiliating for this Parliament to keep coming here to pay tribute to its Members and the public generally.

If you look at what is currently going on in our country, it does not help to control the disease. It instead helps to spread the disease. The decision that Cabinet took to have elections conducted in Uganda amidst the COVID-19 pandemic is suicidal to the people of Uganda. We are going to lose people of Uganda because these elections have opened the gates for COVID-19 to go everywhere. 

Look at what is currently going on now - the arrests that are taking place, the gunshots that are sounding - people are fighting the forces that are supposed to be in charge of enforcing the SOPs.
Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what loyalty are we going to have between the population that is supposed to be protected and the forces that are supposed to enforce SOPs? There is already a rift between them. The election campaigns that are going on all over Uganda are going to be disastrous in December and January, and we will have contributed to the massacre of Ugandans by this terrible disease. 

Mr Prime Minister, you are the chairman of the taskforce; my advice is that if we are to continue with the war against COVID-19, we must bring the whole country to a standstill and go to the drawing board to chart a new way forward to control this disease. Elections are not more important than the lives of Ugandans that are currently being lost by you, the Government, at the mercy of this dangerous disease. 

Other countries like Kenya have attempted to suspend –(Interruption)– Madam Speaker, you are the last person to save this country. I know some people in Government might not stand with you; they will do all kinds of things, but please, stand on your feet and save the country. Today it is Watongola, tomorrow it is going to be other people. The whole country is looking to you, Madam Speaker – (Member timed out)

1.12
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Bulamogi County, Kaliro District, I would like to convey my condolences to Hajj Watongola and his family, to the people of Kamuli Municipality, the district and the whole nation of Uganda. 

We have suffered a great loss in the death of Hajjat Rehema Watongola. We have lost another Hajjat from Busoga Sub-region, having lost Hajjat Hailat who was a Member of Parliament for Iganga District. Now, Hajjat Watongola has departed from us. I also recall that you, Madam Speaker, narrowly survived when you faced a very difficult situation, and hon. Zabwe of Mayuge also narrowly survived. It has been a very difficult time for Busoga as a region and, of course, for this Parliament.

Hajjat Watongola was my friend. She used to refer to me as her mentor. Many times, she would consult me on how to proceed on several issues, because she found me in this Parliament, and I would help her.

I visited her in her home when they had an introduction ceremony. It had rained heavily but somehow, I manoeuvred through the bad roads from Kaliro to her home. She was close to me and she was loved by the people of Kamuli. Although she had been disqualified through a petition, she stood in the by-election and won again. It showed that the people loved her.  

That said, I would like to speak about salvation. As a Christian, I speak this message so that no one will say, “I did not know about salvation. I did not know that Jesus saves. I was ignorant; I did not know anything about it.” 

Man is spirit. Man has a soul and lives in a body. This body which dies is not the real person. The real you and me lives in this body. The time is coming when the real you and me will be exposed, and that is the person that we must work towards saving, that is, saving your soul. 

There is no other way anybody can be saved except by the saving power of the blood of Jesus. I would like to use this opportunity because it is only at this time that I can give this message here. We have to repent and turn to God and accept Jesus Christ as our Lord and Saviour. 

The time is coming, and it is very soon, when we shall stand before the Lord. These earthly things are only with us for a short period. Just a few months back, we were with hon. Watongola, conversing with her after the primaries, we did not know that we would not have her at this time. We were planning for the next election; we did not know that she would not get there.

I would like to invite everyone who is alive to give your lives to Jesus. Accept Jesus Christ as your Lord and Saviour and your soul will be saved eternally. Do not live in earthly glory and lose your soul at the end. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity.

1.16
MS PAMELA KAMUGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to pay tribute to our fallen colleague, hon. Watongola Rehema. 

She has not only been a colleague but a friend, a mother and above all, a very active Member of the Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA). The late was devoted to human rights activism, with dedicated interest in children and women affairs. Her advice, contribution and wisdom shall be greatly missed by the UWOPA fraternity, the Parliament of Uganda and all of us as Ugandans.

On behalf of the people of Budaka, UWOPA and on my own behalf, I convey my heartfelt condolences to the family of the late hon. Watongola, the people of Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli District and Uganda as whole. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

1.18
MR SILAS AOGON	(Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kumi Municipality, my family and on my own behalf, I would love to send my sincere condolences to the bereaved family, Parliament of Uganda, UWOPA and Members of Parliament representing urban constituencies, specifically municipalities.

It is not easy for a woman to win a seat in a municipality. This showed us that hon. Watongola was not ordinary. In the Parliament of Uganda, there were about three women Members of Parliament representing municipalities, and she was one of them. 

As the Member of Parliament representing Kumi Municipality, I would like to say that this is a terrible loss. She was our mother and adviser. I knew her for her humility. One time, I was watching a TV show where she had a debate with her opponent. She exhibited a lot of humility whereas her opponent was almost doing the contrary and I felt that was what returned her to Parliament. We need to emulate her.

She was always concerned about education. I heard her on TV telling the people of Kamuli not to be taken to court like her because of education - “I will try my best to educate many.”

As Parliament, what are we going to do to support the family of the late? I remember when we lost the woman Member of Parliament for Moroto at the beginning of this Parliament, we supported a family member who was elected to Parliament. Are we going to leave that family like that? Colleagues, we need to rise up and support her family; the family should come up with someone from among them so that we all rally our voices behind that person. She has incomplete projects; how will they be competed if this Parliament just keeps quiet and the NRM – (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR AOGON: The NRM, please do not keep quiet; I am waiting to hear from you. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what are you going to do as Government? She was a member of the NRM; are you going to do something? Government, where are you? She was always there for the party, where is the party? The party should stand up and do something. It is good that the Government Chief Whip is around. We are waiting to see what we can do to support that family.

Thank you so much. She used to call me “municipality” and not by my name. I will dearly miss her. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

1.22
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT	(NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. My condolences go to the family, the people of Kamuli Municipality and the country at large.

The news of the death of our sister came to me like a dream; it was very difficult to accept and believe because just a while ago, I was with her here in the lobby. We were chatting and talking about the campaigns. My sister was a woman full of energy. She was younger in her actions than her actual age. She related intimately with many colleagues.

To the family, I say that it is only God who has power over life - power to give and take life. It is indeed painful but it is my prayer that you look unto God and He gives you the strength to go through this grief.

Madam Speaker, as we hold campaign meetings, we are asked time and again about face masks and sincerely, we cannot give an answer. Therefore, we ask Government to give us updates on the progress of this issue. When will my people of Pader District get these masks? I need to know so that when I am asked during campaigns, at least I can give them some information. 

I do not know what is happening. At least I have heard from my brother, hon. Okupa, that 70 districts have so far got. What is the plan? May the soul of our sister, hon. Rehema Watongola, rest in peace. 

1.25
MR JOHNSON SSENYONGA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues as we mourn hon. Rehema Watongola. On my behalf and on behalf of Buganda Parliamentary Caucus, I convey my condolences to the family and to Busoga Parliamentary Caucus as a team.

Madam Speaker, at the same time, allow me to also convey my condolences to those who lost their dear ones in yesterday’s riots. When you lose life, it does not come back.

I remember hon. Rehema Watongola, after losing in the NRM primaries, came here happily and said that that might have been God’s will. I am sure the people of Kamuli and the entire NRM fraternity have lost a very strong and determined lady who could stand on her statements without fear or favour. May God strengthen the family as they go through this trying moment and may her soul rest in peace. I thank you.

1.27
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me also add my voice to that of my colleagues; on behalf of the people of Manjiya and Bugisu Subregion, as I am the vice-chairperson of the Bugisu Parliamentary Caucus, and on my own behalf I express my heartfelt condolences to the family of the late hon. Watongola for this premature demise of our colleague.

Madam Speaker, ever since the controversial removal of the presidential age limit, the hon. Watongola would crack jokes with me whenever we would meet. Actually, the last time we met is when she had issues in the NRM primaries. We met in the lobby and talked for almost five minutes; we even cracked jokes as I encouraged her to soldier on in the general elections.

Madam Speaker, mine is to encourage and comfort the family. I know Hajji is going through a painful moment. The bizarre irony of death is that even if you are very close and knitted to each other in a relationship, like indeed it was, death will never allow you to attend each other’s funeral. For you whom God has allowed to attend the funeral of your dear wife and dear mother - for the children - you have to know that God has a purpose why he had to spare you.  

The truth of the matter is that we are living in a world of the dying and where Hajjat has gone is the world of the living. Therefore, as we are in the world of the dying and not yet in the world of the living, we must grapple with all kinds of challenges. While mourning, we should mourn in percentages. As we mourn hon. Watongola, at least we mourn at 25 per cent; the 75 per cent that remains is for us whom she has left on planet earth because we are faced with a multiplicity of challenges. Take the case of the pandemic now that is spreading - I must salute the healthcare system and the medical staff who are religiously keeping statistical data of those –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR NAMBESHE: The data is religiously being kept. We are now able to know how COVID-19 is spreading – how it increased around the time of the NRM primaries and actually, went skyrocketing, and things may even be worse during the campaigns. 

However, what is worrying is the competition between the victims being claimed by COVID-19 and the excessive use of force by the security personnel during the enforcement of the standard operating procedures. We would also like to know the statistical data of those who are dying at the hands of the trigger -

THE SPEAKER: We can discuss that in the afternoon.

MR NAMBESHE: I thank you very much, but I have made my point.

THE SPEAKER: Does the Prime Minister wish to make concluding remarks?
 
1.31
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am standing on record first, to thank you for having convened this meeting under the circumstances. Secondly, I would like to thank the Prime Minister for being here in person and moving the motion to pay tribute.

I talked to the Prime Minister when he was coming from Gulu, where the members of the Central Executive Committee of NRM had been invited for a meeting by the national chairman of the NRM. I was unable to attend that Gulu meeting because I was confined in the trenches of Kiboga. 

I was very concerned about today’s session and I wanted to find out whether my boss, the Leader of Government Business, would be able to attend. This is what I wanted to see - because of what hon. Rehema Watongola has been. I want to thank, hon. Eragu Veronica, my sister, for having stood in for the Prime Minister who was engaged.  

Thirdly, I want to appreciate colleagues who have turned up to participate in this session. We are here as a family and this is one of the functions which draws us together as family. Many of our colleagues are busy in the trenches but for you to turn up physically encourages us as a family. Thank you.

Above all, I would like to thank God for the gift of Rehema. She has lived true to her name “Rehema”. “Rehema” means a person who is merciful, draws everybody near, gives to the needy and sacrifices. Hajjat Rehema Watongola has been one such person.

Lastly, I would like to give testimony about Hajji Watongola. I met him when I visited Namutumba. I had been invited by the Member of Parliament to officiate –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I would like to pay tribute to Hajji Watongola and family. He has been a very supportive and equally jolly person like his late wife. 

To the children, thank you for standing with Rehema. Since you have been supporting her, I am encouraged that you will not break down. I am also encouraged that you will move on to even pay tribute to your mother when you do exactly what you think she would have done for the people of Kamuli Municipality. May her soul rest in peace.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I should take this opportunity to thank the Speaker for squeezing in the time to ensure that in spite of various challenges such as campaigns and the like, we are able to gather and pay our tribute and respect to our sister, hon. Watongola. (Applause)

I would also like to take this opportunity to salute the very spirited contributions that honourable colleagues have made about the departure of our sister, her contribution to Kamuli, Parliament and the country, and the manner in which this debate has united the House. All of us have come out to pay tribute and talk about COVID-19 and made concrete proposals on how the country can better fight this pandemic. 

It is true, the Government needs those suggestions. However, let me also say that, especially under this phase four of the COVID-19 pandemic, the disease is within our community. You do not know who has it and who does not. Therefore, the fight against this disease is everybody’s responsibility. We, as leaders and Members of Parliament in particular, must take the lead role in explaining, mobilising and alerting the population. If we continue to do that, I believe that there will be less damage caused by this disease.

I would also like to take the opportunity to join colleagues in saluting our brother, Watongola, and the family. We appreciate the support they have given to our sister. I agree with the comments made that the family is very active. We expect the family to continue being very active in politics. As to the details, we must respect well established methods of work both in Government and in the party.

As I conclude my short remarks, I would like to emphasise that the Government has adopted a new approach – the community engagement strategy – where the people of Uganda are being and are going to be empowered with information, so that they can put prevention against COVID-19 as the number one approach in dealing with this matter. 

If each of us cares of himself or herself and also caters for the neighbour and family, and takes the protective measures of the masks, social distancing, sanitisation and proper nutrition seriously, we will deal a deathblow to this pandemic, which has already killed very many people globally and is killing many in Uganda. I would like to salute Members of Parliament, especially those who gave testimony about this pandemic and how it has affected them. That testimony encourages and empowers more people to come out and deal with it.

It is true that the Ministry of Health and testing capabilities have sometimes become stretched. It is also true that some people may not have received their lab tests. Actually, the focus of the Ministry of Health has been to make those who are positive aware as quickly as possible. For those who are negative, there has been less attention because they are reasonably okay.

Nevertheless, the message is that let us all be engaged, improve our performance, support the Ministry of Health and other structures such as hospitals – private and otherwise – so that Uganda can defeat this pandemic. Thank you.

The Speaker: Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Speaker: I now put the question that this House do pay tribute to the late hon. Rehema Watongola, Member of Parliament for Kamuli Municipality.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Speaker: The Clerk is directed to extract the tribute and the Hansard and pass them on to the family.

The House is adjourned and we shall reconvene at 2.30 p.m. for the ordinary session.

(The House rose at 1.41 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 19 November 2020 at 2.30 p.m.) 
