Wednesday, 11 November 2015

Parliament met at 3.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you all to this afternoon’s sitting. 

I would like to advise the members of the Business Committee that we shall have a meeting tomorrow at 10 a.m. for about an hour. The purpose is to chart the way forward for the business that is before the House. Therefore, Business Committee, we meet tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. in the South Committee Room.

I would also like to notify the Appointments Committee that we shall meet on 24 November 2015 to consider nominees for the Human Rights Commission, Equal Opportunities Commission, a judge and another person. It will be on Tuesday. Please, be available. 

Honourable members, last month, I led a delegation of the Inter-Parliamentary Union from this Parliament to Geneva. We discussed resolutions on migration and the digital era and democracy. We also discussed implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). One of the things that came up was the impact of the digital era on democracy, individual rights and privacy; maybe we were not in cyber warfare but it is having an impact in other parts of the world.

A resolution on this matter was adopted that should be able to guide governments and parliaments on the human rights deployment of digital technology. I would like to ask the Clerk to avail this resolution to all the Members of Parliament so that they can read it and maybe discuss it at some stage. 

We also discussed the role of the IPU, parliaments and parliamentarians, international regional organisations in providing necessary protection and urgent support to those who have become refugees through war, internal conflicts and social circumstances according to the principles of the International Humanitarian Law and international conventions. I also ask the Clerk to avail that resolution to the Members of Parliament.

On the SDGs, there was general regret that parliaments were not involved in the MDGs. They really played a very peripheral role; so we decided that we should be central in the process of the SDGs. Therefore, we have the following questions for our Government: We would like to know from the Leader of Government Business who the minister in charge of coordinating SDGs implementation in Uganda is, because for the MDGs no one reported so we do not know who was in charge. Where is the SDGs implementation reporting framework? We would like to know that. Who will be reporting to this Parliament and when? This is because one of the resolutions we took is that annually, Government should report to the Parliament on the SDGs. Therefore, we shall want answers from the Government.

I have also been requested by the IPU to host a seminar in 2016 on the implementation of the SDGs on the role of Parliament. Therefore, we shall make the necessary preparations to attend that seminar to be held either in July or August 2016.

Honourable Prime Minister and Members, I do not know how many times I must say that I am disappointed that the Government has deliberately refused to present the CEDAW reports to this House. I remember at the Convention on Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), when you are reporting, you are supposed to start here before you go to report in Geneva. I had put the matter on the Order Paper and that week all the ministers of the Ministry of Gender disappeared. However in June, one of the ministers stealthily went to Geneva to report. What they are reporting, we do not know. Therefore, we would like to know, honourable Prime Minister, why the Government is hiding the country report on the Convention on Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) because it concerns us.

We have been asking for it. If you look at the Hansard, we must have asked for over six times and we even put it on the Order Paper and then the ministers disappeared and went quietly to Geneva. They were found there reporting and what they were reporting, nobody knows. This is a serious matter, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, and we would like to know what is happening on that.

As we also discussed progress on maternal and child health in the Ugandan Parliament, we were commended for our efforts in facilitating the increase in the budget and recruitment of health workers. Therefore, we need just to maintain the momentum so that we can continue to give good health to our women and children.

Finally, honourable members, we had a discussion on the implementation of resolution 1325 and it came to light that in 2000, the United Nations Security Council directed the Secretary General to appoint more women as peace envoys. I do not know whether any Ugandan woman has benefited from that resolution. Therefore, I am proposing that we identify many of our deserving and qualified women, and we have many, and submit their names to the UN representative in New York through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for transmission to the UN Secretary General. Other countries have taken advantage of this and they have had many of their people appointed; so, I would like to ask the Government to facilitate this process so that more women can be appointed in the UN system. Thank you very much.

3.07
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, thank you for the communication. I would like to bring again to the attention of the Prime Minister the issue regarding a facility that the Government was building in Kasilo under the loan that we acquired under ADB for the construction of a modern landing site. I have continuously raised this matter here. I raised it when hon. Nankabirwa was the Minister of State for Fisheries. She was called to come and commission this facility but she found the facility substandard and she ordered that this thing should be worked on. It is now a year since I wrote to the minister now in charge of the fisheries sector and I copied to the Prime Minister. I raised it again in August. 

This was one of the 29 landing sites, which were supposed to be built, although it was unfortunate there were only nine that were built from that loan. However, nothing is being done. Money has been sunk there, the workers cannot even operate and it is an embarrassment to the Government. Can the Prime Minister –(Interruption)

DR LULUME BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, a similar matter was raised over Kiyindi Fish landing Site which is one of the planned ones. I think on the directions of the Prime Minister, the company went back and did half-baked tarmac and left unfinished business - no drainage, the mini ice plant is not working and the Shs 51 million left for the BMUs to pay. That is the information I would like to give you on that. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, my concern is that when the Prime Minister directs the ministers here, they have not taken any action. No one has even come to visit apart from the good minister then in the sector. Up to now, your ministers are not taking this matter seriously. Are we just going to continue wasting money like that? 

It was not only limited to there; even the one in Bukungu,  another one in Mulondo still Kasilo, in Butyaba - all these are just lying in waste. There was even an Auditor-General’s report on this matter for these people to be apprehended. The then Commissioner for Fisheries was one of those who was implicated in this thing – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thank you, hon. Okupa, for giving way. The information that I would like to give is that we did approve a loan here to build 14 landing sites and – 

THE SPEAKER: Were they not 21?

MR OKUPA: 29.

THE SPEAKER: There were 29 landing sites.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, in the Seventh Parliament they were 29 landing sites. Even the Auditor-General brought a report to Parliament when he was directed. He said that money was basically stolen and no action has ever been taken.

The information that I now want to give is that I think the people who steal money are stronger than the leadership in Cabinet. The Prime Minister cannot do much because I am sure that they are very powerful for him. Unless he can convince us that he has the capacity to deal with them, we are just crying, my brother, and we shall continue to cry.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, I am the Shadow Minister for Agriculture and I would like to state here that there is some degree of anarchy in the ministry. We summoned the Minister of State for Fisheries to our Committee on Agriculture and he expressed his frustration. The technocrats at the ministry do not seem to take any policy direction from the ministers. The technocrats seem to be more powerful than the ministers who are supposed to give them policy guidelines for which Government ought to bite. In fact, if it were possible, there should be cause for all of them to be fired. 

Some of these landing sites that were constructed remained hanging. The water levels went down and the landing sites were just hanging to the extent that they cannot be used. In the ministry, and especially in the fisheries subsector, all the commissioners seem to be more powerful than the ministers. The Minister for Agriculture himself is just yearning for the clock to run very fast so that he gets out of that embarrassment of not being listened to. Mr Prime Minister, there is anarchy in the agriculture ministry and no wonder it is doing badly as we stand now.  

MR OKUPA: Finally, it is really unfortunate that the person named was promoted and is heading a big facility under the ministry in Jinja and yet all these things are in the report. 

Mr Prime Minister, after I raised that matter last time, I thought that the new sector minister would come to see this facility. You had promised that when you come to Kasilo, you would see the facility but then you were caught up with other programmes. I would wish that you come in person and see but you must take action on the people who were named in this.

3.14
MS JUDITH AMOIT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise here to remind Government of the loan we passed in 2013 for the tarmacking of the Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi-Kamonkoli Road.

The ministers kept deceiving us! (Laughter) Hon. Byabagambi would tell us that they were soon commissioning the road, the following day he says that they are procuring and the other day it is under projection. I am going to leave this House without getting my road and I am troubled. This road is very important for our people to move out of poverty. People are wondering because the road is impassable; all the bridges have broken and we are wondering whether we are part of this country and the development programme. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.15
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

I would like to thank hon. Okupa, Member of Parliament for Kasilo, for raising this important point. Actually, the matter was also raised in a note by the Shadow Minister for Health about another landing site. I am requesting that if a member on the Frontbench, hon. Kamanda Bataringaya, can keep order – (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: The Prime Minister is on the Floor, honourable members.

DR RUGUNDA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for protecting me from the responsible minister. I hope he will take cue so that in future there will be no disturbance when the Leader of Government Business is on the Floor and more so from his side.

Madam Speaker, this is the major point. People are taking advantage of certain weak areas in Government and they are not performing properly in some projects. Needless to say, Government wants to cooperate with other colleagues in the House to ensure that we monitor the implementation of Government projects. Therefore, the fact that you are reporting this matter to us is very welcome.

Secondly, the fact that hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, then responsible for fisheries, went to commission the work but found it substandard and she took a decision that instead of commissioning the work, the people responsible should be pursued, investigated and where necessary prosecuted shows she is a responsible government officer and that Government will not tolerate any substandard work. I am sorry that the minister responsible now has not been able to come to this House to account and explain the measures being taken against those who did substandard work and corrective measures to be taken, so that the services can reach the people of Kasilo and other areas where there are landing sites.

I am going to ask the minister responsible for fisheries, who is currently not in the House, at our next sitting of Parliament, even if it is tomorrow, to come and explain to the House why there was a delay in accounting to this House and what corrective measures are being taken to correct the problem.

If I may be allowed to finalise; Ndugu Nandala-Mafabi, who is now looking down after making a very provocative statement, said this Government is toothless. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, this Government has a lot of teeth and where appropriate and when investigations have been done, it really bites and bites hard. 
Therefore, let me take this opportunity to inform all those who do poor work that they are in trouble because Government will use its teeth. (Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thank you very much. I like you very much because we went to the same school. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, the information that I would like to give the big man, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, is that in Uganda, it is true that the law bites but bites in a different way. For example, there was a gentleman in the agriculture ministry named Okello convicted for stealing Shs 200 million for 21 years –

THE SPEAKER: Shs 200 million per year for 21 years? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: He had stolen Shs 200 million and was sentenced to 21 years in prison. In the Office of the Prime Minister, somebody stole Shs 56 billion but was convicted for five years. So, you can see the bigger you steal, the lesser the sentence and that is the biting he is talking about. (Laughter) That is the information I wanted to give the minister.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, we believe in the independence of the Judiciary and really, we will not discuss the details of the sentencing. However, this is a matter that could be looked at by the responsible officers of Government. I thank you.

MS AMOIT: Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister has not responded about our roads. We cannot sit here and not talk about our infrastructure.

THE SPEAKER: Let me direct the minister responsible for works to come here and explain whether he designed, started or procured the Pallisa-Soroti Road.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE CAPITAL MARKETS AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

3.40
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I would like to move that a Bill entitled, “The Capital Markets Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2013” be read for the first time. The Certificate of Financial Implications is being laid on the Table right now. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, No.1 is on Muzizi hydropower project? Is it a loan request? Are you handling a loan request?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): No, I was coming in for hon. Muloni.

THE SPEAKER: That is item three. 

3.41
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I would like to apologise because my office has not facilitated me with the papers. I beg that this matter be deferred.

THE SPEAKER: Is that the same for item 4(2)? Okay, Item 4 (3), Minister for Energy. 

3.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker and colleagues, as provided for by section 6(3) of the Petroleum Exploration, Development and Production Act, 2013, allow me to lay before you the model production sharing agreements in respect of petroleum exploration, development and production in the Republic of Uganda. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Natural Resources for perusal and report back.

REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2013 VOLUME II CENTRAL GOVERNMENT (UGANDA NATIONAL ROADS AUTHORITY)

THE SPEAKER: The chairperson or vice chairperson of Public Accounts committee or a member - okay, let us go to the next item. 

BILLS 
SECOND READING

	THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. Yesterday, when we adjourned, we agreed that we move to committee stage so that we are able to consider clause by clause. The Minister of Finance has applauded the proposed amendment in line with the report of the committee and we are ready to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Bill, 2015 be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill -

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposed that we delete clause 1. The justification is that section 9(1) intends to identify the person responsible for effecting the provision. The proposed amendment does not create a person responsible. In any case, section 9 actually allows for a sector-wide approach, that is, each accounting officer shall, in consultation with the relevant stakeholders, prepare a Budget Framework Paper. We therefore propose for deletion.

THE CHAIPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 be deleted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, deleted.

Clause 2

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: The committee proposed for deletion of clause 2. The justification is:
a) 	Section 13(6) provides that the annual budget shall be consistent with the National Development Plan, the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility and the Budget Framework Paper. This requirement covers the import of the proposed amendment, which ideally means that the policy statement must be aligned to the BFP and NDP among others. 

b) 	Repealing the requirement for a Certificate of Gender and Equity will promote noncompliance to gender and equity concerns during planning, budgeting, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of development entities, programmes of projects within all government ministries, departments, agencies and local governments. Therefore, we propose to delete.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be deleted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, deleted.

Clause 3

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 3 do stand part of the Bill. Does the chairperson have an amendment? 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, in paragraph (a) we are supposed to substitute for (2) as follows: “A local government that does not expend money that was appropriated to the local government for the financial year shall, with approval of the Secretary to the Treasury, repay the money to the Consolidated Fund by 31st August of the following financial year.” 

In paragraph (b), substitute for (3) as follows: “Where the Secretary to the Treasury exercises his or her mandate under this section, the minister shall by 31st September table a report to Parliament.”
The justification is that:
    1. Section 17 should be amended to allow only local governments to retain money up to 31st August and with approval of the Secretary to the Treasury.
    2. The minister should also report to Parliament after one month whenever the Secretary to the Treasury exercises the proposed powers. I beg to move.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson and honourable colleagues, I agree with the proposed amendments by the committee save for the timelines of the extensions of expiry of appropriation from 30th August to 31st July in order for the accounting officers to comply with the reporting and audit timelines as speculated in this law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, are you still pro August, because your own proposal says 31st? Your proposal says 31st; I do not know why you went to August. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, we had given them two months to make sure that the money is properly returned to the Consolidated Fund because it ceases to be operational, and  then for them to arrange for money to be transferred to the Consolidated Fund and also for reconciliation purposes.

Madam Chairperson, it has been the Members of Parliament complaining over the years on behalf of districts that there is no time given. Therefore, if they feel it is not necessary, then we leave it where it was.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I think we should not use local governments as an excuse. One, even under our old law, section 19 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 clearly says that every appropriation expires on 30th June. What it means is that any unutilised balances at that time must be returned to the Consolidated Fund.

Now with the current system of a single account, for the central government, it is okay. Even local governments are soon going to be on that single account. However, what is important is that every ministry or every accounting entity submits what we call procurement plans which are the basis for the budget. Now when they are the basis of the budget and we approve, we have authorised them to go ahead and do those activities within that budget process.

Therefore, if you want to say that the money of local governments as at 30th June should not be returned and give the Secretary to the Treasury authority, then you are telling him to appropriate all the balances which will be under local governments; you are saying that you can retain it with the authority of the Secretary to the Treasury. You are now telling the Secretary to the Treasury that you send money at the end of June, send billions to Sironko, Kapchorwa, when it comes I will come and give you authority to retain it because I have the authority in the law. That is very dangerous. 

Let us give no use excuses of local governments. All money, which is not committed must be returned on 30th June as soon as it comes to 1st, the money should be returned. The moment it is committed, it is allowed. What the chairman is raising is that if they have retained somebody’s money for a certificate, when the time expires they pay. You cannot tell them to retain money because they are anticipating. That is very dangerous. Therefore, we close the account, and the cut-off period for the Auditor-General also is 30th June.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Honourable colleagues, I have said it before that I was the chairperson of the Local Government Accounts Committee for three years and the biggest challenge is service delivery. As a country, we were grappling with a problem of service delivery even where money has already been spent by us to the district or local government for utilisation to deliver services to the people. This money is sent based on work plans and procurement plans. Why should an accounting officer not utilise that money? 

Now here in the law we are saying, can you retain and then write to the Secretary to the Treasury? That is recipe for disaster and corruption and inefficiency in local government. The legal regime already provides that if the local government has already committed itself then it can seek permission from the Secretary to the Treasury - we have already signed this contract, works have been executed and maybe a certificate has not been issued - and that money can be retained by the local government. For us to come and legalise this, that you can now retain money, these accounting officers are not going to be paying for services which would have been delivered to the people. 

My honest view is that this amendment is unnecessary and I beg the committee to reconsider this proposal. If you think it is necessary, it is also necessary for central government because the reasons you are giving are the same. However, the reasons you are giving to denying central government to retain money after the end of the financial year will apply to the local government. Let us save the local government and have people who are in charge of these resources to utilise them and deliver services to our people. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The competent hon. Abdu Katuntu has already made my case. However, I only wanted to add that if there are resources left at the end of the financial year, it would probably mean that you over budgeted. You have resources that you have no work plan to spend on, resources for which you cannot make any procurement and therefore - (Interruption)

MS AJOK: The information I would like to give particularly for local government is that there have been cases where money is sent two or three days to the end of the financial year and at the same time the CAO is being asked to send that money back even if it is already committed. That is why most local governments are being sued by contractors who were already given work but then if this money is recalled, they cannot pay those contractors. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you for that information - (Interruption)

MS KIIZA: The information I would like to give to my sister and my brother holding the Floor is that actually, the law we are going to amend is the one that has tried to cure the situation that she is talking about, that the money can be given to the local government towards the end of the quarter or the financial year.

This is so because the new law now provides that the money is given to them in advance for purpose of proper planning. Therefore, there will never be a situation where an accounting officer will hide under the issue of late releases to the local government that has hampered the item called service delivery. I just wanted to let the member know that information.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I cannot foresee any circumstance where you have funds unspent at the end of a financial year because during the budgeting cycle, as hon. Abdu Katuntu has very ably explained, we appropriate money against a work plan or procurement plan. It is against an existing or planned activity and that activity is planned for a financial year. It is not a multi-year budget. It cannot run into another financial year. Therefore, at the end of the financial year, the account should be closed. All monies that are unspent should go back to the Treasury and we budget for the following financial year. 

Madam Chairperson, hon. Abdu Katuntu mentioned this point that if we permit this, we shall be legislating for inefficiency, we shall be legislating for corruption. I have been the chairperson, by the grace of God, of the Road Fund Committee of Tororo District and hon. Sarah Opendi is a member. We have had perennial problems. The procurements are always done late. There is a work plan but the procurement will always be done late. The payment will always be done late. However, we know that the finances are released every quarter. Why do they do that? It is to promote corruption. It is just a cover up for corruption. As a Parliament, we would be doing this country a great disservice if we sat here and gave it our stamp of approval – (Interruption)

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Members have been assuming that when you have committed money, there is a provision here that allows you to pay after the end of the appropriation. However, I do not see it here. Honourable members, if you can allow me to – (Mr Ekanya rose_) - Can you show it to us? 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. Madam Chairperson, this law is very comprehensive. This law provides that when the accounting officer, for example, knows that a road contract will not be exhausted by the end of the year under section 23 – (Interjection)- Multiyear expenditure commitment. Every accounting officer, according to the work plan of Government, for example, knows that this road or water project will not be completed by 30th and it will exceed. 

It says, “(1) A vote shall not enter into a contract, transaction, or agreement that binds the Government to a financial commitment for more than one financial year or which results into a contingent liability except where the financial commitment or contingent liability is authorised by Parliament.

(2) Parliament may, in the annual budget, authorise a vote to make a multiyear expenditure commitment, and where Parliament authorizes, the annual budget shall indicate the commitment approved for the financial year and the approved multiyear commitments…”

Therefore, this law is very comprehensive and the proposed amendment is null and void.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think the honourable paralegal Ekanya has answered the chairperson of the committee.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo for giving way. Section 17(3), which is about expiry of appropriation, says “A vote that repays money under subsection (2) shall revise its annual work plan, procurement plan and recruitment plan to take into account the unexpended money and the minister responsible for the vote shall submit, as part of the budget for the preceding year…” 

Therefore, we have covered for it and even the local governments should not get worried. However, there is also further penalty. If you do not utilise the money under 17(4) you must be penalised.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, in summary, the deletion of this particular amendment would not cause any absurdity. It will only force Government to operate in an efficient manner within the timeframe for which we appropriate. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, are you still insisting?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: I will concede but with information to members -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let him give us the information. He is conceding but he wants you to know something.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: You must know that we have not provided for money, which is committed. It is not anywhere in the law.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Additionally, Madam Chairperson, if we say as the old law says that appropriation expires at the end of the financial year – 30th June – I see an operational problem. Imagine that the year ends, but there are still cheques – transactions – in the pipeline. For us at the ministry we believe the funds should be returned to the Consolidated Fund by the 30th June –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I know hon. Kasaija, the Minister of Finance, was a co-operator. At the end of every financial year, there is what we call bank reconciliation. When we do the reconciliation, it takes into consideration un-presented cheques – cheques which have not gone off. It leaves only the unexpended – the money which has no attachment. Is the minister in order to say that they will be in transition when we know very well Government employs professional accountants and economists to do this work?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I have not understood the dispute.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: What I was trying to raise is that he is saying that on 30th June there will be a lot of transactions, which are unknown such as the un-presented cheques. Un-presented cheques means a cheque has been issued out but has not come to the account of the local government or ministry. I am saying the moment we issue a cheque, there will be an accountant to reconcile the books. Would it really be fair to come and say that, that accountant will never take recognition that there are cheques which are in transit that have not been cashed? That is what I am trying to say.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Chairperson, let me make myself clear. You all know there are monies normally at times in transit. You need to give the accounting officer breathing space to collect all these. Let me give you an example, hon. Mafabi. Supposing the CAO wrote a cheque to you and it had not yet got to the bank by 30th June, what happens? 

In order to recall that cheque, the accounting officer should recall that cheque and it will take time for that cheque to come so that he can now have time to prepare his final accounts and submit that money to the Treasury.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are the cheques not valid for six months?

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I think we need to be very careful here. The word is “spent”. The word is “money not spent”. Can you define what “spent” means? It does not necessarily mean that all of the money lying on your account is not spent. You may have money on your account, which has actually been spent. You have already signed a contract for example, there is an on-going work and the money is committed; that is already money spent. You are just waiting to pay. 

The current legal regime gives the Secretary and the Local Government Accounting Officer discretion on having the authority sought from the Secretary to the Treasury by the accounting officer. There is no mischief at all being cured by this amendment. We are actually wasting time, Madam Speaker.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the mover conceded. There will be no clause 3. There is no amendment of clause 3.

Clause 4

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 4 do stand part of the Bill -

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Clause 4: Amendment of section 20 - reallocation of funds from a vote. 

In clause 4-
    1. Section 25(6) provides that Parliament can only approve a supplementary budget where the supplementary expenditure is un-absorbable, unavoidable and unforeseeable. It is therefore irregular for this type of reallocation to be financed through the supplementary budget.

    2. The appropriation role of Parliament should not be usurped.

THE SPEAKER: We are on clause 4.

MR EKANYA: Clause 4 is reallocation. Clause 4: Amendment of section 20 of -

THE CHAIRPERSON: If there is no amendment, then I will put the question that clause 4 – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, as a committee and the people who objected this one, we all agreed to delete it.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, amendment of section 20: Reallocation of Funds from a vote. The proposal is to delete clause 4. The justification is: 
    1. Sub-section 25(6) provides that Parliament can only approve a supplementary budget while the supplementary budget is un-absorbable, unavoidable and unforeseeable. It is therefore irregular for this type of reallocation to be financed through a supplementary budget.
    2. The appropriation role of Parliament should not be usurped.

I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 4 be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, clause 5 is about the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. A Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development wants to delegate his functions to the Secretary to Treasury. This is criminal and I do not know why hon. Bahati can allow this. If I were the one, I would even need more power. Therefore, Madam Chairperson, Clause 5 should be deleted.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson and honourable colleagues, after considering the views we have had here in the House, we are proposing that we maintain “the minister” but we are making a slight amendment to include “the minister or a person designated by the minister”. Our understanding is that the responsibility remains with the minister.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What kind of persons can be-? To a junior minister or - it is because the junior ministers are also ministers. To whom can he delegate his ministerial power? Is this with the consent of the Head of Government that you can actually donate your powers anyhow to any person?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Chair, after due consideration- If a senior minister is not there, there will be a Minister of State and that minister automatically carries out the functions of the senior minister as fully as anybody. Therefore, I would like to concede that we go along with the committee’s recommendation.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to move that clause 5 be deleted. Not even (b), but the whole Clause 5 be deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 5 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, amendment of section 25: Supplementary Expenditure. The proposal is to delete 6(b) and (c).

The justification is that the committee takes exception to the proposed repeal of subsection (2). Subsection (2) provides a capping on discretion given in subsection (1) on how much can be spent in excess of the budget. Where money appropriated to the Contingency Fund has been depleted, section 26(3) of the Act provides as follows: 
“The Contingencies Fund shall form part of the annual budget and Parliament may, in addition to the amount under subsection (1), appropriate such other monies as it may deem necessary.”

The committee therefore suggested a deletion.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chair, we are making an amendment to this. We agree that clause 6 be deleted and replaced. We would like to separate the Contingency Fund from the supplementary expenditure. We would like that the Contingency Fund is fully and only committed to natural disasters so that we have stable funds to cater for natural disasters. We would like to allow supplementary expenditures on other emergencies and other budgetary requirements. 

Therefore, we propose that section 25 be amended to read as follows: “(1) The total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what is approved by Parliament shall not exceed 3 per cent of the total approved budget for that financial year without prior approval of Parliament.” - (Interjection)- It is uploaded in our system.

“(2) Where funds are expended under subsection (1), supplementary estimates showing the sum spent shall be laid before Parliament within four months after the money is spent.”

The justification is: to align the section with Article 156(2) of the Constitution and leave the section as it is in the Budget Act. To also provide for supplementary expenditure up to 3 per cent of the budget to ensure flexibility and efficiency required to meet the challenges of funding and unforeseen activities during the budget execution. That is what we are proposing on that section.

MR EKANYA: Honourable minister, pardon me. You know, we took time to make this law, but we are now amending it in a hurry and we are making mistakes. I have read section 25 and 26; section 25 is about the supplementary budget while section 26 is about the Contingencies Fund. It goes into detail and even makes reference to the Constitution. 

Honourable minister, I would like to ask that we first test this. Maybe in the next Parliament we can reconsider this. I would wish to support you but reading it - You see, we have provided for three and half per cent to go to the Contingencies Fund and if you read it comprehensively, you will realise that if the Contingencies Fund is exhausted, it can even be replenished before the end of the year. Therefore, if we only amend that clause- I have looked at the proposed amendment and there is a conflict. Perhaps we should probably stand over this, Madam Chairperson, go to the other sections and then came back to it later. This is because we want to harmonise our thinking.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much.  Madam Chairperson, I do not want to hear people disagreeing. I hope you have the law here. If you have the law, it is very clear. I do not see any minister worried. 

Section 25 (1) says, “Where in respect of any financial year, it is found that the amount appropriated by an Appropriation Act is insufficient, or that a need has arisen for expenditure for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by the Appropriation Act, a supplementary estimate, showing the amount required, shall be laid before Parliament by the Minister through a Supplementary Appropriation Bill.” 

I do not see any worry because the law is very clear; it gives the minister authority to come here with supplementary estimates, which are not covered under the Contingency Fund. If it is unforeseeable, for example a disaster has happened in Bududa, our home area, you run quickly to the Contingency Fund and pick money. When it is over, you come here and we add you more.  

Supposing we budgeted to import items and we discovered that the exchange rate was Shs 3000 but now it is Shs 3500, you can come here and tell us that you need Shs 500 more to buy each dollar because the money you were given was less by a certain amount. It is very clear. So, why are you bringing this to burden yourself? Section 25 alone is very good.  

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I think the minister has a problem. He has not explained that after appropriating all the votes in the budget, he faces a problem of emergencies and he wants to separate the Contingency Fund within the budget. That is why last time when I was debating, I proposed that we go back to the status-quo to have flexibility within the budget. The status-quo was that if the total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources such as emergencies are, within the budget, over and above what is appropriated by Parliament, it shall not exceed three per cent of the total approved budget for that financial year and that would not need prior approval of Parliament. 

In 2003, for example, we had a war in the north and Government did not have money. Government had to go back and rearrange the appropriation but with the approval of Parliament. You should not go above that percentage; if there is more needed, you come back to Parliament. If you want to cartel all the other departments, in consultation with the departments you go and ask them for that money after stating the need but Parliament must be in the know.

The Budget Act was helping you out with flexibility in case any need arises provided you do not go above this percentage. Therefore, the only way out, if you are facing that problem, is that you have this law, which we can amend to help you out –(Interruption)

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: I thank you for allowing to be given information. What we did this year was to allow for supplementaries and at the same time, we allowed for a Contingency Fund. What we did this time, which we had never done, was to budget for the Contingency Fund as well because that is what the law says. However, what really happened is that we confined a supplementary to the Contingency Fund. We did not provide for a supplementary outside the Contingency Fund. 

Subsection (2) of section 25 reads, “For the purposes of Article 156(2)(b) of the Constitution, the total sum of money that may be expended by Government for any purpose, in excess of the amount appropriated for a purpose for which no money was appropriated by the Appropriation Act, shall not exceed the total of the money appropriated to the Contingencies Fund.” Therefore, once you talk about a supplementary, be sure that it must be part of the Contingencies Fund. 

We said further that, “The Minister may, upon request by an accounting officer, approve a supplementary budget of up to 10 per cent of the Contingencies Fund.” It assumes that money is in the Contingencies Fund and you want a supplementary. 

It further says, “The supplementary budget under subsection (3) shall be financed from the Contingencies Fund…”  Honourable members, we confined the supplementary to the Contingencies Fund. So, to provide for what the Constitution says, as hon. Kakooza has said, we must revert back to what was in the Budget Act for you to be allowed to have a supplementary. Therefore, if somebody requires a supplementary away from the Contingencies Fund, then somebody can get a supplementary. 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I was still on the Floor. The chairperson is mixing two things, contingency and supplementary. Contingency must have its own fund appropriated by Parliament as stated in section 26. 

What the minister is trying to say is that he has been given money in a financial year within the budget, which is appropriated by Parliament, while this law was saying, “We have given you this money but there is an emergency, go and spend but do not exceed three per cent of the money you have been given. If the need arises, come back to us and we give you more.” This is what the minister is trying to say. 

Section 12 (2) says, “Where funds are expended under subsection (1), supplementary estimates showing the sums spent shall be laid before Parliament within four months after the money is spent.” This is the flexibility in Government whereby you can adjust what you want to do in case the need arises. It means if you have appropriated money for votes a and b and there is an emergency, you can spend as long as you do not go above three per cent. When the need arises, come back to us - (Interruption)

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am actually getting perplexed by the chairperson of the committee to which I belong - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you raising a point of order against the chairperson or hon. Kakooza? 

MR TAYEBWA: No, the chairperson of the committee. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Who is the order directed at? 

MR TAYEBWA: Finance –(Laughter) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But he is not on the Floor. 

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Chairperson, I am really surprised to find that the chairperson of the finance committee is changing the report, and we do not agree with this. We wrote this report and in the first instance, we agreed, together with the finance committee, not to repeal this section. That is how it is in our report. However, I can now see that the chairperson is changing goal posts by bringing other amendments, which are not included in the report of the committee. Is the chairperson in order? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, I do not want to believe that the supplementary was supposed to be tied to the Contingencies Fund. We agreed to establish a Contingencies Fund by itself with nothing to do with supplementary. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, if you allow me, I can explain. When I stood here, I said that we wanted to separate the supplementary expenditure from the contingency so that we allow the Contingencies Fund to respond and address natural disasters and allow the supplementary budget to handle other emergencies.

Therefore, I am proposing to amend section 25 to cater for supplementaries and then I amend section 26, if you will allow me, Madam Chairperson and colleagues, as follows: 

(a) 	in subsection (1) by replacing “three and a half” with “a half”. We are therefore reducing the Contingencies Fund from 3.5 per cent to 0.5 per cent to cater for natural disasters and remain as a standby fund to cater for natural disasters. The three per cent then goes for supplementary expenditures – (Interjections) Can I first finish? So, it will read, “(1) There is established a Contingencies Fund which shall, every financial year be replenished with an amount equivalent to a half per cent of the approved annual budget of Government of the previous year.”

(b) 	in subsection (4) by repealing “for supplementary expenditure under section 25” to read as follows: “The Contingencies Fund shall be used to provide funding to respond to natural disasters.” 

(c) 	by repealing subsections (5) and (6).

As I have said, the justification is to have the two separate, the supplementary expenditure and also the Contingencies Fund. I beg to move.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I would like to seek clarification from the minister. He would like to have the Contingencies Fund for natural disasters. What would happen if the Contingencies Fund is actually exhausted within the financial year, as it is now?

MR BAHATI: That is why, if you heard me correctly, I said that it shall be replenished. If it is exhausted, Parliament will replenish it. Thank you. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I pleaded here with the minister. Colleagues, this law is very comprehensive. This law took us three years and it is really comprehensive. I would like to support the honourable minister. You see, I told you to read sections 25 and 26 but read the law from the first page to the end.

Let me take you to section 25 on supplementary budgets, because I had not gone through some of the discussions we had comprehensively, to refresh my mind. Section 25(8) says, “Where the minister considers that the supplementary expenditure sought under a Supplementary Appropriation Bill is likely to breach the principles in section 4 or the objectives of the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility, the minister shall apply section 7.” 

You need to read subsection (4): “The supplementary budget under subsection (3) shall be financed from the Contingencies Fund in accordance with section 26(8).” You need to read section 28 comprehensively. This is because we provided that you pick a supplementary from the Contingencies Fund so that we do not distort the Budget where we have appropriated vote by vote and for programmes. I hope you get the point.

We, therefore, said that you pick the money for disasters or any other thing from the contingency and provided for this. Suppose we have put Shs 2 trillion in contingency and we said, pick 85 per cent for supplementary; if it is not enough, the minister has power to invoke section 7. Allow me to read section 7: 
“Deviations from objectives of the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility 

(1) 	The Minister may, with the approval of Parliament, deviate from the objectives in the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility where Uganda experiences a natural disaster, an unanticipated severe economic shock…” - this economic shock may mean exchange rates, unplanned activities – “…or any other significant unforeseen event…” - like the Pope’s visit – “…that cannot be funded from the Contingency Fund or other funding mechanism provided in this Act or using prudent fiscal policy adjustments. 

(2) 	The minister shall within 30 days after deviation, publish a report in the Gazette and on the website of the ministry.” 

Honourable minister, you have all the provisions and I can read the Constitution for you. It says in Article 156 that if Parliament appropriates money and the appropriation is inadequate, spend the money and report. What you are doing is actually going to tie your hands. Article 156 is about the Appropriation Bill and it is very comprehensive. You need to read it to the end. It talks about all these things and we used to apply this. What you are going to do will tie your hands. Next time you need more money, you will cry and yet now you have the leeway. A Charter for Fiscal Responsibility is about the total economy.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Before I seek clarification from you, I would like to state that your proposal is just seeking to re-instate what was in the Budget Act, what was working previously. This is clearly what I read from section 12 of the Budget Act, subsections (1), (2) and (3).

This means that you need to tell the House whether what we passed in the current Act has failed to work. If it has failed to work, I remember very well that most of the colleagues in this House were against the repealing of this Act, implying that the proposals that were in this Act were very good ones.

Madam Chairperson, if the minister thinks that what was in the Budget Act is good, I do not see any harm with this House going back to where we were previously and forgetting all about it. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Maybe for the comfort of the Members, I ruled against the repeal, so the law is still there.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, as hon. Musasizi has said, we are trying to make it smarter here by separating the supplementary expenditure from the Contingency Fund to make it as straightforward and simple as possible. The mixing of the Contingency Fund with the supplementary expenditure is not working and it is not going to work. Honourable colleagues, I beg that the proposals I have put on the Floor be supported.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, many colleagues took time off and burnt the midnight candle to enact this law. In the history of this House, since I joined it, there has never been a law which has taken all the time that we took to enact this new law. Some of these provisions have not had the opportunity to work, especially this particular one. It is not even a year since we enacted this law. What problems have they been finding to have this particular provision implemented to necessitate the change? They have not convinced us. Instead, they are saying it is being smarter. 

There is nothing smart about this amendment and let me tell you why. The minister is now proposing that the Contingency Fund is reduced to 0.5 per cent. Can he explain to us why it cannot be reduced to 2.5 per cent, to 2 per cent or to 1.5 per cent but only to 0.5 per cent? We know with this new law, it will not be business as usual. Actually, that was our intention, that we move away from the status then to a new status. You have not had time to implement this particular provision and instead, you are running here to change this and that.

When you read sections 24, 25 and 26, there is no lacuna to fill; everything is in there. You have 3.5 per cent in the Contingency Fund but you can use up to 85 per cent and you have not done that. I do not know whether my colleagues are being convinced by this terrible amendment – (Interruption) With the permission of the Chair, I will take the information.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, hon. Katuntu, for yielding the Floor. I listened to hon. David Bahati very attentively and in very simple terms, I thought hon. Bahati was saying that as Parliament, you gave me 3.5 per cent as Contingency Fund, let me rename part of the 3.5 per cent to supplementaries so that it is available for me to use and I keep only 0.5 per cent as contingency for purposes of addressing disasters. In simple terms, hon. Bahati is saying we permit him to use the Contingency Fund and we rename it supplementary.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I must thank a school called Busoga College Mwiri. (Laughter) Section 26, which hon. Katuntu brought out, says, “Eighty-five per cent of the money of the Contingencies Fund shall be used to finance supplementary expenditure and 15 per cent shall be allocated to finance responses to natural disasters.”

The reason I would like to thank Mwiri is because 3.5 per cent multiplied by 85 per cent gives you 2.975 per cent. You are therefore asking for another 0.025 per cent to make it 3 per cent yet we have allowed you. If you round it off, you will get the 3 per cent that you are talking about. I really do not know why my brother, hon. Bahati, whom I really respect in numbers, he not read 26(5). That is the information I wanted to give.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much. I have been following the arguments and what the minister is trying to do is to separate the two. However, when you look at the spirit of this law in terms of management of the Contingency Fund and the supplementary, they were managed concurrently. If we amend and separate them, we shall have trouble in some other sections, for example section 28, which provides for supplementary expenditure financed from the Contingency Fund. It says, “(1) The minister shall authorise withdrawals from the Contingencies Fund for supplementary expenditure which is authorised under section 25(3).”

If the minister tries to separate the two without doing additional analysis of other clauses of the Bill, we shall have certain contradictions that will arise in future. You are trying to amend sections 25 and 26 and yet you are not looking at other sections that refer to those particular sections. This will cause a lot of trouble for us in interpretation in future.

MR BAHATI: Just to clear that, we are amending sections 25 and 26 and repealing section 28.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, that makes matters worse. The minister would like to amend other sections by implication and I think that is wrong.

Madam Chairperson, I do not think this is a well-thought-out amendment. When we were enacting the Public Finance Management Act, we wanted to streamline budgetary supplementary expenditure. That was one of the reasons. We wanted to streamline how Government brings supplementary expenditure here; it was one of the main reasons. Now, he is taking us to the amorphous provisions of the Budget Act where in many instances, they were being abused – (Interruption)

MS ANNA MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you. Madam Chairperson, I need some clarification. While the law caters for the contingency and apportions how much can go to the supplementary and contingency, I remember that when we were appropriating we did not have money for the contingency whereas it is catered for in the law.  This is where the problem is. 

We are talking of the contingency and the 3 per cent to be a supplementary and the rest for emergency but we did not cater for the Contingency Fund and this is where the problem is with Government. That is why it is a school of thought today that perhaps we should have retained the earlier position in the Budget Act, which many of us sounded our drums for not to repeal those clauses. The hands of Government are now tied. You are saying you have supplementary but get to the Contingencies Fund and there is nothing. That is why we want to open up. Thank you.

MR KASAIJA: I would like to take on hon. Katuntu on his argument. Can we look at the parent law, section 26, which says, “(3) The Contingencies Fund shall form part of the annual budget and Parliament may, in addition to the amount under subsection (1), appropriate such other money as it may deem necessary.

(4) The Contingencies Fund shall be used to provide funding for supplementary expenditure under section 25 and to respond to natural disaster, as specified in this Part. 

(5) Eighty-five per cent of the money of the Contingencies Fund shall be used to finance supplementary expenditure and 15 per cent shall be allocated to finance responses to natural disasters.”

Madam Chairperson, as we speak, there is no money now in the Contingencies Fund, as you know very well. Well, we provided for it but you know Parliament - I do not want to appear to accuse - (Interjections) Do you want me to say where the money went? I can say it. I can say where the money went.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order, please!

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to give the minister a way out. The minister is right, but we have a way out. During the budget process, the Budget Committee did not provide for money in the Contingencies Fund and that is a fact. However, the Constitution gives us a way out. We did appropriation but did not provide for money for a vote called Contingencies Fund. 

Read Article 156 - Appropriation Bill - which is supreme and even greater than the Public Finance Management Act. We lifted Article 156 of the Constitution into the Public Finance Management Act and it reads as follows:
 “(1) The heads of expenditure contained in the estimates, other than expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund by this Constitution or any Act of Parliament, shall be included in a Bill to be known as an Appropriation Bill, which shall be introduced in Parliament to provide for the issue from the Consolidated Fund of the sums necessary to meet that expenditure and the appropriation of those sums for the purposes specified in the Bill.” 

This is very important and I wish the honourable minister would allow the Attorney-General to remind himself of it. Clause (2) says, “If in respect of any financial year it is found- 
    (a) that the amount appropriated for any purpose under the Appropriation Act…” - In the Appropriation Act, we did not provide for money; we put zero, by the way, which is allowed - “…is insufficient or that a need has arisen for expenditure for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that Act; or 

    (b) that any monies have been expended for any purpose in excess…” - We did not provide for money in the Appropriation Act and the Constitution allows this - “…that no money has been appropriated by that Act, a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or  spent…” - You can even spend it – “…shall be laid down before Parliament and in the case of excess expenditure, within four months after the money is spent.” 

There is no lacuna therefore. We lifted this, hon. Bahati. I did this law for three years. We lifted this provision and I can show you where we lifted this constitutional provision in the Public Finance - (Interruption)- Let me continue; I am reading the Constitution.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Yes, you are reading the Constitution but we added something. In fact, this clause should realign the Constitution with the law. We added in more things as per the law and yet the Constitution allows you to get a supplementary.

I said from the beginning that we confined a supplementary to a Contingency Fund. That is why when we were reading “supplementary”, we put in the word “Contingency Fund”. Why? It is one and the same. Therefore, if there is no money in the Contingency Fund, there can never be money for a supplementary. 

Honourable members, we thought we would anticipate problems and the amounts that those problems would cost to the extent that we started budgeting for a Contingency Fund. However, at the same time, we provided that all the money for the supplementary expenditure should be moved out of the Contingency Fund and nothing less, nothing more to the Contingency Fund. That can be emphasised in 28 which says, “supplementary expenditure financed from the Contingencies Fund” - (Interjections)- No, the Constitution gives you powers but the law we did does not. Section 28 says, “The minister shall authorise withdrawals from the Contingencies Fund for supplementary expenditure which is authorised under section 25(3).”

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, let me conclude and I am not taking any more information. (Mr Kakooza rose_) Hon. Kakooza, you may excuse me, I have to go off the Floor. 

Madam Chairperson, under the current Public Finance Management Act, what hon. Bahati is seeking to introduce is already provided for. Even if the funds under the Contingencies Fund have been exhausted, under section 26(3), you can come and we replenish monies in the Contingencies Fund. It is provided for within the Act.

I feel uncomfortable when the substantive honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development wants to blackmail Parliament by saying, “Do you know where the money went?” If you want to say it, say it. These are public resources. We should not be subject to any sort of blackmail. If monies have been spent for public purposes in good faith, it can be public. There is nothing to hide about it, except under classified expenditure because that is provided for under the law.

As I resume my seat, honourable Chairperson, I do not think this afterthought amendment tabled by the minister adds value to the public management of our funds; it does not. This law clearly provides for safeguards and we seem to be going back to a system, which was abused several times.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, section 25(3) would be operational if we had money in the Contingency Fund but it is not there. There is nothing in the Contingency Fund so we cannot use 25(3).

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to convince colleagues; last time we had this same debate but it was the problem of the technocrats saying that they are going to implement this budget wholesomely and do whatever we want. 

If you go to the record of the Hansard, we said that the moment we pass this law as it is into the Public Finance Management Act, Government will find a problem. Where there is no money in the Contingencies Fund, it will not spend because it will not have the money. However, the other Budget Act gave leeway and flexibility saying, “We appropriated money for you in the budget, can you spend 3 per cent; when you want to go above it, come back to us because we gave you money and you have needs, which arise from what you want. 

This was the position but the technocrats said “no, we are going to implement this”. Now the Government is tied in its own trap. This is what we said, that let us give you flexibility to deal with the budget and in case any need arises, you will deal with it within the vote we appropriated money. That was the spirit of the Budget Act. It was for flexibility, so that if Government has emergencies above the money we have appropriated, do not go above three per cent but back to us and we will give you more money. 

If the status quo remained, the Government would get money to suppress and supplement its own activities when need arises when the Contingency Fund is not budgeted for. Even if you allocate funds to the Contingency Fund, the source of financing will come from the money you have appropriated; it will be new. So you go back to the same law, which was there before, and you put it in there to give flexibility and for Parliament to know how you used that money. 

There is no room for reallocation within. According to the Public Finance Accountability Act as it is, Government cannot reallocate money within unless the flexibility goes back to the other allocation of three per cent. We told them. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we have had enough debate. I put the question that clause 25 be amended as proposed by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 7 do stand as part of the Bill. Does the Chair have an amendment? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we would like to amend clause 7, which deals with the opening of the Bank of Uganda. You cannot do that, my friend. Since you have passed three per cent and now you are covered, clause 7 should be deleted because we cannot allow them to go to Bank of Uganda and withdraw money without our authority. If they need any money, they should come to us.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is clause 8.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is clause 7 as they go together.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson and colleagues, I beg to move an amendment to delete clause 7 and insert section 36(2)(b) of the Act to read as follows: “For the management of monetary policy or treasury operations”. I know we had this debate yesterday and I want to beg colleagues that I make this statement. I would appreciate it if you can, once again, allow us to make this statement so that as we make a decision, we can appreciate what we are saying. 

This is about the economy and about managing the affairs of our country. Every financial year, Madam Chairperson, we pass a budget and when we pass a budget, we have approved estimated revenues and estimated expenditure. You tell the Executive, “Go and implement and we shall keep an eye on what you are spending on.” 

Now, when you pass a budget, we expect to finance this expenditure from the revenues of URA and the money that we borrow. The revenues of URA are collected every day and every month while the releases of Government are made every quarter. Therefore, you have the revenue of the month but you release money for two more months in advance to cater for the things that you have anticipated to do but also as required by the relevant laws. 

We normally have a gap between what we spend and what we expect from the revenue. For us to bridge that gap, what we normally do, as it was in the previous Act, is to get a temporary advance from our banker, which is the Central Bank, only for purposes of activities which have been appropriated by this Parliament and not more. This particular clause is purposely to address the cash requirement of Government and to manage the cash flow of Government for purposes of activities appropriated by this Parliament. 

Yesterday, the Attorney-General was able to convince this House that Parliament has the authority to exempt some loans. So the question, which was raised by hon. Katuntu the other time and by other colleagues, was fully answered by this. That is why we come here today to seek your approval so that we can be allowed to amend this for monetary policy, treasury operations and also to propose the following: “(5a) Notwithstanding subsection (5), where a loan is raised for treasury operations, the loan shall not exceed 18 per cent of the domestic revenue of Government and shall be repaid in the same financial year.” 

Subsection (5b): “Treasury operations for purposes of this Act mean the day-to-day management of government cash needs by undertaking annual, quarterly and daily cash forecasts for ensuring, through investments and temporary borrowings, that Government has sufficient liquidity to meet its obligations on time in line with parliamentary appropriations.” Therefore, the advances that will be got from the Central Bank are restricted for the activities approved by this House and are restricted in terms of percentage and scope. 

Some Members have argued on the Floor of this House why we should not come to the House with a motion and we approve this. I would like to tell you, colleagues, and invite all of you to think about this situation in the context of management of the economy and not only the budget. Assuming that on the 28th of the month we would like to pay salaries but the collection we have from URA cannot meet the cash requirement for salaries and we bring a resolution to this House, telling the whole world that we need money to pay salaries, that we are broke and yet we expect an investor from London or anywhere to come and buy treasury bills and expect interest on their treasury bills; people will be scared and lose confidence. 

So once you restrict this, we can even further restrict it. I had a chat with those who had opposing views. (Mr Ekanya rose_) -I am not referring to the Opposition, hon. Ekanya. It is for those who had opposing views because even this side we had opposing views and we think that we can revisit this candidly and openly. 

We are not doing this so that anybody can go with a brief case, like hon. Nandala-Mafabi said that hon. Kasaija will go with a brief case to the Central Bank and ask that the money be placed into the case and he walks away; no. It is for activities appropriated by this House, colleagues. I beg to move.

MR EKANYA: Honourable minister, this amendment is necessary but we need to recast. If you look at the Constitution, it separates. Monetary policy is basically allowed for Bank of Uganda; what you want is cash advance for operations. So we need to separate. When you say, “for management of monetary policy of treasury operations”, you are mixing. We have already allowed Government to borrow money for purposes of monetary policies and so you need to recast that.

Also, it is an amendment that we need to consider. You need to understand how the economy operates and our budget – (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_) - I know that hon. Nandala-Mafabi has a different opinion, but let me put it – (Laughter)-

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is happening, honourable members? Hon. Odoi-Oywelowo -   

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I thank you, Madam Chair. Hon. Bahati is giving with one hand and removing with the other. He proposes to enable Government to borrow from Bank of Uganda for a vote function called treasury services. Treasury services is a programme under the finance ministry and it is programme No.6 as per the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that I am reading. 

Treasury Services includes the following: wage (recurrent), non-wage (recurrent), and very interesting things like strengthening of oversight – Office of the Auditor-General and Parliament. It also has processing of the government roll, printing of salary schedules for non IPPS, and implementation of EFT salary payment. It has inspectorate and internal audit of the ministry and it continues with payroll audit, supervisory services, quarterly inspection report, quarterly assurance report, repayment of Government loans, processing of Government loans, processing of withdrawal of donor funding – This is the function that the minister wants to spend on – (Interruption) - But this is treasury services, programme No. 6 in your ministry. Can I conclude and then I take your information.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clarification from the finance minister.

MR KASAIJA: Madam Chair, let us get the purpose clearly. I hope that I did not misunderstand hon. Odoi-Oywelowo’s submission. 

The way that I understood it is that we are not differentiating between money for investment and money for running the day-to-day activities of the Treasury. What we are intending here and talking about is the day-to-day activities of the Treasury and is what we call Treasury operations. We are not talking about money for investment. Money for investment is totally different and is covered by different regulations. So, I would beg that we actually look at it from the day-to-day operations of Government and should we pass our proposal, then I think that we shall change that vote.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: But it still brings us to the same problem, that we vote funds for a vote function called Treasury services and we know the outputs of that vote function from the ministry. This is their own document and they cannot disown it on the Floor of the House. 

The minister stands on the Floor of the House and tells us that once we pass that amendment, then they shall also amend our vote function. The problem that I have with the vote function is that it has virtually everything. If you want to borrow from Bank of Uganda to do payroll management and management systems, you want to borrow from Bank of Uganda to do internal audit functions in referral hospitals, that is what is in the vote function, and you want to do so without prior parliamentary approval.  

You want to borrow from Bank of Uganda to do audit reports on foreign missions and embassies, forensic and risk management activities conducted during the financial year, implementation of risk management strategy, quarterly reports, and all is taken by Government. Those are the items under Treasury services.

MR KASAIJA: Can I inform you, once again? I do not know why our minds are not in agreement on this matter. These temporary advances that we are talking about are meant to run the day-to-day Treasury activities – (Interjections) - Yes, somebody will come and there will be a need, for example, to pay salaries and wages – (Interjections) – Let me give you a simple example. When you are running a home, you give your wife money or your husband – (Interjection) - I thank you, hon. Katuntu; you are right, you give your husband. No, but in this case, normally it would refer to the mother of the home to run the activities of the home. It is not money for investing in durable assets but for buying chakula, this and that to make sure that the home is tidy and moving. 

It is in the same vein that we are asking to get this temporary advance from Bank of Uganda so that we can cater for the day-to-day activities and requirements that come to the Treasury. If it is money for development – that is what we call capital expenditure – then that is a totally different matter. We are not borrowing for capital expenditure but to run the Treasury activities of Government. Yes, mama.

MS ONGOM: I would like to seek clarification. I thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. Yesterday, when I found hon. Bahati outside, he tried to give some explanation which I kind of tried to pick but we are about to vote but we still need detailed explanation. They are telling us that because we operate on a cash budget, there comes a time when the Ministry of Health needs money, Ministry of Education needs money but they do not have cash to fund those requirements. I just want to have that clarification if there is any situation where at one moment we have all the accounts depleted and there is nothing completely so that we have to borrow from Bank of Uganda.

Secondly, you are saying that the borrowing should not exceed 18 per cent of the total collection of revenue. However, revenue fluctuates; how will Parliament know that this financial year or month, we got so much revenue and at what moment as Parliament shall know about your borrowing? How often will you borrow and at what point will Parliament know that you borrowed?

MR KASAIJA: I will answer the first question which was, is there a situation where the account will be totally empty? Yes, and yesterday those of you who were here I told you at the beginning of this financial year, we had a problem - I had to make sure that I pay salaries and pay the various expenses in order for the state to continue running and Bank of Uganda said, “Mr Minister –(Interruption)

DR LYOMOKI: Honourable minister, before you make that point, if you look at 2(e) in the clause which you are trying to amend, I thought it caters for your purpose which says “defray and expenditure which may lawfully be defrayed” can’t you handle whatever you are talking about under that provision?

The expenditures which you are talking about are lawful and they are catered for in the budget. That is 36(2)(e). That is what you are amending; you are trying to add your provision on 2(b). What I am trying to say is that if you look at the provision you are amending and you go to (e), you find that it caters for this situation that the minister is trying to cater for.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, I listened very attentively to the minister and I am now more worried than I was before I got up.
The minister says that the money he is asking for is for day- today running of the economy; it is not for capital expenditure. However, when we come here every year to budget we budget for recurrent expenditure and capital development and we give him money for both. We give him money for the day- today expenditure and we also give him money for the capital expenditure of the country.

I am worried by the fact that he is still looking for another 18 percent of the total collection of the year to spend on the same items that we budget for without prior parliamentary approval.

MR BAHATI: Hon. Fox Odoi you are speaking about money and we are speaking about cash. They are two different things; funds and cash are two different things because the issue that we are looking at here is different from what we are talking about.

You may have expenditure to make, but you have not collected that money yet; when Parliament approves the budget, it does not give us cash, it only gives us provisional estimates on what to spend on. When it comes to spending, I must have money from URA in cash to spend.

When you are spending for salary, you are not going to say I have figures in my database. A worker will need cash in their pockets - that is the gap that we are talking about.

You gave me this but this gap, I must finance it from somewhere and the 18 per cent is not adding on the budget, it is just bridging the gap between the timing of the expenditure and when you are collecting the money.

Hon. Fox Odoi, there is a clear distinction between the treasury services and treasury operations and we are defining treasury operations specifically in this Act. Thank you.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you so much, Madam Chair. I want to comment on this term “treasury operations”. We have a vote called “Vote 130, treasury operations”. I think what you need to do is to redefine that vote if you are to maintain this new definition in the amendment.

In the proposed amendment, it is mentioned that the loan shall not exceed 18 per cent of the domestic revenue and it is not indicated which domestic revenue is being referred to here. Is it domestic revenue for the previous financial year or the domestic revenue for the current financial year? I think this provision should clearly state which domestic revenue you are referring to. I think it should be for the previous financial year.

I want to comment about the repayment. You are saying that the repayment should be made within the financial year, but it is possible that the money is not recovered in that financial year and I thought that we should tighten this statement a little bit by saying that this money should be repaid within the financial year from the URA revenue collection or revenue account to ensure that this money as soon as it is recovered from the revenue collections by URA, it is repaid. Remember this is an advance, so it should be automatically recovered from the URA collections. I think the legal gurus could accommodate these amendments so that we are able to move on.
 
MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Chair. I have listened to the arguments by the minister and also hon. Fox Odoi regarding what has come up as treasury operations as amendment to section 36(2)(b) for the management of monetary policy and treasury operations. 

Maybe there is need to define “treasury operations” and also what we have always known as treasury operations. If that is the case, what I have understood honourable colleagues is that what government is looking for is an opportunity to be able to run the activities that we provide for here smoothly and to perform those activities which have a budget attached to it – those that are expected to be funded by revenues collected locally and also other sources of funding. 

However, the problem here is that sometimes or most of the times when we budget for activities, it is also true to say that the expected revenues do not match the timing of the activities that we appropriate resources for here in the budget. Therefore, when the timings do not match, then a gap is created and that is the gap in terms of revenue or funding that we need to address in this law.

What I have understood is that Government is seeking an opportunity to be able to find resources in terms of an advance from Bank of Uganda whenever there is a short fall in revenue collection and when they realise this revenue collection to be able to pick this money and put it where they got it from.

Therefore, in reality, I understand it like an IOU. Pick from here and put it back. It is not in real terms a loan. It would not be a loan because it is supposed to be put back within the same financial year.

Therefore, if these are temporally advances, I do not know what you want to call them. However, to me in the sense of the Bill it is a temporary advance and what Government requires here is an opportunity to be able to pick this money.

Madam Chairperson, I remember in the Eighth Parliament, we used to have in supplementary advances what Government used to do was to draw down from Bank of Uganda and drawdowns were permanent. They were not being replaced. However, now what Government is seeking is simply advances which I believe is the right way to go - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you know it is very bad to use terms in a wrong context. If you went to the bank and they gave you  one day overdraft, it is called a loan. By the way an overdraft is a temporally advance if you did not know –(Expunged)- Therefore, Madam Chairperson, is hon. Akol in order to say or to misrepresent statements that a temporally advance is not a loan, when as far as I know, it is a loan?

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is how she understands it.

(Part expunged)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, honourable members, the chairperson of the committee is appointed by this House and performs a delegated function on behalf of the House, so it cannot be that a chairperson alone can approve an activity of the House. Therefore let that be expunged, if there was an approval, it was done by the entire House not by hon. Akol.  

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, I am not persuaded by the argument of the honourable minister. When you look at what they call treasury operation, it is just cash management. Even if we were to draw from the ordinary practices of a company, if a company is running its daily operations and realises that it does not have enough cash to run it operations, what it can do is to go and borrow. This borrowing normally by law is by board resolution which is registered. 

We want to see a man entrusted with public resources, a public company called Uganda running away from the normal practice of at least coming to the trustees of the public affairs. Literally we are the overseers. It is our constitutional obligation.

If you look at Article 79, it is my major obligation to know what you are doing; you should at least have the courtesy to come here with a resolution before you carry out your affairs. You are not doing your personal issues. If you have run short of money to pay our workers, this is a statutory deduction, it is a direct charge on the Consolidated Fund and you want to run a way going to Bank of Uganda. You want to use all sorts of words. Let us really be nationalistic.

You may be honest today but we may get somebody who is not honest tomorrow and we are not about to surrender this power. Parliament has had a problem of where we are stampeded at the end of our term of office and end up making bad laws. This is one of them. I would want to be in the books of history for having rejected this amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 8 of the Bill be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR EKANYA: Amendment -

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are deleting this and coming to the amendments. Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I propose that we amend Section 36(2)(e) instead of Section 36(b). It is neater for defraying expenditure which may lawfully be defrayed; this is better.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You want to delete that?

MR EKANYA: Section of the Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do you want to do with Section 36(e)?

MR EKANYA: Instead of Section 36(2)(b) because in Section 36(2)(b) we have already provided for monetary policy and that is specifically for Bank of Uganda for managing the economy. When we mix monetary policy and treasury operations, it erodes the independence and brings interference. This is for fiscal purposes. The cash we need is for fiscal operations. The monetary aspect is different and it is very clear.

You have two terminologies – monitory and fiscal expenses; they are different. However, when you bring it under Section 36(2)(b) – for management of monetary policy or treasury operations – you are mixing two aspects. Therefore, I would like to introduce an amendment under Section 36(2)(e). 

In addition, you do not need to talk about all these treasury operations; it is not necessary. We should just lower the percentage from 18 to 10 and add at the end.

The way hon. Fox argued, we need cash. Monetary policy is operation of Bank of Uganda - for managing liquidity excess and mopping out; here we are mixing them. Therefore, we need to separate things. Fiscal is for operation - we need to separate this and bring the amendment under Section 36(2)(e). This is because that is also an advance. You can get a loan under Section 36(2) (e); it is neater.

Secondly, we should lower the percentage from 18 to 10. 

Furthermore, I agree that we recast the words “Government has sufficient liquidity to meet its obligations on time in line with parliamentary appropriation for the financial year”. Let us add that “Bank of Uganda shall take all necessary measures to recover the money from the domestic account of URA collection account automatically before the end of the year” so that we are comfortable.

Ten per cent in this case, for example, will give us Shs 1.3 trillion. Since we need this advance for the activities which we have budgeted within the financial year, when URA brings the money, Bank of Uganda recovers the money so that Bank of Uganda accounts are not in negatives. We should not have Bank of Uganda impaired again. This gives us comfort and neatness.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, hon. Ekanya. Madam Chairperson, maybe the attorneys-general from both sides can help me. We are amending Section 36(b) because it is related to Section 5. We are talking about Parliament giving Government an authority to exempt this. 

I think by saying monetary policy or treasury operations, it does not mix it. They are separate. It does not mean that when you say a monetary policy or treasury operations you are mixing them. It is true that they are in the same sub-section but they are separate. I have got to go with Clause 5 because it gives Parliament authority to exempt these two for purposes that we have stated.

In terms of moving forward, I think the other amendments made by hon. Ekanya are acceptable to us. However, we must reconcile this one. I reject the first one with humility, but I accept the second and the third.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed by the chairperson and hon. Ekanya.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I propose that we delete Clause 8 of the Bill and amend Section 82 of the Principal Act by substituting for 82(1)(b)(4) the following:

“The bank shall not guarantee a payment to any person on behalf of Government or make an advance to Government or to any other person on behalf of Government except as required under Section 36 of the Public Finance Management Act.” 

This is to reconcile Section 36 and Section 82 as we have agreed. We are deleting what we had in the Bill and introducing a new clause. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I do not think we have to delete (b); we should not delete it. The only thing we can do is to bring the exceptions here. Section 82(1)(b)(4) says “The bank shall not guarantee payment to any person on behalf of Government or make an advance to Government or to any person on behalf of Government without prior approval of Parliament”. 

That should stay, because you have already put it up there; it is covered. You do not need to go to Section 82 to amend it. Section 82 is talking about other loans. For advances which we have now fought, we have covered them here. 

Therefore, you do not need to go there. Section 36 was saying you are not supposed to guarantee or make any payment on behalf of Bank of Uganda. We have made it here in Section 36 – monetary policy; you do not have to come here, you can simply go to Bank of Uganda. You have inserted advances here; it is now covered. Otherwise, if you remove this you can pick money from anywhere.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, Clause 8 was amending the Bank of Uganda Act. I think it has to follow that once you amend Section 36 that includes treasury operations as we have said, you also have to go to the Bank of Uganda Act and amend what this one ties – borrowing to any person without prior approval of Parliament. It follows that you come to this clause in the Bank of Uganda Act. 

The other sections in the Bank of Uganda Act are still there – that the Bank may make temporary advance to the Government. The Treasury shall at the beginning do a, b, c and d and the total amount of advance is also talked about.

Therefore, when it comes to Section 4, we inserted something in the Bank of Uganda Act. Therefore, it follows that we must also amend the Bank of Uganda Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you amending Section 82? What is your amendment? 

MR BAHATI: Our amendment is on Section 4 - if you look at section 82(1)(b); then the following where they put 4 - I think there was a mistake in the way they did it. However, when you come to (b)(4), Section 82 on page 75 of the Principal Act -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Read it.

MR BAHATI: “The bank shall not guarantee a payment to any person on behalf of Government or make an advance to Government or to any person on behalf of Government without prior approval of Parliament, except as required under Section 36 of this Act.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that what you have added?

MR BAHATI: Yes - because in Section 36, we have exempted, but 82 is still closing. Therefore, we are saying you can only give exception where we have approved, and not anywhere else.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, Section 36 has a lot of items. It has budget deficits, obtaining foreign currency or lending to approved institutions. You cannot bring the whole of Section 36 there. Therefore, you have put the exceptions under 5.

MR BAHATI: No, we have put it under (b). We can say Section 36 (b) where we have clearly indicated for a monetary policy or treasury operation. That is all.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You have already taken care of it under 5: exceptions; why do you come this way then?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Under which 5, honourable minister?

MR EKANYA: Honourable minister, I need to be advised. You see, we have limited it to 10 per cent and if you are tying it to monetary and treasury operation, does it not mean that both must be within 10 per cent? I need to be educated on that. 

We may not achieve what we want. You see, we have capped our limit to 10 per cent and that is why I wanted you to delete monetary policy. We are now even tying Bank of Uganda since we are saying monetary policy or treasury operation and we have capped it to 10 percent, which is even worse. 

Therefore, leave out monetary policy and we go under (e) which I proposed.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chair, I am wondering why the Government Chief Whip is not whipping the Attorney-General to help the accountant. (Laughter) However, if we provide for (e) for treasury operations, then it follows in 36(5) which has also captured (e) for exempting it from coming to Parliament first.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, honourable members, I put the question that the clause be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

The title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chair, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Public Finance Management (Amendment) Bill, 2015” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

5.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Public Finance Management (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2015”

THE SPEAKER: The title is settled and the Bill passed. 

Honourable members, can we receive the report on the Toxic Chemicals Bill? Are your ears tired? Okay, honourable members, House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow. We must finish the Toxic Chemicals Bill and the Gaming and Lotteries Bill tomorrow.

(The House rose at 5.37 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, 12 November 2015 at 2.00p.m.)

