PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTTHIRD SESSION - SECOND MEETINGTHURSDAY , 23 NOVEMBER 2023PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA11070MINISTERIAL STATEMENTThursday, 23 November 2023It beats my understanding that leaders, instead of using the power given to them by their people, use the power given by somebody called a “principal” because he is heading a political party. There is collective responsibility, fine, but I see this – Madam Speaker, for some of our brothers and sisters to miss sittings for the sixth day – as denying their voters rights and effective representation. Therefore, I agree with you that this being the sixth sitting, it sounds a noise bell to our colleagues and it will be a big lesson to other leaders who are to come, that when you are elected as a person, you must respect the authority that the people have given to you.It makes me to have a second mind of believing in the individual merit as a person. This is because where it has reached, people have stopped listening to the people who voted for them and they are listening to individuals, which now brings the question: Who is whose boss? I believe the people of Busia Municipality are my bosses because they brought me to the august House to talk for them, although I pay allegiance to my party. Where it has reached, we should let our colleagues know that politics of activism cannot work in the African setting and it will not make us enjoy multiparty democracy which we ushered through our Constitution.Therefore, Madam Speaker, you are spot on. Thank you.IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentTHIRD SESSION - 16TH SITTING - SECOND MEETINGParliament met at 1.59 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I welcome you to this session on a Thursday. As we promised, we will always have Thursdays as the Members’ day. We do not have much, but we will reserve more time for Members. I would like to make a kind reminder that today is the sixth sitting. It is a polite reminder to whoever. Thank you.What are you rising on? On the reminder? (Laughter)2.02MR GEOFFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, once again, the people of Busia Municipality are so proud of you for attaining the title of “Nalongo” . On your communication, politics in Africa has changed from multiparty democracy to activism – and this is a very big problem that we are witnessing in Uganda and other African countries. 11071THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 NOVEMBER 20232.05MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bukimbiri County, Kisoro):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Of late, this Parliament, as an institution, has been in the media. What is there is now becoming an issue of public concern as to why it cannot be resolved. The cause of action, why our comrades are out of Parliament, did not originate from this House and neither did it originate from the decision of the presiding officer. Some of these actions originate from as far back as 2020. In 2020, none of us was in this House and there are sufficient laws in this country, where when someone is aggrieved, he either reports it to police or goes to court. In case he is aggrieved by the decisions of this House, he can follow it within the rules. In that respect, can we appeal to our colleagues, in the event that the cause of action was not by this House, to take appropriate measures by reporting the matters where they are supposed to report them? (Applause)In case they think they cannot be listened to there, and they are Members of Parliament who can be listened to here, they should formally put it to the presiding officer. The presiding officer will use Article 90 of the Constitution and process this business through a committee of Parliament. This Parliament takes decisions on the issues that are processed through the committees. This Parliament cannot originate business and take decisions without it being processed. Some of these people who are supposed to appear there cannot come to the Chamber. So, I appeal through some Members who can access them that let them formally put their case so that their case can be put through the appropriate channel – through Article 90. In case they do not trust all of these committees of Parliament, under our Rule 190, the Speaker has power to put up a select committee and this select committee is selected when both sides agree. Both the Government side and the other side will propose names so that these matters can be resolved. Some of the people in the subject matter are not Members of Parliament. So, I appeal to you, Madam Speaker, that we take that direction and we get out of the media because neither you nor Members of Parliament were a cause of action. I thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, that has already been said. The cause of action was not by this House. The decision was not by the Speaker. We inherited problems way back from Mukura – the people who were burnt in Mukura. Are Arrow Boys also going to start on that?We inherited this; so, we should not be held - I should not be held liable. It happened when I was not there. It did not happen in this House, and it is only in this House that we can be able to resolve such issues when we are all here.We will all stand for the good of the people outside there. If we choose to address some of these issues in the boardrooms, then, the public will judge us. I am leaving it to the public to judge. As the honourable member said, if it is something that we should handle, then, we can even go for a select committee and have a report presented to this House. If the Government is failing to respond – and to the best of my knowledge, the Government has not failed to respond. However, the Government cannot respond to people who are not there. The ones who asked for the report are not in the House. Let them come back to the House and we give the report. Government, can I hear from you?2.09THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua):  Madam Speaker, for all intents and purposes, the Government had indicated on this Floor - not once and not twice 11072MINISTERIAL STATEMENT- that it had meetings chaired by the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker many times on the same subject matter. The subject matter on human rights was debated through a ministerial statement on the Floor of Parliament. The other day, when the Deputy Speaker was chairing, he enumerated the times. The same subject matter on human rights was investigated by the Committee on Human Rights and the Uganda Human Rights Commission. Some of the suspects have been charged in courts of law as indicated here. To the best of our understanding, as Government, we have done our best. We respect the decree of the presiding officer then to say the Government was given 30 days, but to the best of our recollection, we have explained. Madam Speaker, this is the same list that was submitted to the Uganda Human Rights Commission and the Committee on Human Rights that reported on the Floor. It is the same list that has been investigated by the different government agencies. For how long will this Parliament continue with this legislative activism? (Applause)As Government, we committed here – I remember Gen. David Muhoozi stated in very clear terms that because the presiding officer gave us 30 days – THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Amero, sit down. I wanted the House to know you are around.MR OBUA:  Madam Speaker, we support you as the presiding officer to use all the mechanisms within the Rules of Procedure to compel our honourable colleagues to come back to the House. You can evoke certain provisions because the truth is that they left this House on their own. Now, they want to be aided by us to bring them back that we first explain here.  (Interjections) We  shall politely decline. There is time for everything. Even under the law, there is what we call the Limitation Act; everything has a limit. How long are they going to stretch us? I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. 2.12MR ISAAC OTIMGIW (NRM, Padyere County, Nebbi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to congratulate you for the blessings and wish you a happy birthday - I understand it is your birthday today; I saw it somewhere on a platform. Happy birthday day, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. I would like to also wish a happy birthday to Hon. Achayo, Hon. Caroline Kamusiime, and my big sister, the Rt Hon. Speaker of the National Assembly of Tanzania, Dr Tulia. Thank you. (Applause)MR OTIMGIW : Thank you. May you live to blow as many candles as possible. Madam Speaker, I thank you for the stand you have taken on this matter. It is sad that for the last month, our honourable colleagues have tried to tarnish the name of this House and drag it in the mud. We cannot allow this place to turn into a theatre; Parliament is a place of serious business. They have tried to drag us all in the mud but I am happy that you have taken a stand on this matter. I thank the Government Chief Whip for the strong statement on this matter. It is true, Madam Speaker, we are behind you to take any possible procedural matter in order to make sure that our honourable colleagues are compelled to come back to the House.Yesterday, Madam Speaker, you made a strong statement. We cannot have honourable colleagues who abandoned us here choose to participate in the areas that they benefit from; that cannot happen. They want to keep travelling abroad, attending committees and also to go for the East African Community Games. We beg that you stand your ground on that and we are behind you. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Ogwang, Hon. Ebwalu and my brother from the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC).COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [Mr Obua]11073THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 NOVEMBER 20232.14THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang):  Madam Speaker, on behalf of my family, happy birthday to you and the twins. I congratulate you and the people of Bukedea. I am happy that the Government Chief Whip has spoken firmly here, but I would like to remind you of some of us who have joined Parliament. When I joined the Ninth Parliament, I found a strong foundation by the Hon. Obua’s then. As of now, I do not know whether we interest ourselves in listening to what the population talks about the institution of Parliament. It is true today, in this Parliament, we have the nearest big building here which has almost reached Parliament. Madam Speaker, forgive me for mentioning here that if you do not stand firm, this institution is becoming like the national theatre. Why am I saying so? We used to admire legislators and the debates of this institution when we were young people, and it is the reason I endeavoured to be here irrespective of where I come from. Fundamentally today, are we doing what the people of Uganda sent us to do here? THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, we are doing it.MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, there is a reason why I am bringing this out. Give me a minute. First, we all have to accept that there is activism at play and we cannot stop it. I would like to implore us that – I am happy that they are not in the House - (Laughter) - and it is important that we continue with our business because we are dealing with the reason we were sent to Parliament. (Applause)  With due respect, they are looking for a scapegoat to return. I would like to appeal to you to let them stay out because we lose nothing. We will continue to transact business on behalf of this country. Honourable colleagues, I would like to say this; you were voted to be here by your own people, including those who are out. I call out their constituents - If you want to solve a problem, can you solve it when you are out there? [Honourable Members: “No.” ] Come here and solve the problem, but you have chosen to be out. I implore my brother, Hon. Mpuuga - I have a lot of respect for you. I do not know where you have got that activism from because you are a diplomat. If it is pressure, live up to who you are. Thank you. (Applause)THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, we all need to be in the House. If our colleagues are able to come back to the House the same way they left, let them come back. This House belongs to them. Nobody chased them. When they come back to the House, they will get all that they need. The team out there is not just fighting for a few people but a bigger population and they are doing a good job. However, they must do a good job from inside because they need support from the whole House. You may find that the person who was kidnapped might not have been from NUP; maybe he is a relative to one of these NRM Members. Let us not take this as a party issue.2.18MR JONATHAN EBWALU (Independent, Soroti West Division, Soroti):  Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you; you have held this Parliament together from day one. It is the responsibility of this institution to hold the Executive accountable. If we do not hold them accountable, who else will do it? I see the debate in this Parliament degenerating between the Opposition and NRM, which should not be the case. The people who the Opposition Members say have been killed and abducted are our children, relatives, aunties and friends. Therefore, when we are handling these matters here, we must be very sensitive to the feelings of this whole Parliament and the country. 11074MINISTERIAL STATEMENTFinally, Madam Speaker, I would like to request you – the appeal I heard from the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament was that Government must commit to bringing a comprehensive list here. Madam Speaker, you have the power - and you have been doing that before. You have helped this country to hold the Executive accountable and it is still within your power. I appeal to you, as I go back to my seat, that you give the Executive another chance to bring a comprehensive list of the demands raised by the Leader of the Opposition, so that this matter can be put to rest. When I hear my colleagues say that you compelled the Opposition to come back to the House, that is not correct; we do not need to compel our colleagues to come to the House. We need to negotiate and dialogue, so that we bring this list together in the House and discuss it. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Ebwalu, for us to hold Government accountable, we do it from the House, not in the corridors. Do not reduce me into going to the corridors. (Applause)  I chair the House; I do not chair the corridors. The Members were elected to come to this House. MR EBWALU:  Most obliged. 2.21MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The other day when my Woman Member of Parliament, Hon. Jane Pacuto Avur, spoke on behalf of the Jonam people - the Pakwach people - I could not say any more. I only want to add that a birthday after giving birth is double sweetness. (Applause)  I have learnt something today which I am not sure if I should continue to hold that way; that when people walk out and stay away from Parliament, then it can be termed as political activism; I have learnt it from here. I am saying this because – you remember in FDC we used to have activism. I was in the group of Gen. Muntu that cherished building the party from the grassroots, not talking too much about activism and claiming our win, which we have not claimed up to now. (Laughter) Whichever way people want to describe what has happened, I leave it there. Secondly, I know you have made some pronouncements and I want to go and support my son-in-law, Minister Ogwang. Why should we continue to talk about it? Why don’t we just continue with what we have to do? (Applause) This is because – THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. When an elder says so, you move on. Next item. (Applause)Honourable members in the VIP gallery this afternoon we have a delegation of senators and the staff of the Standing Committee on Labour and Social Welfare from the Senate of Kenya. They include: 1. Senator Julius Murgor - Chairperson of the committee; 2. Senator Faki Mohammed - Member of the committee; 3. Senator Miraj Abdallah - Member of the committee; 4. Ms Mwanate Shaban - Senior Clerk Assistant; and5. Ms Gertrude - First Clerk Assistant. You are most welcome to the Parliament of Uganda. While here, feel at home. This is your sister Parliament. Kenya and Uganda are one and the same. Karibu sana . Join me in welcoming them. (Applause)  Thank you. LAYING OF PAPERSTHE ANNUAL PERFORMANCE REPORT OF THE FINANCE INTELLIGENCE AUTHORITY FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, Section 36(2) of the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2013 requires the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to table the annual performance report for the Financial Intelligence Authority to Parliament within one COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [Mr Ebwalu]11075THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 NOVEMBER 2023month of its submission by the board of the Financial Intelligence Authority. I now invite the minister to table the report.2.25THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua):  Madam Speaker, for the record, I am holding the fort for the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who got delayed in a meeting, but will be joining us. Also, before I lay, permit me, on behalf of the Leader of Government Business in Parliament - who is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister - to convey, on behalf of Government, a very happy birthday to you, Madam Speaker. Government salutes you and wishes you many more candles to be blown in the future. (Applause)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you.MR OBUA:  I now lay on Table the annual performance report of the Finance Intelligence Authority for the Financial Year 2022/2023. On behalf of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I beg to lay. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. The report is referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for further assessment. MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON UGANDA’S CHAIRMANSHIP OF THE NON-ALIGNED MOVEMENT (NAM) AND THE GROUP OF 77 AND CHINA AND HOSTING OF THE 19TH NON-ALIGNED MOVEMENT AND THIRD SOUTH-SOUTH SUMMITTHE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, as you may be aware, Uganda will be hosting the 19th Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) on 15-20 January 2024. The Minister of Foreign Affairs will be providing us with information on NAM. When that information is given to you, you can use it very well. However, at the same time, Parliament will also be hosting. I will also wait to hear from Hon. Katuntu after the minister has given his report. 2.28THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr John Mulimba):  Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. I join my colleagues who spoke earlier to wish you a pleasant birthday. Permit me to take this opportunity to present an information paper to the House in respect of NAM and Uganda’s chairpersonship of NAM. I am pleased to address this august House on the preparations for the following important events and responsibilities: 1. Hosting the 19th Summit of NAM Heads of State and Government; 2. Hosting the Third South Summit; 3. Uganda’s chairmanship of Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) for the period 2024-2027, and 4. Uganda’s chairmanship of the Group of 77 and China in 2024.As honourable members may be aware, Objective XXVIII of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy of the 1995 Constitution (amended), of the Republic of Uganda, provides for Uganda’s foreign policy to focus among other things, on; i) Promotion of the national interests of Uganda; ii) Peaceful coexistence and non-alignment; and iii) Active participation in international and regional organisations that stand for peace, well-being and progress of humanity. Brief background of NAM and Group of 77 and China Madam Speaker, NAM was founded in 1961 at the First Summit held in Belgrade, Yugoslavia, out of the desire to avoid polarisation of countries of the developing world during the Cold War era, between pro-Soviet Communist countries of the Warsaw Pact, and the pro-11076MINISTERIAL STATEMENTAmerican capitalist countries belonging to NATO. It was also intended to further promote the decolonisation of the Asian and African countries which were fighting for their independence. Currently, NAM is a forum of 120 member states. In addition, there are 18 observer countries and 10 observer organisations. Details of the member states and observers are attached in the Annex I. Since its founding, the work of NAM has been guided by the following 10 Bandung Principles: i. Respect for fundamental human rights and for the purposes of principles of the Charter of the United Nations.ii. Respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity of all nations. iii. Recognition of the equality of all races and equality of all nations, large or small. iv. Abstention from intervention or interference in the internal affairs of another country. v. Respect for the right of each nation to defend itself, singly or collectively, in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations. vi. Abstention from the use of the arrangement of collective defence to serve the particular interests of any of the big powers, and abstention by any country from exerting pressures on the other country. vii. Refraining from actions or threats of aggression or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any country. viii. Settlement of all international disputes by peaceful means, such as negotiation, conciliation, arbitration, or judicial settlement, as well as other peaceful means of the party’s own choice in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations.ix. Promotion of mutual interest and cooperation. x. Respect for justice and international obligations. Madam Speaker, with regard to the Group of 77 and China, the group is a loose alliance of developing countries established on 15 June 1964. It derives its name from the 77 original signatories to the “ Joint Declaration of the Seventy-Seven Countries ,” issued at the end of the First Session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in Geneva. Although membership of the group has expanded to 134, the original name has been retained due to its historic significance. I have enclosed the matrix showing the spread of NAM and G-77 countries, and those with dual membership in Annex II. The primary goals of the group include: i. Maintaining the independence and sovereignty of all developing countries,ii. Defending the economic interests of its members through the promotion of equal standing with developed countries in the global marketplace, iii. Establishing a united front for negotiation on issues of common concern to the Greater South and the UN, and iv. Strengthening the ties between member countries. Uganda will host the 19th Summit of NAM, Heads of State and Government, and the Third South Summit, back-to-back. I hasten to say, that it is going to be the first time for a single country to host the two summits back-to-back. (Applause)The NAM summit is scheduled to take place between 15 and 20 January 2024, divided into three segments, namely; [Mr Mulimba]11077THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 NOVEMBER 2023i. 15 - 16 January 2024 - Senior Officials, ii. 17 – 18 January 2024 - Ministers of Foreign Affairs, and iii. 19 - 20 January 2024 - Heads of State and Government. Immediately after the NAM Summit, the Third South Summit will take place between 21 and 23 January 2024. As honourable members may recall, the Third South Summit had been scheduled to take place in April 2020 but was postponed due to the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. This summit is organised under the framework of Group of 77 and China (G-77 plus China). Madam Speaker, enhanced preparation for the successful holding of the summits has been ongoing since February 2023. Substantive progress has been made in this regard, and we are now in the implementation phase. I have enclosed a matrix highlighting the major achievements, as Annex III. However, without going into the details already contained in the matrix, I wish to take you through some of the salient issues. Madam Speaker, I hope I will just skip these because they are clearly laid down, for purposes of saving time. We have the theme and the vision statement. We have the convention centre. Let me just speak briefly about the convention centre. Construction of the convention centre at Munyonyo is ongoing and is expected to be ready for the summits. Progress has been made on the structural and architectural works, as well as electrical and mechanical works. Due to prior project delays, the contractor has introduced catch-up plans and measures to redeem the lost project time, including working longer hours and working in shifts - day and night. Transport Due to limited resources, the Government has not spent funds on the purchase of vehicles. Instead, the entire fleet of Government vehicles will be mobilised for the summits, including vehicles used by entitled officers across MDAs. So far, the Ministry of Works and Transport has inspected a total of 2,592 vehicles, and 1,543 are in good condition. These will be further inspected at the end of December and early January. The Government fleet will be supplemented by vehicles donated by bilateral partners, that is China and India. In addition to the 70 vehicles donated by China in 2020, another 70 have been donated and have arrived in the country. (Applause)  This time, however, the Government was required to purchase only 30 vehicles as part of the cooperation arrangement. The Government of India has donated 10 executive buses and five ambulances. (Applause)  These are expected in the country by the end of 2023. Road infrastructure works by Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) and Uganda National Road Authority (UNRA) THE SPEAKER: On the vehicles, all the ministers are going to hand over all the vehicles - all Government vehicles. MR MULIMBA: Madam Speaker, I did mention that “all MDAs” - and MDA stands for ministries, departments and agencies. The ministries will lead the way. THE SPEAKER: That is very good. MR MULIMBA: Including mine, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: I will also give mine. (Applause) MR MULIMBA: Oh, very good. KCCA is currently undertaking improvement and maintenance of strategic roads in and around Kampala and the summit venue, including street lighting and drainage. Details are also outlined in the matrix attached. 11078MINISTERIAL STATEMENTUNRA is currently doing work on three major road projects, namely; Kampala Flyover Project Road - where works are substantially completed; conversion of the Kajjansi-Munyonyo Spa into an expressway, and improvements of Kampala Northern Bypass. In addition, UNRA is also working on a number of diversion roads and installing street lights. Details are contained in the matrix. Beautification by KCCA - I think we can read that one. Security and Accreditation Some substantive progress has been made in this regard. Specific progress has been made on: a) deployment of foundation security; b) training of protection teams and motorcade drivers; c) designing of the accreditation module for delegates to register online. Details are also in the matrix. ICT, Media and PublicityMadam Speaker, I request not to read that; Members can read it.Conferencing, protocol and migration a) Confirmations have started coming in for the two summits. So far, 18 confirmations have been received, including member States and observers. The agendas and programmes for the summits are still under review.b) In addition to Government efforts, we are also collaborating with partners to support arrangements for the summits. For example, the UN Regional Service Centre Entebbe has offered standby parking spaces for VVIPs, in addition to emergency firefighting support within Entebbe if required, as well as staff with foreign language skills to assist at the airport.c) Protocol liaison officers have been identified from a number of MDAs, including Parliament. They have undergone the first phase of training.d) The immigration department has enhanced its capacity at the airport to handle the expected high number of delegates.e) Health and medical servicesf) A sufficient number of ambulances and healthcare workers have been identified for the summits. Hospitals for possible use during the summits have too been identified.g) Other important issues of priority include emergency medical evacuation services, as well as COVID-19 screening plan.Airporta) The immediate area of concern has been completion of construction works at the main terminal. However, work has progressed substantially, and will be completed before the summits.b) Other issues of concern under review for improvement relate to: the small size of arrivals hall; limited number of washrooms in the arrival hall; congestion at the baggage claim and customs screening areas, especially during peak hours.Spouses’ programmeMadam Speaker, allow me to skip that.Accommodation i) A total of 59 hotels have been visited with a total of 6,248 rooms around Kampala and Entebbe. So far, grading by UTB for the first batch of 32 hotels has been completed. Others will be graded after another follow-up visit this month.ii) Government will provide limited accommodation courtesies (1+3) for [Mr Mulimba]11079THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 NOVEMBER 2023Heads of State and Government and heads of delegations at selected hotels.Business forum, trade exhibition and tourismi) A business forum and exhibition on the margins of the two summits to promote trade, investments and tourism in Uganda, is being organised with the involvement of private sector and support from partners. It is planned to take place between 15 and 18 at Serena Hotel, Kampala.ii) Discussions are also underway with key stakeholders on how to leverage Uganda’s tourism during the summits.Chairmanship of NAM and Group of 77 and ChinaMadam Speaker, immediately after the summits, Uganda will assume the chairmanship of NAM for the period 2024-2027. That is a three-years’ period as well as the Group of 77 plus China for one year starting 2024.  (Applause)Unlike other organisations, NAM has no formal organisational structure, constitution nor permanent secretariat. The activities of the movement are mainly coordinated by the permanent representatives in New York, under what is called Coordination Bureau led by the permanent representative of the country holding the chairmanship. Other activities are carried out by five missions where NAM has chapters, namely; Geneva, Paris, Vienna, Nairobi and Addis Ababa.In addition, the country chairing NAM constitutes a secretariat to coordinate the work of the missions at the six NAM Chapters during the chairmanship. This has been set up at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.Uganda’s chairmanship of NAM will be anchored on the universal principles of intentional relations as enshrined in the United Nations Charter, the founding Bandung Principles of the NAM, as well as African Union Agenda 2063, and the promotion of Uganda’s foreign policy objectives. In relation to the vision already outlined above, Uganda will seek, among other things, to:i. Maintain cohesiveness among NAM member states on issues of common interest and promoting common positions within multilateral fora.ii. Build on the on-going efforts by NAM to pay close attention to issues of socio-economic development and the challenges hindering the prosperity of its member states.iii. Call on NAM members to identify some of the practical bottlenecks that impede economic progress, despite the natural endowments and wealth possessed by a number of NAM members.iv. Strengthen multilateral economic diplomacy to ensure that the rules, programmes and activities developed are favourable and aligned to NAM and Uganda’s development needs.Over the three years of NAM chairmanship, Uganda will be making statements and leading negotiations on behalf of the movement on a number of important issues. The ministry will be charged with guiding these processes, in consultation with H.E the President and other key stakeholders, as may be appropriate.We shall also be required to attend a series of NAM meetings, which will not be optional, given the chairmanship. In this regard, Cabinet directed that the ministry’s budget for travel abroad should be reinstated and enhanced through the chairmanship. Some of these meetings include:a) Meeting of Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the coordination Bureau (attended by all NAM Member States).b) The mid-term meeting of Ministers of Foreign Affairs, held 18 months after taking over the chairmanship, with the responsibility to review the mid-term 11080MINISTERIAL STATEMENTstatus of implementation of the summit decisions;c) Annual meetings of Ministers of Foreign Affairs on the margins of the high level segment of the United Nations General Assembly; andd) Annual meetings of the Ministerial Committee on Palestine, on the margins of the high level segment of the United Nations General Assembly. The country chairing NAM automatically also assumes the chairmanship of the Ministerial Committee on Palestine.Madam Speaker, as outlined above, Uganda’s chairmanship of the Group of 77 and China will be for one year only (2024). The activities of the group during the chairmanship are also carried out mostly by Permanent Representatives in New York and other locations where there are G77 and China Chapters such as Geneva.Expected outcomesUganda’s chairmanship of NAM, G77 and China, and hosting of two summits is expected to contribute to the following outcomes:a) Promotion of Uganda’s national interests through enhanced positive image of the country and the potential economic and commercial benefits that will accrue over the medium to long term.b) Promotion of the aspirations and objectives of Uganda’s foreign policy, as enshrined in the 1995 Constitution (as amended), through projection of Uganda’s diplomacy at global level.c) Provide a platform to market Uganda’s unique tourism and investments opportunities to a large and wider community of international actors. The two developed websites for NAM and G77 plus China with menu “about Uganda” contains information related to investment opportunities and tourism.d) Contribute to the country’s policy and drive to attract meetings, international conferences and exhibitions.e) Provide a platform for direct business-to-business interaction and partnerships through the proposed business forum and summits.FundingMadam Speaker, at its meeting held on 27 March 2023, Cabinet approved a budget for the organisation of the two summits amounting to Shs 53.594 billion.The budget requirements for mandatory activities during the three- year chairmanship are to be catered for separately through the ministry’s annual budget, following Cabinet’s decision that I have outlined above.Finally, I wish to thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity and honourable colleagues, for listening to me.Thank you. (Applause)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable Minister of Foreign Affairs. I remember some of us were asking why they sent money for NAM. Now, you know and will appreciate it.Therefore, even when we get a supplementary budget asking for money for NAM, you know that there is an activity. This information is basically informative. You need to know when visitors are coming to your country. So, thank you, honourable minister.From the Parliament side, Hon. Katuntu can give information on my behalf. Hon. Katuntu used to be my chairman in COSASE.2.49MR ABDU KATUNTU (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri ): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of my committee and, indeed, on my own behalf, I congratulate you upon reaching the age you have. It is not okay to mention people’s ages, especially if [Mr Mulimba]11081THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 NOVEMBER 2023they are ladies. (Laughter)  May the almighty Allah bless you with more years to come. (Applause)I would like to take it up from where Hon. Mulimba ended. Uganda is still continuing to enjoy the confidence of the international community and family. The Parliament of Uganda is going to host the Commonwealth Speakers and Presiding Officers Conference from the 3rd to the 6th of January. So far, 35 countries –THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, it seems you are not happy to receive the Speakers. (Laughter)MR KATUNTU:  Madam Speaker, as you recall, in 2007, we did host CHOGM. We also hosted the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA). Now, we are going to host the Speakers and Presiding Officers of the entire Commonwealth. It is equally a big conference like NAM and G-77. Preparations are underway and I happen to be the chairperson of the coordinating committee. Madam Speaker, I would like, on behalf of my committee, to request that you give us some space on the Order Paper on Tuesday to give colleagues a detailed programme such that we are on the same page. However, like I said, this is about Parliament; it is about Uganda. One country which has already confirmed, Malaysia, has requested that they bring over 50 delegates. (Applause) . Just one country!So, the benefits that Hon. Mulimba talked about have actually started flowing in, in terms of tourism, income by our entrepreneurs and, indeed, marketing our country. I do not want to pre-empt the statement. Madam Speaker, give us some time on Tuesday and we shall give a detailed budget, including the responsibility of colleagues who should be able to participate in the final preparation. I thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, Hon. Abdu Katuntu. Thank you for representing us on that committee. Next Item.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF LAND OWNED BY GOVERNMENT INSTITUTIONS ACROSS THE COUNTRYTHE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister of lands? - Government Chief Whip, are you sure you can be able to answer all the issues on land? 2.53THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua): Madam Speaker – maybe let me, first, put it on record that the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development wrote to the Clerk to Parliament, in a letter dated 21 November 2023, stating that the honourable minister for lands is currently in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, officiating at the African Land Conference, 2023. Coincidentally, the ministers of state are also unable. However, the statement, including the attachment, is available. You may wish to guide whether we skip the item or the item be presented –THE SPEAKER:  Which ministers of state? We have a minister - one is for… Hon. Obiga Kania is the only minister of state this House knows. MR OBUA:  This letter, Madam Speaker, states that the –THE SPEAKER:  Honourable Government Chief Whip, I just want to request that we have Hon. Nabakooba in the House to answer the questions on land. We can reschedule it to next week. MR OBUA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Most obliged.THE SPEAKER: We will also need a statement from the minister for gender on the same. Honourable minister, do you have your statement on youth, the disabled and women’s 11082MINISTERIAL STATEMENTland. No, we are still finalising on the land. We will need a statement from both ministers, the one of gender and the one of lands. MR OBUA:  Madam Speaker, I commit to ensuring that the minister comes to Parliament. At the moment, she is in Addis Ababa attending a conference on behalf of the Government. For the ministry for gender, I undertook – I wrote and also copied you in because Parliament wanted the status of all land belonging to persons with disability. THE SPEAKER:  Then the youth – the scouts? MR OBUA: That day, Madam Speaker, the directive I undertook was only - because we were debating the statement for the celebration of International Day for Persons with Disabilities. There was only one directive which I undertook. THE SPEAKER:  I actually asked for a statement on the land for Kaazi. Kaazi is for what? MR OBUA:  Kaazi is for Uganda Scouts. THE SPEAKER:  Yes, I also asked for it. So, we need all that information, including on the Naguru land.  MS OPENDI:  Madam Speaker, I want to appreciate –(Interjection)-  yes, I am on a procedural issue. You are raising issues regarding land, but also, while attending the last AGM of the Parliamentary SACCO a week ago, we were informed about the land that had almost been forcefully taken away from the Parliamentary SACCO by the UPDF. Madam Speaker, we, as Members of Parliament, are the ones that actually sustain the funding of that SACCO. When the SACCO procures land, the land is supposed to be sold to the members. This happened some time back. I do not know whether it would not be procedurally right to also get a statement from the minister on how land in this country is acquired. I do not believe that the UPDF can just go and take over land without following the due process. Madam Speaker, while we struggle with land grabbing in this country, it should not be an institution taking away land from legislators. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that the minister - whether for defence or lands - also comes and gives us a statement on how land can be acquired by another institution from another without following the proper processes? Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. First of all, I was insisting on that issue of land because all the other bodies were raising issues that their land was being grabbed. Now, for the SACCO land, we had a meeting over that land and I am not sure that, that land has been grabbed. Can we hear from the SACCO chairperson? 2.58MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is true I am the chairperson of the Uganda Parliamentarians Savings and Credit Cooperative Society. It is true Hon. Opendi is a member of the SACCO, like many other Members. It is also true that during our Annual General Meeting (AGM), we indicated to members that the Uganda Parliamentarians SACCO had acquired land to develop a new estate, as a follow-up to the one in Bulindo. The Uganda People’s Defence Forces developed appetite and interest in our land.One of the roles of the SACCO is to make money for the members. The Government Valuer has already valued it. We have negotiated and have been given a figure that we think is profitable for the Uganda Parliamentarians SACCO. That is not the only piece of land in this country. (Applause)Our only promise – Madam Speaker, I thank you; you have been in different meetings. Now that we know a good figure, we want it cleared in the shortest time possible. The Government has promised to do so - of course with your guidance - in the shortest time possible. The shortest time possible is today or tomorrow so that we can use that money to acquire more land. Thank you very much.[The Speaker]11083THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 NOVEMBER 2023THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The shortest way possible would be for you to appropriate that money. You need to appropriate it. It is not something that –First of all, you are the ones who requested because it is near a barracks; let us be sincere with each other. I have been chairing these meetings. The UPDF is giving us good money - that is correct - but they did not get the appetite. It is you who has the appetite to get more money; so you are selling. (Laughter)  We shall appropriate that money and it will be -3.01THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua): Madam  Speaker, first of all, I thank you for the kind statement you have made in protecting the image of our national army, the Uganda People’s Defence Forces. (Applause)  We all know that the UPDF has gone through metamorphosis and as we speak, we have one of the best professional armies on the African Continent. (Applause)  Arising from the explanatory note offered by the chairperson of the SACCO, I would like to seek guidance on whether the earlier accusation by Hon. Sarah Achieng Opendi would still stand and be captured in our record because we all know that the UPDF – If there are elements within the UPDF, we should single them out, rather than the entire institution of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces. I beg to seek your guidance on whether that statement should still remain on our record, with the explanatory note. THE SPEAKER: We are in a business relationship between the UPDF and the Uganda Parliamentarians SACCO. Hon. Sarah Opendi – No, it is not him who said it. MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, I was very careful when I was making my remarks. I said, “I do not want to believe” because during the AGM –THE SPEAKER: Now that you have gotten the truth, do not believe it.MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, at the AGM, the chairperson said – (Interjections) - In the interest of moving forward, let me withdraw but the facts are clear. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Komakech?MR KOMAKECH: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you, first of all, for always speaking for the voiceless in this country. May the good Lord bless you for that trait.THE SPEAKER: Amen.MR KOMAKECH:  Madam Speaker, on that same note, you directed, guided and instructed the minister, who is also my mum, Hon. Beatrice Anwar, to come to Pader District, particularly in Aswa Ranch, and call the area Members of Parliament. You also directed the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to come to Pader. That was a blessing alone, having three ministers in Pader on that particular date and they would come up with a statement on two issues concerning Aswa Ranch on the Floor of this Parliament.Madam Speaker, I would like to inform you that we have waited from sunrise until sunset. THE SPEAKER: Including the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries? MR KOMAKECH: Yes, including the  Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries  but the minister has not come to Pader. (Laughter) People are still waiting, as “Paderians” grumble with the issue of land.Isn’t it procedurally right, Madam Speaker, that you again implore the minister to come to Pader to address the issue of Aswa Ranch?THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, Hon. Anywar, it was a simple thing - Go to the locus for fact-finding; find out what the Member is raising and report to this House. 11084MINISTERIAL STATEMENTThe Government Chief Whip was supposed to put it down in writing to you and Hon. Tumwebaze, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Agriculture minister, are we together? Did you communicate to the ministers? 3.06THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I pleasantly say, “Happy birthday”. You look like an angel.THE SPEAKER: Yes, “Blue Girl”. MS ANYWAR: I am a “Yellow Girl”. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: We used to be “Blue Girls”.MS ANYWAR: We used to be. Madam Speaker, I thank my son - and indeed, Hon. Komakech is my son – for reminding us of the directive you made. However, when you made that directive, it was realised that the intervention was at ministerial level and was given to the Third Deputy Prime Minister to handle. We started our preliminary meeting. I alerted the management of the project –THE SPEAKER: Hon. Susan Amero, can you tell us what you are laughing at? Is she looking at Hon. Ecweru? (Laughter)  Hon. Ecweru, why are you making Hon. Amero uncomfortable?MR ECWERU: No. Madam Speaker, I am sitting in the direction of her interest but it may not be me who is the direct target. I highly suspect that she must be appreciating something around this direction. (Laughter)  THE SPEAKER: When Hon. Anite was entering, Hon. Ecweru started salivating. (Laughing)MS BEATRICE ANYWAR: Madam Speaker – THE SPEAKER: Mama Mabira , please continue. MS BEATRICE ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, I wish to report that since the issue involved more than one ministry, the Third Deputy Prime Minister started handling it. We contacted the management of prisons and they are actually assembled to wait for our team to go there. However, we are still finalising with the Office of the Third Deputy Prime Minister who is supposed to lead us; the three different ministries, that is agriculture, water and environment and internal affairs. I beg to submit. We are ready to come – THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what would be hard for the three of you to go and come and make a report?MS BEATRICE ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, with that chair of yours, we - THE SPEAKER: I am directing you to go to the locus with the Ministry of Water and Environment; the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and; the Ministry of Internal Affairs and report back to this House in the next two weeks. Thank you. In the public gallery this afternoon, we have student leaders of the Guild of Council of the YMCA Comprehensive Institute from Kampala Central Division. They are represented by Hon. Shamim Malende and Hon. Muhammad Nsereko. You are most welcome. Thank you for coming. Honourable members, join me in welcoming the students. (Applause) We also have a delegation of the district councillors from Lamwo District. They are represented by Hon. Nancy Acora; she is here. You are most welcome. She is a Nakawere  and she has a baby called Anita Among. They are also represented by Hon. Anthony Okullo and then Hon. Hilary Onek. Thank you for sending us very good people. (Applause) [The Speaker]11085THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 NOVEMBER 2023MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE COMMEMORATION OF 16 DAYS OF ACTIVISM AGAINST GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE (GBV) 2023.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the 16 days of activism against Gender-Based Violence is an international campaign that commenced on the 25th of November and the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women ends on 10 December; that will be the Human Rights Day. Honourable members, I wish I was the minister to avoid - I would have sat down. This is a very important aspect in creating awareness and accountability on the steps that have been taken to eliminate gender-based violence. When we talk about gender-based violence, it is not about women alone; it also includes men. For instance, you may find Fr Onen saying that he has been tortured. Therefore, it is about men and women; it is both genders. As you are aware, gender-based violence remains an aspect in the community; it is a challenging aspect in the community and we must eliminate it. Today, we have a report from the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development and she is going to make a presentation to that effect. Honourable minister?3.13THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (GENDER AND CULTURE)  (Ms Peace Mutuuzo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving us the opportunity to present a statement on the status of gender-based violence. However, allow me to first congratulate you upon adding to our constituency, the ministry, specifically responsible for children’s affairs. Congratulations and a happy birthday. We also thank the team which came from Kenya; the Committee of Gender, Labour and Social Development, which has been benchmarking on our positive ways of managing the externalisation of labour. We have also learnt a lot from them. Madam Speaker, I wish to note that the purpose of this statement is to apprise Parliament on the commemoration of the 16 Days of Activism Campaign against Gender-Based Violence, 2023. Background to the 16 Days of Activism Campaign against Gender-Based ViolenceThe 16 Days of Activism Campaign against Gender-Based Violence is a global campaign that was inaugurated in 1991, spearheaded by the Women’s Global Leadership Institute (WGLI), a programme at Rutgers University in New Jersey, USA, which trains women in leadership based on global good practices. The campaign has since grown globally and is marked with a wide range of activities organised by various stakeholders. This year marks 32 years from the time we started mobilising and campaigning in these 16 days. In 2008, the United Nations Secretary General launched another initiative called, “UNiTE! End Violence against Women by 2030.” That reinforces the 16 Days of Activism Campaign. The UNiTE campaign calls for global action to increase awareness, galvanise advocacy efforts, share knowledge and innovative measures to address gender-based violence. The Government of Uganda, under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, joined the global campaign in 2008 and has since utilised the campaign annually as an advocacy and mobilisation strategy for raising public awareness on gender-based violence and its implications to national development, influencing behavioural change and securing high-level political and social commitments to end impunity. The campaign has served as the call-to-action to ensure that comprehensive services, including protection, medical, legal and psychosocial services are available to survivors of gender-based violence. 11086MINISTERIAL STATEMENTThe campaign also contributes to the efforts to deliver on the international, regional and national commitments on gender equality and women empowerment, which include the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, Goal 5 specifically on gender equality, Uganda Vision 2040 and the National Development Plan III, among others. The 16 Days of Activism Campaign commenced on the 25th of November, which is the International Day for Elimination of Violence against Women, with a national launch which flags off various activities at national and district level in line with the national theme, and ends on the 10th of December, which is the Human Rights Day. Since 2008, Uganda has been engaged in this campaign, and the following impacts have been realised;i. Increased public awareness on gender-based violence as a human right, public health, economic and social issue at family, community and national level.ii.   Increased reporting of cases of gender-based violence from 39.5 per cent in 2013 to 70 per cent in 2021. 43 per cent of these survivors were seeking help to end gender-based violence. This information is sourced from the National Survey on Violence Against Women and Girls, 2021 (UBOS). This has been attributed to the innovative approaches the Ministry of Gender, Labour, and Social Development has undertaken to roll out a toll-free line Sauti  116, “Safe Pal” app, and a robust referral pathway for violence against children and gender-based violence. iii. Increased access to quality services by survivors, and victims of gender-based violence through the current 21 gender-based violence shelters, with well-coordinated and integrated services. These include temporary accommodation, psychosocial support, legal aid, medical examination and treatment, resettlement and reintegration into communities. So far 46,481 survivors have sought support in the 21 gender-based violence shelters, of which 40,714 are female and 5,766 are male, and out of all those, 443 were persons with disabilities. iv.  The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has enhanced dialogue with key actors, including religious and cultural leaders, as custodians of social culture norms for transformative approaches to gender-based violence prevention and response. As a result, 16 cultural institutions have made declarations and pronouncements to combat all negative cultural norms and practices which reinforce gender-based violence in Uganda. v.  Strengthened local initiatives and networks to stakeholders to address gender-based violence. At the grassroots level, the Male Action Group, Survivor support groups, para-social workers and para-legal have been helpful in offering support to the victims of gender-based violence through making referrals, counselling and whistleblowing. vi.  Enhanced accountability by the Government and stakeholders on actions to address gender-based violence. Various institutions of Government and non-state actors are well-coordinated to deliver justice to the survivors, and victims of gender-based violence. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development coordinates well with the offices of the Director of Public Prosecution, Judiciary, and Police to ensure perpetrators are brought to book. As a result, in 2022, 14,693 sex-related crimes were reported to police. 5,461 cases were taken to court, 942 cases were not proceeded with, 8,290 cases are still under inquiry and 224 cases have secured convictions. This information is generated from the Annual Crime Police Report, 2022. Madam Speaker, this year’s global theme is; “UNiTE! Invest to Prevent and Respond to Violence against Women and Girls.” Uganda [Ms Mutuuzo]11087THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 NOVEMBER 2023has adopted this global theme as the national theme. It calls upon all UNiTE networks, civil society, and women’s rights organisations, organisations working with men and boys, the UN system, the General Equality Action Coalition, Government partners, human rights defenders, academia, private sector, associations and individuals to step up and support different prevention strategies to stop violence from occurring in the first place, as well as provide appropriate response and services to the reported cases of violence. This year’s campaign theme is also aligned to the 2024 priority theme of the Commission on the Status of Women, which is focused on accelerating the achievements of gender equality and empowerment of all women and girls by addressing poverty and strengthening institutions and financing with gender perspective. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is coordinating organisations of the national launch and bringing together all stakeholders, including Government, ministries and departments, development partners, civil society organisations, private sector, religious and traditional institutions, in planning the 16 Days of Activism Campaign against gender-based violence across the country. There are emerging causes of gender-based violence in the modern error. Madam Speaker, while the Government, all stakeholders and all citizens have been addressing and focusing on the traditional ways and practices of violence, of late with modernity, the new and emerging ways of gender-based violence are highlighted here as follows;i. Child neglect and abandonment has increased emotional violence among children and women. About 1,791 cases, which accounts for 51.6 per cent male and 45 per cent female, reported on Child Toll-Free Line, Sauti , which is being managed by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and as you can see, more males than females have faced this neglect from parents.ii. Cyber harassment, which includes terrifying, intimidating, humiliating, threatening, harassment and stalking women specifically. A separate poll that was conducted in August 2019 by the United Nations reports reveals that about 4,054 aged between 15 to 24 years old across the country said they have been victims of violence cyber bullying and those that reported specifically were females. This has increased emotional violence, mental health, depression and suicide cases. iii. Refugee influx and urban refugees. Adults and young women reported that domestic violence is present in refugee camps or refugee households and is highlighted by livelihood challenges and economic pressures. This has increased tension in the households’ psychosocial trauma that can translate into aggression towards family members and as a consequence, young girls between the ages of 13 and 14 resort to sex activities to fend for themselves. iv. The poor parenting patterns among the elite class, including ourselves. Madam Speaker, this is due to work-life balance. Parenting and children care has been substituted with work-related excuses. It is challenging today for modern parents to spare time for children. This has caused serious negligence in child upbringing, which in turn causes permanent mental torture for parents and children. Parents need to spare time off  their business schedules to nurture children into responsible citizens.v. Urbanisation: Uganda is presently experiencing fast urbanisation and transformation of its urban form in all areas of the country. Young people are selling productive land to settle in small towns without life skills to derive a sustainable livelihood. 11088MINISTERIAL STATEMENTThis has negatively impacted such families because they are failing to provide the basic necessities and partly this contributes to the high cases of child neglect, street children and sexual violence like child marriages and teenage pregnancies. Madam Speaker, of late, we even have street grandfathers. They started as street children, they had children on the streets and now they have grandchildren on the streets. Efforts to take them back to their original areas have turned futile because they are used to the environment where they get free money. vi.  Climate change. The lack of fuel and poor harvests exacerbated by climate change has increased the burden on women and girls. women often bear the primary responsibility of cooking. Therefore, the lack of energy supply and food stress offer a lot of challenges to girls and women whose responsibility is to make food and present it on the table. vii. Sugarcane growing in areas of Busoga, especially to people with small land holdings, has contributed to food shortage in the subregion. This has consequently triggered the high rate of domestic violence, child neglect, teenage pregnancies and child marriages in search of food. You will find a number of markets in the evening, which stretch up to night in those areas. Therefore, girls are not spared in the course of either transacting business that is legal or illegal businesses of sexual exchanges for money also comes in. Magnitude of Gender-Based Violence in UgandaMadam Speaker, gender-based violence is widespread in Uganda and it affects all people irrespective of their social, economic and political status. It occurs in families, communities, workplaces and institutions. The lifetime prevalence of intimate partner violence and physical violence among the ever-patterned women was 45 per cent, the highest being in Acholi Subregion with 78 per cent, and sexual violence was 36 per cent, with the highest being in Acholi Subregion and Bukedi with 61 per cent. The lifetime prevalence of physical or sexual violence or both by intimate partners stands at 56 per cent. In Uganda, about half of the women face economic violence, 47 per cent, two in every 10 women, which accounts to 23 per cent are forced to give their earnings to their partners. According to the Uganda Police Force Annual Crime Report 2022, a total of 14,693 sex-related cases were reported to police, and of which 12,580 were defilement cases. Out of 14,795 persons that were victims of sex related crimes, 12,816 were female juveniles, 33 were male juveniles, while 1,946 were female adults. A total of 18,549 people were victims of domestic violence, of whom 3,728 were male adults, 13,052 were female adults and 819 were male juveniles, while 950 were female juveniles. The 2022 Uganda Demographic and Health Survey further reveals that up to 16 per cent of women aged between 15 to 49 in the country has experienced some form of sexual violence. The report also reveals that 24 per cent of women aged between 15 to 19 are mothers or pregnant with their first child.Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that the objective of the campaign for this year will be to:i. Invite everyone as an ally in preventing violence against women through taking a strong stand like you have already expressed and I thank you for being our ally in this fight and struggle. Publicly, to report cases of violence against women and girls and to raise awareness of violence against women and girls and its implications to families, communities and overall national development. ii. To call for action for increased long-term, sustainable investment form, Government Private Sector, foundations and other donors to women’s rights organisations working to end violence against women [Ms Mutuuzo]11089THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 NOVEMBER 2023and girls. A number of NGOs, civil rights organisations, which deal with gender, closed during COVID-19 period and are now looking for help. If Parliament can put aside some of the bonanza money, I have had to support such organisations, it would be nice to give back to the community. Madam Speaker, I am told we are going to make a good deal. Therefore, if it is a good deal, there is nothing wrong with giving back to the community.iii. Advocate for workplace policies and measures that ensure women’s economic security and safety. iv. Mobilise Government, development partners, philanthropist, private sector, universities and all actors to join the Generation Equality Action Coalition on gender-based violence and make tangible policy, pragmatic and financial commitments, to accelerate transformative action to end all forms of gender-based violence against women and girls.I wish to inform the House that this year’s national launch of the 16 Days of Activism Campaign will be held on 24 November 2023, at Siriba Primary School, Bweyale Town Council, Kiryandongo District. The selection of Kiryandongo District was informed by the high number of refugees and the Internally Displaced Persons (IDP) camp which still exists and also because of the big market that operates day and night along that road in the township. Also, the highest level of teenage pregnancy exists around Kiryandongo.Madam Speaker, it is my humble appeal to you and honourable members, to participate in this campaign through various events being organised at national and district levels, as indicated in Annex 1 on the planned activities, which I would like to highlight, but that is not its limitation because everybody is called upon to join this struggle in your respective districts:1.  We have the national launch on 24 November in Kiryandongo.2.  We have newspaper supplements and publications to launch this day and the Minister of Gender, Daily  Monitor , New Vision newspapers and the Embassy of Sweden are handling that from the 24th of November to 10th of December. 3.  Launch of the Uganda COTLA Chapter Strategic Plan under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is run by the National Cultural Forum and the Cultural Institutions of Uganda. This will be on the 29th of November.4.  The social media campaign will go on throughout the period and media centre and media companies have also indicated that they will support us in that struggle. 5.  The national symposium on ending child marriage and teenage pregnancy, will be managed by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and Action Aid on the 28th of November. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable minister, for the statement. It is a straightforward statement. When you listen to what the minister is saying, it remains our responsibility to ensure that we eliminate or curb gender-based violence.When we talk about gender-based violence, the boy child has always been left out. The boy-child is as endangered as the girl child. If you do not look after the boy child, this is the boy-child who is going to become your in-law tomorrow. So, you are better off taking care of both the boy-child and the girl-child. We should not abandon the boys because they are more endangered.When you look at depression – of recent I have been seeing cases of students committing suicide. Why? You will find that behind it, there is a problem at home – there is gender-based violence. Look at the psychological trauma that these people go through. It is not an easy thing. When you get your father, Ssekikubo, fighting 11090MINISTERIAL STATEMENTwith your mother – (Laughter) – you cannot settle at school. You will be psychologically tortured.So many street children are coming out of the gender-based violence issues. The children you see in the streets there and the Butabika that you are talking about are full of victims of those issues of gender-based violence. You will find that Butabika is full of children with parents who are elite.You find that some of these children have dropped out of school. Why? It is because of gender-based violence. Nobody will be able to pay school fees. It will disorganise the family. The drug use! These children end up going to take drugs and that leads to mental torture and high crime rate.There are some streets that you cannot pass through because they have street children and they will try their best to grab – to get a survival for themselves. Why? It is because we have failed to eliminate or curb down the gender-based violence.It is our responsibility. There is what they call “Team No Sleep”. The sexual harassment of this – Hon. Anite, do you know “Team No sleep”? (Laughter)Some of these girls end up selling themselves in the streets because they have nowhere to be. They must earn a living. So, you have heard from the minister.Yes, Imat?3.41MS CECILIA  OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have moved from Imat to Atat. Before I make any comment on this presentation, I understand you have moved to your next level of age. I would like to congratulate you. I wish you were born on the 22nd of November. Some of you who are Catholics know that 22nd of November is when we celebrate St Cecilia Day. (Laughter) It would have been perfect, but all the same, you missed by just one day. We are praying to St Cecilia to send the anointing to fall on you.Madam Speaker, I have listened to the presentation of the minister. It is all about telling us the causes and all that of gender-based violence. We have been involved in this exercise every year. There is a second part of the report which has not been given to us.I would like to know from the ministry how we have improved in the fight against gender-based violence since we started this initiative. How have we improved? How have we involved, holistically, the population? Madam Speaker, if you look at the last part of the report – the activities which are coming up – these activities are targeting people who are exposed to social media, newspapers, radios and so on. However, when you talk about gender-based violence – Madam Speaker, I did not want to interrupt your conversation with my senior brother. When we talk about gender-based violence, we are aware, all of us who are representatives of our people, that the most affected are the rural women. I do not see any of these activities touching the rural women.I am anxiously waiting – Madam Speaker, you could guide the ministry – for when we can get another part of the story telling us how we have progressed. They can also tell us what activities have been designed by the Government and the local governments in addressing those strategic areas.I think it is high time that parliament got involved because we are treated to many stories and causes and so on and lamentations, but I think we want to make an impact. How can we address that disaster and change the life of that rural girl who is subjected to abuse every day?THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable minister, you need to do an impact assessment to see whether we are moving positively or negatively. Much as I agree that the affected are the rural women, the most affected are also [The Speaker]11091THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 NOVEMBER 2023the elites – these town persons. If you get a stubborn woman like Anite, you will really – (Laughter)Honourable members, domestic violence is everywhere. Actually, the rural women are even better because they are used to living that kind of life. In the town life, they can really harass these men. (Laughter)3.46MR ANDREW OJOK (NRM, Omoro County, Omoro):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me also to join the team in wishing you a happy birthday and congratulations.I have listened to the report by the minister and I thank her for the report. You have guided very well that gender-based violence is not just for the girl child. If you review the affirmative action policy that the Government has taken, you realise that over time, we are creating a very disfranchised boy child in terms of education, health care and employment.If you look at affirmative action, especially in the political arena, you find where there is a district with just women and they are all very empowered. The boy child is trying to get back to the drawing board. How do we help the boy child? Yes, it is good to help the girl child; we know they have suffered. According to our Constitution, they have been marginalised for a long time. How can we bring the boy child back on board? If you look at the suicide rates, the boy child is always among the top statistics. If you look at alcohol abuse, drug abuse suicide – basically mental health cases – the boy-child is still topping. Why is that the trend? Can we see how to reverse this and also bring us back on board?Empowering the girl-child does not mean disempowering the boy child. Can we have them both empowered to walk the journey together? (Applause) Thank you very much.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. It also brings in the mindset change.3.47MS JUDITH ACHAN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was following on Zoom  as I was coming here because we had a meeting on PWDs that delayed me and it is why I rise to speak on their behalf. I would like to thank the minister for the statement; however, I did not pick quite clearly about the gender-based violence on persons with disabilities. There are many cases of gender-based violence on both males and females – THE SPEAKER:  Clerk, she is Hon. Judith Achan and not Joyce Okenyi.MS JUDITH ACHAN:  We get many cases of violence on persons with disabilities. These are categories of people who are unable to report these incidents to the police because they do not have the means of transport or because of the type of disability they have. I would like the minister to speak on how we can help that category of people to easily access information and justice in the process of reporting cases of violation. I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER:  Let us limit the time because it is almost Prime Minister’s Time. Hon. David Lagen, then Hon. Kahonda. 3.49MR DA VID LAGEN (NRM, Agago County, Agago):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the rest of the Members to thank God for you and for the blessings in the family. I would also like to also thank the minister for the statement.It is true that the issue of gender-based violence is a serious one in the country and it is the responsibility of the different parents to take the initiative and combat the challenges that they are going through.11092MINISTERIAL STATEMENTI would like to ask the minister what they are doing as far as coming up with a comprehensive programme to deal with some of our young girls masquerading along the streets is concerned. If you go to many cities, including Kampala Capital City, you will find many young girls from families masquerading as prostitutes. It is a shame to see our daughters on the streets. What programme has the ministry put in place to combat that challenge?THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Before you say they are shaming you, you need to know why they are there and how they came there. Why don’t you try your best to ensure that they do not shame you by taking responsibility as a man and providing what the girls want?3.51MR DONONZIO KAHONDA (NRM, Ruhinda South County, Mitooma):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development for the statement. However, I expected the interventions and actions taken by the Government in the statement. This is because when you look at the activities in the 16 Days of Activism against Gender-Based Violence, they are mostly funded by the donors. Where is the Government in this?We need to strengthen the department of community development officers at the district level and the ministry as well. When you look at the funding allocated to the ministry to address all these issues – I worked in the ministry as a gender officer for UPDF but there is a gap.As a community, we need to look at parenting. We are going for holidays, but most of the parents are going to send children to relatives, strangers, and at the end of the day, there is gender-based violence. Even sending children, especially girls, to shops and relatives at night – we need to address these concerns. On the issue of access to justice, she has reported that out of 14,693 cases, 942 were not prosecuted. This is where parents of girls, especially on sexual violence – (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Absentee parents when you – Hon. Agnes Taaka?3.53MS AGNES TAAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I congratulate you and wish you a happy birthday. Last Wednesday, I was privileged to officiate one of the activities to mark the 16 Days of Activism against Gender-Based Violence in Bugiri District. I thank the minister for the report; however, the young women and girls had issues that I would like to put forward for the Government to intervene. The first is about those who have dropped out of school due to pregnancy and bearing children. When some give birth, they are chased away by their parents from home. They said that much as the Government has provided Universal Primary Education (UPE) and Universal Secondary Education (USE); some have failed to go back to school because of the fees charged in most schools almost to the level of private schools. They request the Government to intervene in that matter. The other is the – THE SPEAKER:  Do they want the Government to pay fees for them? I seek clarification.MS AGNES TAAKA: It was assumed that in Universal Primary Education –(Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER:  Switch on.MS AGNES TAAKA: …children were supposed to attend school without paying fees. However, every UPE school charges Shs 100,000 per term which is too much for them to pay. The other – THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I would like you to appreciate your Government. When you drop out of school, do not expect Government to pay fees for you because you [Mr Lagen]11093THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 NOVEMBER 2023are one of those – I was going to use a Rukiga word but – (Laughter) – who decided to drop out of school and produce children too early. The Government does not have money. You are the ones who appropriate the money; tell me if you have a vote for that. You have a vote for schools, but we cannot have a special fund. What we can do is for the ministry to arrange and have a skilling project for these girls because most of them cannot even go back to school; they have the responsibility of looking after their babies. But if you have a project for these young girls who produce early and have babies – The girl herself is a baby and then she has another baby. You need to get something that will help them look after the babies. The ministry should look at that. MS AGNES TAAKA: Madam Speaker, the issues were many and that was one of them. The other is about skilling, which you have talked about. They request that the skilling centres be distributed equally in the districts so that they can access skilling; also, so that the local women can access some skills to give them some source of income to empower them. The other is about – THE SPEAKER:  Can we have another person? Hon. Agnes Taaka, we are running out of time; it is the Prime Minister’s Time now.  3.58MS IDAH NANTABA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kayunga):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to join the rest of the colleagues who have congratulated you upon attaining that double joy. We thank God for that and we pray for more twins - (Interjections) -  Yes, she has just started on twins. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, very many cows were paid; so, I have just started. (Applause)MS NANTABA:  Amen. We have enacted laws. We have also legislated on behalf of the boy-child and girl-child. However, recently, I was challenged when I was invited to a meeting which was addressing issues of persons that are born intersex. They are born with two genitalia. They have the organs of both a woman and man – THE SPEAKER:  Actually, they call them, “hermaphrodites.” MS NANTABA:  That is another term, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  No, that is the English word. The medical word is hermaphrodite. Hon. Susan, isn’t that the word? MS NANTABA:  It is “intersex”. We interfaced with these people.  They shared with us the challenges they go through and they are immense. Even identification itself – to be identified as either a male or a female is another challenge for them. Many of them told us that they cannot even be issued with identity cards because NIRA cannot identify what gender they belong to – THE SPEAKER:  I hope the homosexuals are not using them. Let me hear the information. MS OPENDI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I call upon my colleagues, Hon. Nantaba inclusive, to note that these people have existed since time immemorial. You all know that we have the LGBTQI. The “I” applies to the intersex. We have to be very careful with what is going on now. I ask this question: Why now when we are even in court? I would like to inform this House that we held a meeting with the doctors. This is a medical condition that can actually be handled. One of the things that should be done is to ensure that they have funding because it is expensive for the parents of these children to pay for corrective surgery. Therefore, what needs to be done is that we need to appropriate funds so that the Ministry of Health – the funds can be in some specialised 11094MINISTERIAL STATEMENThospitals where these children can access the services for free. Otherwise, we are not going to have another gender; we have male and female, full stop, as created by God. That is the information that I wanted to give you.THE SPEAKER:   Thank you. MS NANTABA:  Allow me to respond to my sister’s concern, well knowing my stand and position when it comes to homosexuality and the LGBTQ agenda. It is indeed true that when the homosexuals wanted people to rally for the agenda, they co-opted the intersex persons such that they would have a big number of people to drive it to the end. However, it has been realised, by even the medical teams that she is talking about, that these people are saying, “We were wrongly included in the LGBTQI agenda because we do not belong there.” They said that they were naturally born with two genitalia, and therefore, do not belong to the homosexual agenda. I would like my sister to differentiate between the two agendas.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. MS NANTABA:  Madam Speaker, allow me drive my point home. We are neglecting and ignoring a group of people that have no home, even in our laws; even in our Constitution, they have not found a place to hang in. I am requesting that you interact with these people. I was in support of Hon. Sarah Opendi’s version. That is what I knew. That is the view I upheld before I met them but I met these people at Kampala Serena Hotel. We were there with many other Members of Parliament and we shed tears because young children were there testifying. They are born with two – they cannot even be in school. They are bullied. Even when they are arrested –(Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. MS NANTABA:  Madam Speaker, allow me, please. This is a different one. The girl-child and the boy-child has been catered for in our laws but these are people who are completely neglected. Yes, they have been there from time immemorial, but time has come for us to think about them because they are young children; they are crying – THE SPEAKER:  Can I ask you a question?MS NANTABA:  Yes, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Do they arise out of gender-based violence? MS NANTABA:  Madam Speaker, you will allow her to submit but let her allow me to finish. This was a different platform where we were specifically – THE SPEAKER:   No, there is a point of order from Hon. Cecilia. MS CECILIA OGWAL:  Madam Speaker, right now we are discussing the issue of gender-based violence. I want us to get it clear, including the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. However, the matter which is being brought by the Member holding the Floor – I have been listening – does not seem to relate to gender-based violence. MS NANTABA:  That is because I have not driven my point home.MS CECILIA OGWAL:  However – THE SPEAKER:  Doctor, can you help me with the – MS CECILIA OGWAL:  I know where she is heading to. I have attended several of those meetings. We do appreciate the challenges those people have but it has no relationship whatsoever with gender-based violence. Can that matter – maybe you can bring it to us – There is what they call “the human rights activists” who have gone overboard. They are talking about this issue. They want to bring it to us so that we begin to rethink the law we have passed. [Ms Opendi]11095THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 NOVEMBER 2023However, when we passed that law, we were very clear on what we wanted. Please, as Members of Parliament, let us defend the image of the institution of Parliament. We passed that law ourselves. The whole world is condemning us. Maybe the Minister of Foreign Affairs did not tell you; Uganda is not alone. The signing which should have taken place on – THE SPEAKER:  Which law did we pass? What was the law?MS CECILIA OGWAL:  The anti-homosexuality law.THE SPEAKER:  Did you have “I” in the law?MS CECILIA OGWAL:  No, we do not have it. We have “Q” but we do not have “I” in the law. Therefore, Madam Speaker, let us be clear to isolate the difference between the “I” and the “Q”. They have even brought other new elements but we do not want to discuss them now. Maybe, the Speaker will give us time. Is it, therefore, in order, for the honourable member to continue misleading the House; talking about homosexuality or intersex issues, when we should be dealing with gender-based violence? THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this document was more informative. The best thing that I got was on the impact assessment since we started this programme. We have looked at all the challenges that we are going through, and all the causes of gender-based violence, and we also appreciate that the marginalised gender should be both the women and the men. You find women like Hon. Susan Amero over there, who can slap a man. (Laughter) You get it? The men are suffering in silence. The boy-child should be treated the same way you treat the girl-child. As I said before, if you do not handle this boy-child well, he will marry your daughter but you do not want a traumatised in-law who is a thug and that kind of thing. Let us embrace this and make sure that we try our best to eliminate gender-based violence. I am giving these remarks because I know the Prime Minister wants to go and it is her time. You gave her the time in the Rules of Procedure that at 4 o’clock – we are sorry that we have spent your minutes. We will continue the debate after she has presented. Thank you so much. Honourable members who have matters of national importance like Hon. Jovanice; when the Prime Minister is presenting, bring out all your issues and she will answer. STATEMENT ON GOVERNMENT BUSINESS FOR THE SUCCEEDING WEEK, 28 TO 30 NOVEMBER 20234.09THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, allow me to also join colleagues in wishing you a happy birthday. I move under Rule 28 to submit the following Government business for the succeeding week, that is 28 to 30 November 2023: 1.  Statement by the Minister for the Presidency on the commemoration of the World AIDS Day.2.  The Minister of Health to present a statement on injectable HIV drugs in Uganda. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. As you make a presentation for number two – on injectable HIV drugs – there is a lot of excitement outside there. People want to do away with ARVs, and even condoms. People want to know – (Laughter) –I am talking about what is outside there. We expect that statement to be exhaustive, and it should not be saying, “We are going,” but, “We are doing it.” Thank you. Next item. 11096MINISTERIAL STATEMENTPRIME MINISTER’S TIME4.11THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Hon. Maximus Ochai, West Budama County North – he gave a long preamble which I want to read. That in the 2022/2023 Financial Year, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development issued to Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), a warrant of expenditure under Wage Recurrent Expenditure Item No. 225203, in feasibility studies and detailed engineering design of Shs 16,046,480,098. These funds were to finance, inter alia, an in-house feasibility study and a detailed engineering design for the upgrade of Tororo-Nagongera-Busolwe Road, which is approximately 44 kilometres, prioritised in the National Development Plan III and the 2021-2026 NRM Party Manifesto. According to Hon. Ochai, by 30 June 2023, UNRA had spent Shs 15,155,089,380 only. This resulted in the miscarriage of the in-house feasibility study and detailed engineering design for the upgrade of Tororo-Nagongera-Busolwe Road. His prayer is that; what steps has UNRA taken to request the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the supplementary allocation of part of the Shs 891,390,718, that they did not spend in the Financial Year 2022/2023, to conclude the in-house feasibility study and detailed engineering design for the upgrade of Tororo-Nagongera-Busolwe Road? His other concern is: What measures has the Ministry of Works and Transport put in place to address the non-responsiveness of UNRA to the upgrade of the Tororo-Nagongera-Busolwe Road? Madam Speaker, my answer is quite long but the actual answer is on page 4. I would like to assure the House that Tororo-Nagongera-Busolwe Road is part of our programmed study to be undertaken this Financial Year 2023/2024, and that Government is committed to utilising the available resources to invest in the development – THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when your Prime Minister is speaking, you do not make noise in the corridor. MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I just wanted to inform Members that the Government is committed to utilising the available resources to invest in the development of the necessary stock of infrastructure to support the socio-economic transformation of Uganda. Therefore, that road will be worked on this financial year. The feasibility study Hon. Apollo Yeri, Member of Parliament for Tororo Municipality: “Uganda Cooperative College, Tororo, is the only college which gives certificates and diplomas in Uganda in cooperatives. Formerly, it was Kigumba Cooperative College, but they have uplifted it, and it is now awarding degrees.” “Government sent Shs 600 million to Tororo Municipality early June, this year, for development works, and they could not utilise the money in such a short period when the financial year was closing. That money was returned to the Consolidated Fund.” His prayer is; will the money be remitted back to Tororo Municipality for the mentioned development purpose? Madam Speaker, the first paragraph says that all these funds have been re-voted through a supplementary budget, and have been released as part of second quarter releases this financial year. The money is already with the municipal council.Madam Speaker, I would like to save time. I am looking for where there are answers to give Members so that we can save time.Hon. Emmanuel Otaala, Member of Parliament, West Budama County South, received complaints from young mothers in PRIME MINISTER’S TIME11097THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 NOVEMBER 2023his constituency who visit health centres for antenatal care services; that they are required to make the visits along with their spouses, or provide LCI letters explaining the absence of their husbands if they are unable to go with them.That this requirement has proved to be a deterrent to young mothers without proper husbands or those who have been denied by those who impregnated them from accessing antenatal care services and is therefore, aggravating maternal mortality in the country.Prayers:1. That the Ministry of Health should visit the health facilities in West Budama County South, including Iyolwa Health Cenre III, Poyameri Health Centre III, Panyangasi Health Centre III and Fungwe Health Centre II, among others, to assess the status of antenatal care services in these facilities;2. That the Ministry of Health explains to the country what informed the adoption of such a policy; 3. That the Ministry of Health rescinds that policy with immediate effect and further guides health workers on the provision of antenatal care services to curb this anomaly;4. That the Ministry of Health works out a strategy for universal access to antenatal care services in the country.Madam Speaker, my response is that antenatal care is a critical component of safe motherhood. The Government through the Ministry of Health recommends that all pregnant mothers receive eight or more antenatal care services contacts before delivery, and each contact is given different health care packages to ensure the good health of the mother and the baby.All health facilities (health centres II, III, IV and Government hospitals) in Uganda must offer routine antenatal care services to pregnant mothers. It is emphasised but not mandatory in the national antenatal care services guidelines that spouses should accompany their pregnant women to receive antenatal care but also receive health packages for the husband such as screening for HIV/AIDS and sexually transmitted infections.It is therefore, against this background that the national antenatal care service guidelines emphasise spouses or husbands to accompany their women during antenatal care contacts.The Ministry of Health in a circular dated 4 October 2023, addressed to health managers in the regions and districts, emphasised the importance of strengthening the quality of antenatal health care as one of the ways to improve maternal and newborn health indicators.The Government of Uganda through the Ministry for Health will work with the district health teams to conduct technical support supervision in West Budama, focusing on antenatal care services to ensure that all facilities are offering quality health care.Question No. 4 came from Hon. Mary Nakato, Woman Representative, Buyende. She raised a matter concerning the construction of Kampala-Jinja Expressway to help decongest Jinja Highway that is always full of traffic jam. Her prayer is that can the Government update the House on this matter?Madam Speaker, the Kampala-Jinja Expressway is part of the national road network and is managed by the Ministry of Works and Transport through the Uganda National Roads Authority.The Government of Uganda initiated the development of the proposed Kampala-Jinja Expressway to improve the connection between Kampala and Jinja cities.The proposed project includes the construction of the 74 kilometres from Kampala to Jinja and 20 kilometres of the Kampala Southern Bypass. 11098MINISTERIAL STATEMENTThe Kampala-Jinja section will include eight lanes for the first three kilometres and six lanes for the next 17 kilometres and four lanes for the remaining 54 kilometres.The Kampala Southern Bypass will have four lanes for 20 kilometres connecting the Northern Bypass at Namboole National Stadium to Entebbe Expressway Spur at Munyonyo.The Kampala-Jinja Expressway Project is to be undertaken as a Public Private Partnership (PPP)in accordance with the PPP Act, 2015. The private partner will finance, design, construct, operate and maintain the road for 30 years. The procurement process for the right private sector partner is ongoing and is expected to be completed by the end of this financial year. Once the procurement is done, the works will commence after the developer has secured the private capital required for the construction works.The construction period is planned to take five years.In preparation for the construction works, the Government of Uganda is currently acquiring the land for the project. So far, the land required for 44 kilometres has been acquired. This includes 14 kilometres along the Southern Bypass and 30 kilometres along the Kampala-Jinja main line.The progress of the compensation has been slowed down by some challenges, for example, lack of ownership documents and contestation of ownership.By December 2024, the Government targets to have acquired the full section from Kampala to Namagunga and the whole Kampala Southern Bypass. The rest of the land from Namagunga to Jinja is planned to be acquired by December 2025.In the meantime, the Government will continue to maintain the existing Kampala-Jinja Road in a motorable condition and to ensure the smooth flow of traffic along that route.I would like to assure you and the public that the Government of Uganda is committed to ensuring that the Kampala-Jinja Expressway Project is implemented to improve efficiency of Uganda’s transport infrastructure.Hon. Henry-Maurice Kibalya, Member of Parliament, Bugabula County South. He raised a matter concerning a group of people that migrated and settled in Namwenda Subcounty dealing in moneylending business and harassing members of the community.His prayer is that: Can the Prime Minister inform him whether the Government is aware of these moneylenders in Kamuli?Madam Speaker, Kamuli is one of the districts in Busoga Subregion. It has 14 subcounties and four counties. Some of the subcounties are Namwendwa, Nawanyango, Kisozi, Bulawoli, Kisambira and Mbulamuti. The four constituencies are Bugabula North, Bugabula South, Buzaaya and Kamuli Municipality. The total population is approximately 446,000 people. The main economic activity is farming and the main crops grown are sugarcane and rice. The people need money to boost their farming activities, thus they need to get loans from moneylenders. Madam Speaker, there are 32 registered moneylenders in Kamuli District. They demand for the borrower’s national ID as part of security for the loan. Other lenders demand for household items such as chairs, fridges, etc. In case of defaulting in making payments, they grab the properties and, in some instances, illegally detain them. I have attached a list of moneylenders in Kamuli District. Madam Speaker, the district security committee embarked on a mass sensitisation to the locals to desist from using national IDs as collateral to reinforce the guidance recently given by the [Ms Nabbanja] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME11099THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 NOVEMBER 2023Ministry of Internal Affairs. The moneylending entities that indulge in the holding of borrowers’ national identity cards will also, henceforth, be dealt with as the law demands. Hon. Isaac Etuka Isaac, MP Upper MadiHe raised the matter concerning the delayed construction of Offaka, Anyiribu, Ewanga and Rigbo secondary schools in Madi-Okollo District under the Uganda Secondary Education Expansion Project. Prayer:i. Can the Prime Minister update the House on the matter? Madam Speaker, my response is that the Government of Uganda, in partnership with the World Bank, is implementing the Uganda Secondary Education Expansion Project (USEEP) in the sector of education and sports. This project will fund the construction of 116 new seed schools in the subcounties without any public school and the expansion of 61 existing schools in the refugee-hosting districts. The policy requires that districts select which subcounties should take priority in benefiting from the project and Madi-Okollo District Local Government fronted Ewanga, Rigbo and Anyiribu subcounties as the most suitable for the new construction phase and Offaka –(Laughter)-  for the expansion phase. That is it. (Laughter)For the construction to take place, the site needs to have fulfilled all the criteria required as stipulated by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in the Budget Call Circular of February 2022. These are: a land title in the name of the school; land size measuring five acres; and land-use should be restricted to institutions or schools. The ministry, on 15 August 2023, received three land titles from the proposed sites in Madi-Okollo, namely; Ewanga, Rigbo and Anyiribu, where new construction of the schools is going to take place. The fourth site in Offaka, which is to benefit under the expansion phase, has not yet presented the title to the ministry. Madam Speaker, upon receipt of the title, the ministry undertakes a series of surveys, including the following: 1.  Topographic (to ascertain how structures will be placed);2.  Geotechnical (to assess the soil characteristics to determine the structures to be built);3.  Cadastral (to confirm that the land title matches the land on the ground); and4.  Hydro-geological (to assess availability of underground water for borehole drilling). These surveys inform the preparation of site-specific bidding documents. The advert for the inviting of bids for the construction under Uganda’s Secondary Education Expansion Project is expected to run by 15 December 2023. Madam Speaker, it is adherence to this due process and the need for adequate preparation that has led to the delayed construction in Madi-Okollo. Hon. Faith Nakut, District Woman Representative, Napak DistrictShe raised the matter concerning the arresting and jailing of people by the Ministry of Works and Transport in Napak District who were found in possession of items allegedly belonging to Uganda Railway Corporation and the extortion of the victims by Uganda police. Her prayer is that I update the House.Madam Speaker, my response is that on 17 August 2023, there was a joint operation conducted by both railway police and UPDF. During the operation, nine suspects were apprehended, namely;11100MINISTERIAL STATEMENTi. Ibra Kalistaii. Charles Balaiii. Denis Akoroiv. Desani Sonkov. Abudu Wandawa Odeke vi. Francis Odongovii. John Ojaletviii. Daniel Dowan ix. Ismail WalusimbiThese suspects were found in possession of six cut pieces of rails. A case file of being in possession of stolen rail materials has been opened up vide URC Soroti SD: 19/17/08/23 and subsequently CRB: 13/2023, which was later on submitted to the Resident State Attorney (RSA) for his legal opinion. Exhibited railway materials were found in their possession. The case file was withdrawn from RSA’s office before it could be acted upon by the office of the regional CIID East Kyoga, on grounds that the OC Railway, Soroti neither had the jurisdiction to investigate cases, nor submit them to the Resident State Attorney. The Regional CIID, however, had not taken over the file, but instead handed it over to the OC Railway without divulging the concerns that led to its withdrawal from the RSA. The matter has been put to the relevant docket heads to sort without allowing the culprits to go scot-free on the mere excuse of procedural flaws in the case management. Madam Speaker, regarding the concern of extortion by the police, investigations are still ongoing so that the necessary disciplinary action can be taken against implicated officers once culpability is established. Hon. Etuka Isaac, Member of Parliament, Upper Madi County He raised a matter concerning the delayed construction of a technical institute in Upper Madi County. His prayer is, can I update this House on the matter? My response is that it is indeed true that Madi-Okollo is among the districts without a technical institute. This is a challenge which we acknowledge and remain committed to addressing. However, it is important for Members to note the state of disrepair, which many of our institutes are currently in. This is as a result of lack of maintenance over time. The ministry would, therefore, like to focus resources on rehabilitation of these institutes and fulfilment of the presidential pledges on the same. Madam Speaker, we are also encouraging Members from districts without institutes to make use of the existing ones. This will help us to curb the prevalent challenge of low student enrolment, in order to make the continued operation of these institutes viable. In future, we shall work to ensure that each district has a technical institute and a skills development centre is operational in every constituency. Hon. Yusuf Nsibambi, Chief Opposition Whip, FDC and a Member of Parliament for Mawokota South stated that on 27 July 2023, Parliament resolved that the addition of Shs 1 billion to 135 districts, 10 cities and 31 municipalities be used for road maintenance, as opposed to road rehabilitation. However, we have received information alleging that Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) who constitute part of the District Roads Committees are raising great resistance regarding the use of this additional maintenance grant. It is further alleged that the money is sitting idle on accounts, yet roads in districts, cities and municipalities are impassable and in dire state. This is his question is, why has it taken the Government too long to implement the resolution of Parliament to this effect, so that the road works can go on smoothly in these local governments, cities and municipal councils? My response is that the parliamentary resolution of 27 July 2023 on the allocation of Shs 1 billion to district, cities and municipalities for maintenance of roads is in line with a Cabinet [Ms Nabbanja] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME11101THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 NOVEMBER 2023directive on the same matter. Note that His Excellency the President further guided that the Shs 1 billion was in addition to the Road Fund, which districts were getting. Madam Speaker, on 1 September 2023, the Ministry of Local Government communicated the parliamentary resolution to all Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs), city clerks and municipal town clerks who are currently implementing the resolution, following the release of funds by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. A copy of the guidance is attached hereto.The Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Works and Transport are closely following up the implementation process to ensure adherence to guidelines, procedures, timelines and quality of work. However, if there exists a specific issue in any local government that any Member feels is a hindrance to quality and timely implementation, it should be brought to the attention of the Government, so that we resolve it urgently. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. You have heard the responses from the Prime Minister. I will allow about five people. Hon. Solomon Chelangat, do you have a supplementary question?4.42MR SOLOMON CHELANGAT (NRM, T’oo County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I come from the border district of Bukwo that borders Kenya to the east and Kween District to the west. Our people are facing a lot of challenges in surveying and titling their land. Whenever people try to survey and title their land in Riwo Subcounty, the coordinates read that the land is in Kenya. This extends almost one kilometre into Ugandan territory. Madam Speaker, when you try to survey and title some parts of land in Chesower, Tulel and Lwongon subcounties, it reads that the coordinates are in Kween District. People in the lands office in Bukwo are having difficulties in surveying and titling lands. This is a general problem in Sebei subregion. Recently, in Kapchorwa, a health centre called Sanzara in Tingey County had its land surveyed but the coordinates read that it was in Bulambuli District. This means that our borders in Sebei subregion are not clearly marked. I do not know what we can do.Recently, when I went to the education office to follow up on the construction of Riwo Secondary School and Kortek Secondary School, they told us about the ownership of the land. This means we have to get a title. I wonder how our people are going to get titles, if the coordinates are not reading well.My prayer, Madam Speaker, is that the Government should go to Sebei subregion, starting with T’oo County, and open the boundaries such that our people can survey and title their land. Thank you.MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, the Member is raising a very pertinent issue. In March this year, the President directed the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to demarcate boundaries in the districts of Kween, Bulambuli and Bukwo, and make them clear. It has been an issue for quite some time. I request you, Madam Speaker, to allow the Member to bring this question in a written form so that I can give a concrete answer because it is quite technical. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Hon. Solomon Alinga raises a very pertinent issue. It is not only in Bukwo where this is happening; it is also happening here in Kampala. Personally, I have my own home and I know where the mark stones are. However, when I went back a few days ago, we found that the road had been shifted to the middle of my home and that was done by KCCA. I have a report to that effect. You need to check that. If 11102MINISTERIAL STATEMENTthey can do that to me, how many people have they done it to? (Applause) In the title, you have the right coordinates; on the ground they are there but they change it on their computer to move from where the title is to where they want it to be. I want you to find that out with the physical planner because it is documented and I reported it to police.  4.47MS JOV ANICE TWINOBUSINGYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to join my colleagues in wishing you a happy birthday. Kiruhura District was hit by heavy rains and hailstorms. Properties were destroyed, including schools, houses, and crops. On 10 October 2023, we officially wrote to the Prime Minister’s office concerning the case and this happened in about eight subcounties. Allow me to mention those subcounties, though I will not go into the details of parishes and cells; those were officially submitted. The subcounties that were heavily affected include: Kikatsi subcounty, Kenshunga subcounty, Kinoni subcounty, Rushere Town Council, Kiruhura Town Council, part of Nyakashashara, Akayanja, part of Rwentamu, Kashongi, and Kitura. We did what is required; wrote the report and submitted it and we are still waiting. I would like to know from the Prime Minister the progress on support to the district. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I thought the response was to the one raised first. MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, you directed me last Thursday to have a meeting with Members of Parliament so that they can bring their concerns and you told me not to report back here. We had that meeting on Tuesday this week. A number of Members came and we have done the compilation. If the Member concerned had written to us early, her concern would have been taken care of. I promise that we shall handle it, including those who brought their issues last Tuesday. Madam Speaker, your issue of the Bukedea flooded roads was also brought to our attention, and many others. I brought all the ministers concerned; we had the Minister of Works and Transport, Hon. Katumba Wamala, Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) was present, the Minister, Office of the Prime Minister (Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees), Hon. – (Hon. Kwizera Eddie rose_) THE SPEAKER: Honourable, let the Prime Minister finish then you raise your issue independently. I want to thank Hon. Esther; after the meeting, she went and saw what was happening in my village. She will tell you that things are bad. MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, we constituted a team; both technical and political, to go with the Members of Parliament to see what is happening in their area. We have also gone ahead to come up with a supplementary on the directive of the President. He said that we need to first put in place urgent measures to address these disasters that have been brought about by floods. We are moving in the right direction and I request Members to be patient.THE SPEAKER: When do we have the supplementary? MS NABBANJA: The supplementary may come here in two weeks’ time. THE SPEAKER:  People are suffering. Yes, Hon. Kwizera - he is burning with his issue. 4.51MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bukimbiri County, Kisoro): Thank you. Madam Speaker, all the Members have been raising issues of disaster and there is a way to handle them. The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, under Article 249, directs the Government to have a Disaster Preparedness and Management Commission. [Ms Nabbanja] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME11103THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 NOVEMBER 2023Could the Rt Hon. Speaker inform this House when this Commission will be there? THE SPEAKER: Are you saying that I should inform you? MR EDDIE KWIZERA: Can you direct the Prime Minister to tell us? Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Let me tell you -  MR EDDIE KWIZERA: No, but that is a mechanism that should be in place. THE SPEAKER: Formation of a Disaster  Preparedness Commission as per Rule 249 will come together with the Constitutional Review Commission. Those commissions will come. For now, let us first save lives. Hon Aeku, then granddaughter. 4.52MR PATRICK AEKU (NRM, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you,  Madam Speaker – THE SPEAKER: She is  the granddaughter of H.E President Amin. MR AEKU: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Soroti County, I wish you a very happy birthday. The rains have come and they have been good. The orange trees have dropped the old leaves, they are flowering and bearing a lot of good fruits.However, there is a big problem; these fruits never mature on the tree because there is a serious pest that has affected the oranges in Teso. I am not speaking only for Soroti but the entire Teso region, from Katakwi down to Kumi, Ngora and back to Bukedea and within the city area of Soroti. There is also good news that a miracle has happened. There was communication from the fruit factory that now they can consume over 72 tonnes of orange. However, the question is, are they going to consume the rotten oranges? My prayer is that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries - We had locusts; we fumigated them and they went. These trees must be fumigated. Let us provide - because even when the farmers maintain the trees, the rot continues and spreads from one tree to another. We are talking about the economic basket of Teso; the household income. I pray that as these new rains continue and the trees are bearing new fruits, we can protect this and we shall see a change in household income. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER: Can I play devil’s advocate? There was a report that was presented here -  Hon. Ebwalu raised an issue that Soroti Fruit Factory had been given out. Do we still have the Soroti Fruit Factory? I want information from the Prime Minister –(Member rose_)  No, you do not have information. It is the Prime Minister who has information. MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, Soroti Fruit Factory has not been given out. You are aware that the President has been struggling to make sure that the oranges - because he is the one who advocated for the people of Soroti and Teso subregion to engage in fruit farming. The current factory we have has got limitations but they can easily be done away with. We have one of the investors, Mrs Zenawi, who is the former First Lady of Ethiopia. According to the President, she has the capacity to help us revamp this factory because UDC has mismanaged this factory in partnership with the Government of Uganda. We are in the process of making sure that UDC together with the former First Lady of Ethiopia, Mrs Zenawi, can come up with regulations and a way to have that partnership. The issues are now with the Attorney-General and the Auditor-General is already taking the necessary audits. We are still on the way. For the spraying of the fruits, I request the Member to write so that I can get technical answers to his question. 11104MINISTERIAL STATEMENTTHE SPEAKER:  There is a clarification from Hon. Kibalya. MR KIBALYA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Your question to the Prime Minister was very clear. As she was closing, it was as if she was going to the question. I seek clarification from the Prime Minister whether she understood the question from the Speaker, and if she got it, has the Soroti Fruit Factory been given away or not? THE SPEAKER:  The question has been answered. Unless you did not understand, but it has been answered. Hon. Biraaro, do you have something on the same?MR BIRAARO:  Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister has narrated very well, and I was following, that UDC and the Uganda Government mismanaged the factory. She again told us that Mrs Zenawi is going to partner with UDC. The known mismanaging agency is now given another chance to mismanage. Can she clarify what this means? Is it the second UDC or the actual UDC? THE SPEAKER:  Another clarification. MS AMERO : Thank you, Madam Speaker, and happy birthday. The Committee on Trade and Industry brought a report to this House with recommendations in regard to the mismanagement of that factory. The Prime Minister is here as the Leader of Government Business. Would she explain to us what has been done on the recommendations and resolutions of this House? What have you done with the UDC staff because so many of them were named, including the Managing Director of Soroti Fruit Factory? What have you done as the Leader of Government Business? Should we continue trusting these people? Before I sit down, there has been a plane moving around the swampy areas of Teso, demarcating and dropping mark stones. THE SPEAKER:  The what? MS AMERO:  A small plane moving around the areas of Teso, yellow in colour, dropping mark stones while doing an aerial survey. Our people would like to know because they do not understand - They drop these mark stones very deep - We want to know what the Government is doing, because even we, the leaders, are not aware of this and we cannot explain anything to defend the Government down there. Can I know from the Prime Minister so that when I meet the people of Amuria, I can tell them what the Government is doing in this place? THE SPEAKER:  Is that the geophysical surveys being done by the Ministry of Energy?MS AMERO:  Madam Speaker, I am not aware of it because I thought - THE SPEAKER: I am informing you.MS AMERO: It would be right for us, as leaders, to know about it so that we talk about it down there otherwise it is going to be a big challenge to answer these issues during times of campaign, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:  That is done by the Ministry of Energy. They are doing a geophysical survey of the area. I think what we need to do on the issue of the report of Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry is to get the action-taken report. You may not ambush the Prime Minister now because she may not know; she gets so many reports. She may not know what is happening, but she will come with the action-taken report on the Soroti Fruit Factory. MS AMERO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, it is against the background of our resolutions in this House that the President is - I can say, struggling to make sure that what we promised our people is fulfilled. PRIME MINISTER’S TIME11105THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 NOVEMBER 2023I will come with a detailed report and concrete answers on how far we have gone and where we are in regard to the resolutions of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Aate then Hon. Ibanda.5.03MS SHARIFAH AATE-TABAN (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Happy birthday and congratulations on your double blessings. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my concern is about my people in Koboko. Six students were sent back from Oba Technical School because they tested positive for Hepatitis B. Our concern as Koboko is, what other plan does the Government have in place for those students who are suffering from lifelong illnesses because the technical school has denied my students access to studying because they tested positive for Hepatitis B. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Yes, Prime Minister –MS NABBANJA:  Rt Hon. Speaker, the question in front of us is quite technical. I will consult the Ministry of Health and also get in touch with the district administration; the DHO and the others, to find out what truly happened, then I will come back here and report next week. THE SPEAKER:  Okay. Hon. Ibanda, Dr Bukenya. 5.04MR IBANDA RWEMULIKYA (Indepen -dent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Happy birthday. I seek some answers from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I thank you so much for the help you are giv -ing to Ntoroko due to those floods, especially when you visited us. As I speak, the seven sub -counties are submerged. The other time we gave a report, but the challenge was that we needed land to relocate those people; Kasese and Ntoroko were prioritised and Kasese got their land, but Ntoroko was left out. Rt Prime Minister, we have land in Ntoroko and people are willing to sell. The other time I was in your office and told you about it. When are we getting this land, so that these people are shifted from those areas? As I speak, if you see the pictures, our people are suffering. Thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, it is true I was in Ntoroko together with all the teams from the Office of the Prime Minister. We identified three issues and agreed that we needed to move people. The challenge then – he is aware that the neighbouring land is Semuliki National Park. We even went to the extent of coming up with a resolution that we could de-gazette part of that land. They then said we have to change the Constitution. We left that path and agreed that we get people who can sell land to the Government. Since that time, I am just getting information now. Because some of the facilities had been submerged, we relocated and constructed a health centre III. Madam Speaker, the Office of the Prime Minister is doing a lot. Now that we have people who are willing to sell their land, we shall get to Ntoroko and buy that land for the people. We even bought land in Kayunga. Do you remember the Shs 5 billion you wanted me to clarify on? THE SPEAKER:  Yes.MS NABBANJA:  We were able to construct a health centre.THE SPEAKER:  The Prime Minister is giving accountability for the Shs 5 billion. That is very good.MS NABBANJA:  Let me make accountability. We bought land in Kayunga, constructed a health centre that had submerged in 11106MINISTERIAL STATEMENTRwampanga, we constructed a school that had submerged in Nakasongola, we constructed a health centre III in Butiaba in Buliisa and we constructed another health centre in Ntoroko. On the same Shs 5 billion, we bought land in Kasese and we are currently constructing and upgrading a hospital there. That money was well spent. We used the army brigade to do these facilities. THE SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the honourable minister promised to construct Achomai Primary School. I request that you find it in your heart to construct that school. Let him tell us the status of that school. 5.08THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true the school is coded; it has teachers but it does not have infrastructure. Therefore, the request by Madam Speaker to the Prime Minister is valid. For that matter, Rt Hon. Prime Minister has directed me to take it up. Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Dr Bukenya and Hon. Davis Kamukama? I know the people who have not spoken and we need equity. You are the same people who will complain that I do not give you chance to speak. From that side, we will come to the three ladies and then this tall man. (Laughter)5.09DR MICHAEL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Kassanda):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join Members to congratulate you upon achieving the title of Nnalongo . As a gynaecologist, I know how difficult it is to be a Nnalongo . I also wish you a very happy birthday and many more years. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there is a ban on recruitment of public servants. The Ministry of Health constructed a health centre III in Bukuya, in a hard-to-reach area called Buseregenyi. They even brought equipment that the few health workers put in the store but it is being seen as a white elephant. The health centre III has two staff and they cannot operate. I would like to know from the Prime Minister when the Government plans to lift the ban on recruitment of public servants, especially in the health and education sectors. Thank you. MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, that issue came up in Cabinet on Monday and the President directed the Minister of Public Service together with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to lift the ban. After all, the wage was provided, but the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development wanted an audit, which was carried out and the report is out. Therefore, your people will be recruited.  (Applause)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. 5.11MR DA VIS KAMUKAMA (NRM, Bunyangabu County, Bunyangabu):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Congratulations, more especially on the double blessings of twins and happy birthday. I would like to know which criteria a Member should use to write to the Minister in charge of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. I have written several letters about the disaster in Bunyangabu, which is a food basket for this nation. Almost all the matooke  we eat comes from Bunyangabu.However, we normally face a problem of hailstones and heavy winds. I have written letters but received no response. I do not know whether I should write letters in Chinese or Swahili, so that maybe you can respond. I pray they give me some criteria on what I should do to solve such disasters in my constituency. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  You can write it in Rutooro, but I am sure that the letters reach and the food basket of this country should be Isingiro. (Laughter)  PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [Ms Nabbanja]11107THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 NOVEMBER 2023MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker,  now that the Minister in charge of  Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees is here, she can give an answer. However, what I wanted to say is that I do not know which technical people helped the Member, but we have responded to disasters across the country. Did you go through the procedure we brought here? THE SPEAKER:  Did you get a report about the disaster from the district? MS NABBANJA:  Was it written by the chief administrative officer? Let us ask the minister to respond since she is here. THE SPEAKER: Why don’t we respond to the Member’s issue? [Mr Enos Asiimwe:  “It is related to the same, Madam Speaker.”]  5.14MR ENOS ASIIMWE (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister is referring us to the supplementary budget from the ministry. However, we understand that disasters are supposed to be funded under the Contingency Fund and we know that this is the second quarter. I do not know whether that money has already been used or not. Why do we have to wait for the supplementary budget to deal with disasters that have happened everywhere in Uganda?THE SPEAKER:  You are reacting in anticipation. When the Bill comes, you will ask why they used what was on the contingency. First get the Bill, understand how much has been spent, how much is wanted, check what is on the Contingency Fund and then you can ask that question. That is the difference between an accountant and a historian. My son did history and –5.15THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Ms Esther Anyakun):  Thank you, Madan Speaker. I thank my senior, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for ably answering some of these questions about disaster preparedness and management in the country. Honourable colleagues, you need to bear with us. We have been trying our best to see how to respond to some of the disasters. As we compile all the disaster reports that we have, in the last two weeks alone, we have a bigger bunch of 27 reports from the El Nino, including Bukedea, Nakasongola and Buvuma -  THE SPEAKER:  Nakapiripirit.MS ANYAKUN:  Madam Speaker, I do not want to speak about my district because people will think that I am conflicted. However, we are saying –THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the floods that I get in Bukedea come from Nakapiripirit and Sebei subregions. All the water comes from Hon. Chemaswet’s place and Hon. Anyakun’s place and ends up in Bukedea and Katakwi.MS ANYAKUN:  Madam Speaker, I agree with you that all the water that comes from the mountains of Elgon, Napak and Moroto slope toward Teso and that is why we have many floods in Katakwi and Bukedea. Honourable colleagues, I just want you to be patient with us. The Prime Minister has just announced here that we are making preparations to get some money from the supplementary to be able to respond. I am going to bring a report here and you will see how many schools our ministry has tried to support at your constituency level, because of you. We are trying our best to see how to support you, Members, amidst - Even this morning, I was in the stores. The Prime Minister sent me to the stores this morning to confirm what we have in terms of iron sheets and relief and what quantity we can take to the people. Madam Speaker, we are going to support all the Members, constituencies and the districts that have been affected by the floods. That is my word.11108MINISTERIAL STATEMENT5.17MR JAMES MAMAWI (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to congratulate you upon two events, the first and the second, which is your birthday today. I want to know from the Prime Minister whether the implementation of the presidential executive order requires any regulation. As I speak, I cannot reach my home in the district. There are vehicles which are full of charcoal parked on the road because they cannot cross the road.The district cannot implement the executive order of confiscating these vehicles with charcoal because they say they need regulations. This is especially the advice from the Resident State Attorney and the OC police. We want to know from the Prime Minister whether we need those – (Interruption) - Information allowed – THE SPEAKER:  Prime Minister, can you answer the issue on the ban on charcoal? You are saying they are stuck and cannot be arrested.MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, there is an executive order the President gave me, together with the concerned ministries, departments and agencies. I know there is a ban and that is it. If there are upcoming concerns, we can sit and agree on how to implement the executive order. That is what I can tell him.5.20MR JAMES OLOBO (NRM, Kioga North County, Amolatar):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this chance. I also join my colleagues to thank you for having added to the population of Uganda, two in one. I had a problem with one of my primary schools; Abwockwar Primary School. It goes up to P.7 but does not have a single staff house; all the teachers sleep outside the school. The parents have told me that they can make structures, but that I should come and request for iron sheets from the Prime Minister. I have written and the letter is there. Secondly, Prime Minister, I thank you for visiting the school during the flood. You sent the iron sheets but you never bought land so, the iron sheets are lying idle. I am very surprised to hear that you bought land for other places and left your friend out. (Laughter) Now, the floods have overtaken the school again. I thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable Prime Minister, we want land. MS NABBANJA:  It is true, Madam Speaker, that I went to Amolatar and we constructed a health centre called Nalubwoyo, using the same Shs 5 billion.When the President says we should use the army brigade and that they can save a lot, he is right. With the Shs 5 billion, we were able to construct a health centre in Amolatar, like I have already told you, as well as others. Madam Speaker, even the iron sheets that he received came from the same money. I think we have no alternative but to relocate that school. The other time it had not fully submerged and no sooner had I left than the people who went there to see found out that the water had rescinded. So, we thought that maybe it would survive. However, if you are saying there is another reoccurrence, we have to look for a permanent solution to that problem. I promise that the Office of the Prime Minister, together with the ministry for disaster preparedness, will come and rescue the situation.5.22MR ANNE TUMWINE (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntoroko):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Congratulations on your birthday. I would like to thank the Government for the support they have been giving Ntoroko on floods year in, year out. However, there is a little bit of a problem that I would request the Government to handle. For us, the floods are different from what is happening right now. People’s livelihoods are being affected because PRIME MINISTER’S TIME11109THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 NOVEMBER 2023each year we have floods and we lose animals, property and businesses in big numbers. There is need for the Government to have a long-term and short-term solution. We have been getting short-term solutions of food supplies and emergency support, but now we need a long-term solution because River Semliki is becoming a lake. There is a need for the Ministry of Water and Environment to find out the long-lasting solution for it because sometimes we get floods when there is no rain.Can the Government find a lasting solution because this issue affects us every year and it does not leave us the same? It is encroaching on people’s livelihood. Thank you, Madam Speaker.MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, the Woman Member of Parliament for Ntoroko attended the Tuesday meeting and those issues she talked about were brought to our attention. We took note of all her issues and I promise that we shall handle Ntoroko. We shall give permanent solutions because the President directed me to do it. We shall do it.5.25MS VICTORIOUS ZAWEDDE (Indepen -dent, Woman Representative, Nakasongo -la): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleagues to wish you a happy birthday. In Nakasongola District, I have got a lower local council that was created in 2012. To date, it has never been allocated any government health facility – that is Migyera Town Council. Migyera Town Council is the busiest town council in Nakasongola. It is along Gulu Highway. We have always had a lot of accidents on that road and people have ended up losing their lives because there is no facility that can handle such an emergency. Madam Speaker, when is the Government constructing a government health facility in Migyera Town Council? It is 12 years down the road without any government facility. Follow-up has been made to different offices, but all in vain. May I please know when the Government is giving us a government health care facility as per the government policy on health? Thank you, I beg to submit. MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, Migyera Town Council was curved out of Nabiswera subcounty. We are aware that it is our policy that every subcounty is given a health facility. I request the Member to follow up with the Ministry of Health. Definitely, we shall handle that issue. Nakasongola has a number of health facilities. I have been to Migyera and almost every subcounty in Nakasongola but they have a facility in the mother subcounty. It is only that now it was upgraded to a town council.5.27MS DOROTHY NYAKATO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitagwenda):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. On behalf of the people of Kitagwenda, allow me to congratulate you and wish you a happy birthday. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. MS DOROTHY NYAKATO:  My concern is about the regular maintenance of Kabujogera-Mahyoro-Buhindagi Road in Kitagwenda District. This road has black spots, which have continuously caused accidents that have claimed so many lives of our people. As leaders, we have tried to engage Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), but nothing has been done. Recently, a contract was awarded to carry out road maintenance on this road, but these black spots were ignored. There is another stretch that connects Rubirizi and Kitagwenda districts, but it was left out yet it is in a very bad state.I request the Prime Minister and the Ministry of Works and Transport to work on these spots such that we can save the lives of our people. I beg to submit. 11110MINISTERIAL STATEMENTMS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, as we speak, it is true that most roads are not in good condition because of the heavy rains. We agreed with the Ministry of Works and Transport that it is useless for us to spend taxpayers’ money to work on these bad spots as of now. Otherwise, we shall just waste money. Therefore, we are waiting for the rain to subside and then embark on serious work across the country. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Cissy - Barbara - Let us start with Hon. Evelyn Chemutai since you had forgotten your name. 5.30MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo):  Madam Speaker, there are very few people who call me Cissy. That is why I was surprised; I thought you were calling somebody else. I must appreciate the way the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is responding to the questions put to her by Members. (Applause)  She makes it thorough and holistic. I am not saying so because she is a woman, but I think the manner in which she is handling our questions is really very professional and thorough. I want to appreciate that. At least put it on record. (Applause)Madam Speaker, there is a matter of concern in my region, not only in Lango but it is now spreading to Teso. It started in Acholi, hit us in Amolatar, and is spreading; the issue of balaalo . I know the way our Prime Minister works and I know the way our Speaker works. It is very clear that if we leave this matter of balaalo  in the hands of the Government alone, it might be difficult for us to handle. Right now, we have a crisis in Amolatar, Acholi and people are talking. Even the issue of the aeroplane which Hon. Susan Amero brought has now spread all over. When we see an aeroplane, we think they have come to spot our land and the balaalo  are on the way to take it up. Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister who is working with a lot of vigour should help us to calm down. The President made a very strong statement when he was talking about fishermen who went and settled in some fishing villages. He said that those fishermen should go back to where they have come from. Why not make the same statement; that before we resolve this matter, these balaalo  should first go back? We would like to know where they have come from. We may think they are balaalo  of Uganda when they could actually be coming from Ethiopia or elsewhere. Let them first go back then we can work out where we can settle them and who the right people to settle are. Are they criminals who are just trying to find a safe sanctuary in Uganda? On behalf of the people of my region, I beg you, Madam Speaker that the matter of balaalo  be resolved. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. There are three Arms of Government. We have the Executive, the Legislature and the Judiciary. As of now, there are two Arms of Government handling that issue; the Executive; the President himself, and the Chief Justice. Let us not discuss that before we get a report from the other two Arms of Government. The Prime Minister and I do not want to burn our hands because when the top bosses are handling it, we may not be able to discuss it as of now. 5.34MR FADIL TWALLA (NRM, Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker - (Hon. Evelyn Chemutai rose_)THE SPEAKER:  There is a tall man behind you. MR TWALLA:  Yes, sit down first. (Laughter)  Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 23 September last year, I raised the issue of the boundary between Sebei and Bugisu in this House. The Speaker promised that she was going to handle it within a period of only one month. THE SPEAKER:  Did I promise? PRIME MINISTER’S TIME11111THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 NOVEMBER 2023MR TWALLA:  No, sorry. The Prime Minister promised that she was going to handle it within a period of one month. Last month, the Sabiny were demonstrating on the same issue. This issue is going to cause tribal conflict which this country may not be in position to handle because the Bagisu continue to extend the boundary to the upper belt of Sebei. If this matter is not taken seriously, I think Sebei will be no more. So, yes -THE SPEAKER:  Will not be anymore? MR TWALLA:  Yes, Sebei will not be there anymore because prior, our land was bordering Yembek. Right now, it is bordering the mountain. As we speak, the two parishes in my sub-county are said to be in Bulambuli. We cannot wait as the Prime Minister had suggested. It was a directive from the President.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable, please sit down. The issue you are raising is one of those that was raised before and we agreed that it is a technical matter. Kindly put it in writing. When you do so, the Prime Minister is able to send it from one ministry to another. Do not expect to get an answer from the Prime Minister here on such a technical matter. What I want you to do is to put it down in writing. Bring all those issues and the Prime Minister will be able to send people on the ground and determine what can be done. MR LORIKA:  Much obliged, Madam Speaker. 5.37MS EVERLYN CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Bukwo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank God for another year that He has added you and the bundle of joy of the twins. In 2004, the President gave Bukwo District hospital status. However, last year, in the wisdom of the Ministry of Health, the district hospital was downgraded to a health centre IV . As we speak, the National Drug Authority has also decided to cut off drugs for the same district hospital. We are now in trouble and we do not know where to take patients. Therefore, I would like you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, to please take this up so that Bukwo General Hospital can be reinstated and given back its status as a district hospital. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: First answer that. MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, I cannot deceive you that I have an answer to her issue because I am hearing it for the first time. It is strange how Government can downgrade a hospital to a health centre IV . Therefore, I request the Member to write that question so that I can get answers and also take action where possible.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Adome, can you first finish and then I make a ruling?5.38MR FRANCIS ADOME (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to engage the Prime Minister. I would like to raise two issues. First, earlier on, I raised the issue of the status of the Moroto Road regarding the trucks that were ferrying out materials and we had a discussion on the weighbridges. The Prime Minister promised that they would bring temporary bridges. I would like to use this opportunity, since the Minister of Works and Transport is here, if he can tell us when exactly they can do that because we have a big challenge.Secondly, I would also like to inquire about what we requested for; a mortuary. We told you that the whole of Karamoja subregion does not have a mortuary. Therefore, we move bodies all the way to Mbale. We always have to engage UPDF to assist us with the facility in Mbale, which has also become a bit costly and difficult. This is because sometimes we find their mortuary is already filled up, so we have to hang in there. That is why I want to inquire from the Prime Minister when she thinks she can also help us with that facility so that we are able to help our people. Thank you.11112MINISTERIAL STATEMENTTHE SPEAKER:  The whole of Karamoja?MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, I have been to Moroto Regional Referral Hospital and what he is talking about is true. The facility that they use does not have a cooler; it is like a store. Therefore, bodies decompose. I request that the Member puts this in writing again. THE SPEAKER:  They have a mortuary without a cooler.MS NABBANJA:  A body cannot stay there for a day. THE SPEAKER:  It cannot stay. MS NABBANJA:  I was shown a store.THE SPEAKER:  Please put it in writing.MS NABBANJA:  Yes. About the weighbridge, I request my colleague here, the former RDC and “arrow boy” – (Laughter)5.41THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru):  Madam Speaker, it is true that the weight of the trucks – THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, when you start singing, “procedure” from the left, right and centre – “Arrow boy”, please sit down. I am a mother and I have to look after my children. I adjourn the House to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.(The House rose at 5.41 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 28 November 2023 at 2.00 p.m.)PRIME MINISTER’S TIME