Wednesday, 4 November 2015

Parliament met at 2.16 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this special sitting of Parliament. We come here to commemorate a colleague who has passed on. There are one too many this time and it is worrying.

Hon. Stanley Omwonya Oribdhogu, Member for Okoro County in Zombo District, passed on. The circumstances are not very clear because he was healthy; he was with many of us the night he died and nobody could have thought that hon. Omwonya would be dying that same night because he was full of life and moving around with everybody else. However, that has happened and we come here to commemorate his passing. There are condolence messages that will be highlighted at the right time. Thank you. 

(Entrance of the late Stanley Omwonya Oribdhogu)

The National Anthem.

The East African Community Anthem.

Laying of wreaths.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. STANLEY OMWONYA ORIBDHOGU, MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT OKORO COUNTY, ZOMBO DISTRICT

2.37
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Stanley Omwonya Oribdhogu for his dedicated service to the Republic of Uganda under rule 47 or the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

 “WHEREAS Parliament learnt with sadness of the untimely death of hon. Stanley Omwonya Oribdhogu, which occurred on Monday, 2 November 2015 at Kampala International Hospital;
 
AND WHEREAS the late hon. Stanley Omwonya was born on 23 May 1951 in the then West Nile, now Zombo District, and studied and graduated with a Bachelor’s degree in Arts and a Master’s degree in Public Administration from Makerere University;

FURTHER, WHEREAS the late hon. Stanley Omwonya served the Government of Uganda in various capacities including as a District Commissioner in Kabale, Bushenyi and Lira and later, as an Under Secretary in the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, the Education Service Commission, and the Uganda Land Commission;

NOTING, with appreciation, his contribution to the Ninth Parliament of Uganda representing the people of Okoro County in Zombo District, a seat he has held up to the time of his death on Monday, 2 November 2015;

APPRECIATING his discipline, leadership skills and the love for his people and the Kingdom of Alur, which saw him overwhelmingly elected in the recently concluded NRM party primaries as Member of Parliament flag bearer for the newly created Ora County in Nebbi District;

SATISFIED that the late hon. Stanley Omwonya dedicated his working life to the stability, unity and development of not only his constituency of Okoro but to the whole country, he therefore deserves the recognition of this Parliament and the State;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:

1. 	That Parliament collectively conveys its condolences to the bereaved family, His Excellency the President and the people of Uganda for the loss of a distinguished son of Uganda, hon. Stanley Omwonya Oribdhogu.

2. 	That this Parliament takes cognisance of the dedicated service and contribution that the late hon. Stanley Omwonya rendered to this country during his lifetime. 

3. 	That the Almighty God sustains the bereaved and grants our departed colleague, hon. Stanley Omwonya, eternal rest.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the members for Butambala, Ndorwa, Erute. Would you like to speak to your motion?

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this is the justification of the motion to pay tribute to hon. Stanley Omwonya, Member of Parliament for Okoro County, Zombo District. 

Mr Speaker and colleagues, we are yet again here in a sad mood to pay tribute to our fallen colleague, hon. Stanley Omwonya, who passed away on 2 November 2015. The sting of death has once again hit us barely two months after losing two other Members of Parliament. 

The late hon. Stanley Omwonya was born on 23 May 1951 to Mr Dominic Omwonya and Mrs Christine Acun in Ruvuka village, Atyak Sub-county in the then West Nile District, now Zombo District. He attended Warr Catholic Primary School, Odwonga Junior Secondary School and then St Joseph’s College Ombaci where he sat for his East African Certificate of Education in 1969. From Ombaci, he joined Teso College Aloet in Soroti for his higher school certificate and completed in 1971.

Hon. Omwonya was admitted to Makerere University in Kampala in 1971 for a degree of Bachelor of Arts, which he pursued with determination and graduated with an honours degree in 1975. His love and thirst for education could not allow him stop at a bachelor’s degree. Between 1983 and 1984, hon. Omwonya enrolled for a Postgraduate Diploma in Administration at Birmingham University in United Kingdom. He, again, between 1998 and 2002, pursued a Master’s degree in Public Administration and Management at Makerere University.

As a good cadre of the National Resistance Movement philosophy of focusing on value addition, he did this to add value to his knowledge, given the ever-changing political, social and economic environment. 

Career Service

After university in 1976, the late hon. Omwonya was recruited and deployed as Assistant District Commissioner in charge of Aloi sub district, East Lango. Within two years of service, because of hard work, dedication and discipline he was promoted to the post of Assistant District Commissioner, Grade I (ADCI). Between 1980 and 1981, he was posted to Hoima in the same capacity.

Mr Speaker, in 1981, the late hon. Omwonya was promoted and posted to Bushenyi as a full District Commissioner where he served until 1983.  In 1984, he was transferred to Kabale in the same position, where he served until 1996 when he was posted to Kitgum, this time as District Executive Secretary.

Other Postings 

Mr Speaker, the late hon. Omwonya was basically a career civil servant. Between 1987 and 1999, he served in numerous ministries and departments of Government as a Senior Assistant Secretary and Principal Assistant Secretary. These included the Ministry of Information; Ministry of Relief and Social Rehabilitation; Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry; and also special projects such as the Mamdani Commission of Inquiry into the Local Government System, the 1991 Population and Housing Census Project, and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. In 1999, hon. Omwonya was promoted to the position of Under Secretary and posted to the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry where he served until 2005, when he was transferred to serve as Under Secretary to the Education Service Commission.

His Last Posting in the Civil Service

The late hon. Stanley Omwonya was posted as Under Secretary, Uganda Land Commission, where he was in charge of finance and administration up to the time he retired in 2010 to join elective politics. 

Mr Speaker, just like in many previous areas where he was deployed, hon. Omwonya was very innovative and always left a mark.  At Uganda Land Commission, for example, by the time he joined, although constitutionally the Uganda Land Commission was supposed to be an autonomous body, it still served as a department in the Ministry of Lands. With his effort, the late hon. Omwonya spearheaded a crusade for Uganda Land Commission to attain its autonomous status, which was done within the one year he served there. It is, therefore, worthy to commend that the current land reforms being undertaken are partly attributed to the contribution made by our fallen comrade. The late hon. Omwonya was a reliable, dependable dedicated servant of Uganda and we shall dearly miss him.

Cause of Death

Mr Speaker, the late hon. Omwonya has been for some time battling a problem of heart disease and he succumbed to heart failure.

The late hon. Omwonya is survived by a widow, Mrs Grace Omwonya, and 11 children; five girls and six boys. Let me take this opportunity to convey my sincere heartfelt condolences to the family, His Excellency the President and the people of Uganda for the loss of this gallant son of Uganda. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament to the effect that:

1. 	Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, His Excellency the President and the people of Uganda for the loss of a distinguished son of Uganda, hon. Omwonya Stanley Oribdhogu.

2. 	That this Parliament takes cognisance of the dedicated service and contribution that the late hon. Stanley Omwonya rendered to this country during his lifetime.

3. 	That this Parliament collectively prays that the Almighty God sustains the bereaved and grants our departed colleague, hon. Stanley Omwonya Oribdhogu, eternal rest. 

That is the motion I propose for debate. 

2.52
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, I am sorry that I am late. As you are aware, I had to escort my presidential candidate for nomination. (Interjections) I have only one flag bearer, Dr Kiiza Besigye.  (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, it was with profound sadness that we learnt of the passing on of hon. Stanley Omwonya. We offer our most sincere condolences to the family members and to this august House.  The late hon. Omwonya was a soft-spoken person that advanced the development of the entire country above his own interests.

Aware that the NRM government has for years advanced infrastructure development as its core performance indicator, the late hon. Omwonya was worried about the Government’s perennial corruption and rhetoric on roads, housing and the construction of dams. 

To advance the interests of the local people and vent his disappointment in the NRM government, which has failed to implement its own manifesto, the late hon. Omwonya posed a question to the Prime Minister in Parliament on 8 April 2015. Listen to his statement: “Madam Speaker, the Government some time back came up with a plan to develop Nakawa and Naguru estates into a modern satellite city and a company, Prime Properties from the UK, was identified to carry out that project. They were supposed to invest about Shs 4 trillion into that project. I would like to ask the Prime Minister about what has happened to that project. If the company has not worked, can the Government reallocate the land in question to other Ugandans who are able to do better?” 

Those were the words of the late hon. Stanley Omwonya, asking the Prime Minister about what had happened and whether the Prime Minister could tell the country. Little did he know that a project that was to commence in December 2012 and premised on providing displaced tenants with quality housing would only translate into what the Prime Minister referred to at that time as “concerned”. It is so unfortunate that the evicted Ugandans, mainly from the North, still await the promised settlement but to no avail.

It is further unfortunate that nationalistic leaders such as the late hon. Omwonya passed on at a time when they are most needed. The late hon. Omwonya was passionate about the quality of health services in Uganda. On 15 April 2014, he raised two pertinent issues in Parliament that remain unaddressed up to now. One is about the staffing of health centres. It is true health centres III are supposed to have 19 staff but recently, when the late Omwonya and I visited some of the health centres III in my constituency, we found out that these centres are heavily understaffed. Instead of each of them having 19 staff, there are only 10 or even less and yet nurses and other medical staff are undergoing training. It is even unfortunate that those who are trained are not employed by the Government. This is a very serious matter and I think Government should come up with a deliberate policy to ensure that nurses and other medical staff who are trained are employed by the Government. This was the cry of hon. Omwonya on behalf of the people of Uganda.

Two, Mr Speaker, I quote the late Omwonya: “Let me talk about the upgrading health centres III to health centres IV. I agree with the committee report that Government comes up with a clear policy on how this upgrading is going to be done. In my constituency, for example, we have only Nyapeya Hospital which is being run by the missionaries.” 

Unfortunately, the late hon. Omwonya is no longer in a position to advocate for his people in Parliament as he did on 4 December 2014 when he raised a matter of national importance about a woman with anaemia who failed to access quality service from health facilities in Zombo. Upon transfer to Naguru Hospital, she could not afford the Shs 1,250,000 for five units of blood. The Opposition commits to advance the question of a healthy population and deliver affordable world class health services in 2016.

The late Omwonya valued co-existence, respect of territorial boundaries. He actively participated in resolution of the border conflict between Uganda and Democratic Republic of Congo to the point of being put on gun point in Lefori Sub County in Moyo District in 2012. His unwavering endeavours contributed to the restoration of peace and stability in Zombo District particularly the areas of Pakadha, Asina and Pamitu. Now the people of Zombo District, and indeed other districts that border the Democratic Republic of Congo, live in peace and in friendship. These are traits of a Pan Africanist that the late George Kakoma advanced in the second stanza of our national anthem, “Oh Uganda! The land of freedom, our love and labour we give, and with neighbours all at our country’s call, in peace and friendship we’ll live.”

Placing above self the wellbeing of the people that he and all of us represent in Parliament, the late hon. Omwonya is applauded and will be missed by all of us. As indicated in the scriptures, Hebrew 6:10: “God is not unjust; he will not forget your work and the love you have shown him as you have helped his people…”

Mr Speaker, I am re-echoing the concerns hon. Omwonya expressed when he was still alive. Many of us have spoken many things of national importance and I pray that when such people depart as our brother has gone, we should not forget the words they have spoken in this House.

I want to encourage the family; we know you have missed a father, a friend, a husband and Member of Parliament, but I can assure you as a person who was with hon. Stanley Omwonya here that he was very effective in representing his people. He has made you proud; he was a nationalist. He co-operated with all of us regardless of his political leaning. So, he will always be remembered by all of us. May God bless you all.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I have already proposed the question for your debate. May I know how many members would like to speak to this motion and then I can regulate the time properly? Okay, the whole House would like to speak; therefore, we will be using three minutes each but the House will rise at 4.30 p.m.

3.03
GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI (NRM, East Moyo County, Adjumani): Mr Speaker, I also stand here to pay tribute to our late brother whose passing actually shocked me because the previous day we were together in Namboole. 

I want to explain to the House my experience with him as we worked together in the Ministry of Tourism and Trade. I found that Omwonya was a well brought up officer who knew exactly what he wanted to do. When given an assignment, he proved to be results oriented; he made sure he did what he was given. He became reliable in the ministry. Sometimes work which was not even meant for him was diverted to him because of his active contribution. He was an honest man and very social. Indeed, he worked, as has been read out by the Prime Minister, in many places but I left him in the Ministry of Trade and Tourism.

I was happy to meet him again in the House, which made me remember the time we were in the ministry. When we met the last time, nobody knew what was going to happen and when I got a telephone call about his death, I was shocked. I had nobody around to ask. First, I did not believe; I did not know whether it was true or not. However, very rarely people deceive about death and it turned out to be true. We are very sorry that these things happen.

To the family, I want to pray to the Almighty to give them strength and indeed to colleagues in the House and people back home in Zombo District. We have lost one of the icons of Nebbi and now Zombo District. 

I think for his good performance during his lifetime, God will pay him the same in kind now that he has decided that he should join him. May hon. Stanley Omwonya’s soul rest in eternal peace.

3.06
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I wish to extend my deepest and sincere condolences to the family of the late Stanley Omwonya.

I met hon. Omwonya when he joined Parliament. He joined the Committee of Foreign Affairs in which I was the vice chairman. He became a kingpin in the contributions of this committee. It was mentioned by hon. Cecilia Ogwal that hon. Omwonya was among the delegation of Members of Parliament that were besieged in Moyo. This was a delegation which you, Mr Speaker, assigned a duty to go and sort out the border dispute between Uganda and Moyo and I was the leader. We were besieged for two hours at gun point but hon. Omwonya played a very big role in ensuring that Members of Parliament on that delegation remained calm until the matter was resolved between Kampala and Juba. We praise him for the role he played.

Mr Speaker, hon. Omwonya has passed away in a very mysterious way because his friends did not even have an opportunity to see him sick in bed. However, God has decided that he goes away. Many Members of Parliament and staff will miss hon. Omwonya as he was a humble and gentle person who is rare to find. We wish to assure the family that it is not they alone that have lost hon. Omwonya, but he had many friends in this Parliament who will continue to miss him.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, we all join them to mourn Stanley Omwonya. We wish to assure the people of Okoro that he was a good representative of the people of Okoro. At times we have would lead delegations to foreign capitals and we would appoint him, although we were leaders of the delegation, to head all the deliberations of the committee of Parliament –(Member timed out.)

3.10
THE MINISTER FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to pay tribute to my friend and brother, Stanley Omwonya. I got to know him in the 1980s. He was the District Commissioner for Bushenyi and I was the Member of Parliament representing Bushenyi North constituency in this House. 

Stanley Omwonya showed a rare commitment to serve this country. Coming from Zombo to Bushenyi, he contributed immensely to the stability of Bushenyi as a district where he was the District Commissioner. He served at a time when this country was going through very difficult and troubled times and you would see the qualities of a leader in him at such an early stage of his growth. I visited his district a number of times in his different capacities and this time as a Member of Parliament. 

I am sure all of us knew about his cool headedness, tactical and diplomatic approach to issues. He has done tremendous work. He has died at a time when we needed him most. The most saddening part is how suddenly he passed on. Indeed, as colleagues have said, he was in Namboole and we have hardly come out of there. For anyone to tell you that the man is no more is indeed shattering. 

They sometimes say that God does his things in a mysterious manner and they sometimes add that those he loves die without pain. Maybe God loved him and he has gone the way he has. 

We shall immensely miss him. I can say this to the family and people of Zombo: the people of Bushenyi have a bond with you because he made a tremendous contribution in the development of Bushenyi as a region. May God bless him and rest his soul in peace. Thank you, Mr Speaker

3.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Mr Sam Engola): Mr Speaker, it is with deep shock that I heard of the death of hon. Stanley Omwonya. On Sunday, we were with him at Namboole and what we discussed issues that I cannot say here because he is not here now. 

As the Prime Minister read his CV, he forgot to say that Stanley Omwonya was also a DC in Lira many years ago. I got to know Stanley Omwonya from Lira. We started working together as brothers and friends. By the time he died, he was like my brother and friend. The widow and the family know this very well. To me, a brother is one who when you have a family problem, they can come and chair the meeting to reconcile you. I did that twice with hon. Stanley Omwonya and his wife and the family. 

When we were going through the elections that brought us to the Ninth Parliament, the Movement Secretariat sent me to Zombo for one week to go and help hon. Stanley Omwonya in his elections. We worked together very well and continued to work well until the day before yesterday when he passed away. 

The family and people of Zombo have missed a great man. The people of Zombo voted for him just about three weeks ago in the primaries and he was waiting for the real polls, which he was going to win. It is very unfortunate that he has died without talking to anybody. 

When we were in Namboole for our party elections, he told me that all the people of Zombo were going to vote for me, hon. Engola. I thanked him very much and after that, he still talked to me and I promised that we would meet the next day. Today, we are not meeting and I only see a coffin in front of us here. 

I would like the people who have remained behind to help the family of the late hon. Stanley Omwonya - the wife, children and grandchildren. If you are a friend, you do not see that your friend has gone and then you forget the family. Let us think of the family and find ways to help the people of Zombo, Let us go and bury him in a good way, the way we have attended Parliament here, in the numbers that have come to give their last respects to hon. Stanley Omwonya today. I pray that his body rests in eternal peace.

3.16
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here on behalf of the people of West Nile to pay tribute to the late Omwonya Stanley whom I have known for a very long time.

I first met him when he was posted to the Ministry of Relief and Social Rehabilitation as assistant secretary. For those of you who recall that ministry then, it was one of the ministries that were well funded because all issues of relief in this country were under that ministry’s domain and he was placed in a very sensitive position. 

It was a position which was to receive, coordinate and distribute relief services. He carried out his job very well without any commodities disappearing in his hands. We pay tribute to him for the fact that he was able to walk with his head up and be able to make us, who come from West Nile, proud.

Secondly, the late Stanley Omwonya was a man who loved his God. Every Sunday, you would find Stanley Omwonya in church. Even when I first got the sad news, I rang my namesake, Mr Okecha Kassiano, who is his neighbour. Okecha said he was equally taken by surprise about his death because the previous Sunday they were together in church. He said they chatted and he even congratulated Omwonya upon winning the flag-bearership of NRM in Zombo.

The thing is that good people in this world do not live long. Omwonya was gentle and soft-spoken. He would persuade you to understand when he stood to speak. It is indeed a great loss to us, the people of West Nile. 

To the bereaved family, I would like to say life does not come to an end just because hon. Stanley Omwonya has passed on. I know in the family there are children and the widow who will still be able to continue with life. Whenever we can, we will support the cause of their wellbeing and ensure that the children he left behind are still in school and still assisted in every way. The Lord gives and the Lord takes away. (Member timed out.)

3.18
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to my fallen colleague.

I first met hon. Omwonya when I joined Parliament in 2011. We have served on the same committee of COSASE since we joined Parliament. I learnt about his behaviour actually when we travelled together when we were carrying out investigations into the defunct Uganda Railways Corporation in Mombasa. Hon. Stanley has been very humble and religious. He loved his family, especially his children. I know he hated corruption. The only gift we can give him, Mr Speaker, is to get rid of corruption in this country.

I know hon. Stanley had won in the primary elections. I met him about two weeks ago in front of Parliament there. He was dressed very smartly in his suit and we chatted. I said, “Colleague, why are you very smart today?” He said, “You know, we are about to go for elections, I must be very smart so that I can win.” I asked, “Are you going to win?” He replied, “Yes, I am going to win. We have also had the opportunity of demarcating our constituency and I am very confident that I am going to come back to this Parliament.”

We are going to miss hon. Stanley Omwonya. I would like to extend my condolences to the bereaved family, especially the widow and the children. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.21
MR FRED EBIL (UPC, Kole County, Kole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I too got to know hon. Stanley Omwonya in 2011 when we joined the Ninth Parliament. As a new member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, I tapped into his experience as a civil servant and I learnt immensely from him. 

He liked to associate with young people wherever we went. When we went to the University of Dar-es-Salaam, for example, he had asked me to escort him for an extra session after finishing our committee work. He told me he wanted to inspire the Ugandan students who were in Dar-es-Salaam University. 

We actually met the students and from that time I learnt something from him that like people of his generation who had education not for the sake of getting jobs but to do something for their nation, he felt that it would be better if he had imparted a new sense of patriotism in the young generation who are at the university who would be future leaders and administrators. He encouraged the students to concentrate on their studies. The students followed his advice and I saw in him a person who had a lot to offer to this nation. 

Therefore, the nation has lost greatly in his death and the family has lost too. However, I believe wherever he worked and stayed, he left a big impact. It is that knowledge and experience he left to the young generation that gives me hope. 

Now, there is something that I have always said in this Parliament, that the best thing that we can do as Parliament is to go to the basics that the Government then did in the 1960s, to give the young generation quality education. Stanley Omwonya would not have been as good as everybody is saying he was if he did not have that kind of quality education. You can imagine where he studied from, but he emerged as the best and he studied at one of the best universities. 

He had the opportunity to work up to the rank of an undersecretary and he became a Member of Parliament. That is what the Ugandan youth need today. They are not asking us for too much. They are not asking what we, as Parliament or Government, cannot do. Let us go back to the basics and give our youth quality education.  (Member timed out)

3.24
MS RONAH NINSIIMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kabale District, I also wish to join the family in mourning their beloved, hon. Stanley Omwonya. 

Mr Speaker, when hon. Omwonya won this last election, he was not happy. When he was speaking, he complained a lot about the anomalies that took place in the primaries. His concern was on how his opponents could access ballot papers before the elections and it disturbed him a lot. 

Actually, he said he had got information that one of his opponents had got 5,000 ballot papers at a cost of Shs 10 million. I wish to say that the death of hon. Omwonya should become a lesson possibly to the party to think of how better they can handle these elections so that in future we can say that things are now better in memory of the late Omwonya.

Secondly, I can imagine the financial strain among members who have come from elections. I was thinking that maybe through your office and the Prime Minister’s Office, something be done for this family by Government so that - I imagine the family must be limping financially having come out of this election. There could be debts and a number of challenges that the family alone can tell.

Maybe Government could help his family in this post recovery period so that they are assured of meals and some money to help the children continue with education without necessarily waiting for the pension possibly. I thank you and I pray his soul rests in eternal peace.

3.27
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to the late Stanley Omwonya. From what I have heard from colleagues, I would like to give other information that he was actually a chief. In the Alur Kingdom, we have chiefdoms and he was a leader of one of the chiefdoms. Maybe that is what described his character and how he interacted with the people.

While Stanley Omwonya was looking active in the first week of September, he suffered heart problems and he was in hospital for about a week. That led him to be careful. I did not ask, but I observed that he was very careful during the campaigns and he stayed a little bit in Kampala while his wife and his agents did the campaigning. I would like to thank the wife who supported him.

Stanley Omwonya was a very social person and he was a man who would not want to hurt anybody. He was a man who would want to appreciate people for what they are and stay happy. He would be very disappointed if somebody was telling lies or spreading rumours. 

Many times, we shared with him what is going on in our district and he would laugh at it at one instance, but later on we would sit down and think about what to do about it. He would forget it once we had discussed it. However, he was always taking note of the constituency and talked about four things: schools, health facilities, our road which is very bad and the coffee factory which up to now we have not got. Those were his very passionate ideas about our constituency.

He loved people, as I said, and he also had his lighter moments. One time, for example, we attended a meeting together and we were all broke. He never called me by my name; he would always call me Nyarwot, meaning princess, or Nyawat. “Wat” is where I come from. He asked whether those people were going to pay us and he said they had written our names, age and sex which is a lot of information –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MS KWIYUCWINY: He had those light moments, like I was saying, and he was very social. When he finished his recent campaigns, he was very excited, although the excitement did not last long. It was a long period as I said. 

Maybe I just have to narrate a little bit about what happened after the meeting in Namboole according to a family source. He went home early and had supper with his family. At about midnight, he got up and asked the driver to take him to the hospital. They were rescued by the AAR ambulance from one of the clinics where he had asked his driver to stop. They rushed him to International Hospital Kampala and he was pronounced dead. He was due for a minor surgery on the heart on Monday. That was the life and the experiences in his last moments.  May his soul rest in peace.

3.31
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues to also pay tribute to our colleague, the late hon. Stanley Omwonya, who has been a friend and a very social Member of Parliament. Most importantly, he was a dedicated leader not only for Zombo but also for the entire country.

Tracing from the Prime Minister’s statement, he came all the way from Okoro, studied in Teso and worked in Bushenyi and Lira. He had the right blend of national leadership. We miss him. 

I would like to appeal to my colleagues; all of us have our native communities but the moment we become national leaders, let us propel national interest first. It is very important we do not retain our native agenda because the moment we become Members of Parliament, we have become national leaders. Let us propel national interest, agenda and the common good.

In his submission as a member of the Foreign Affairs Committee, he advocated for all our foreign missions to not only be missions for diplomatic matters, but commercial interest for our country so that we can market our products and tourism industry to improve the quality of wealth creation in Uganda. We miss him on that level.

He also ensured that our foreign missions got permanent owned houses so that we minimise the cost of renting. Therefore, we pray that as we pay tribute to him, Government enhances our foreign missions to become trade and commercial advocates for improvement of our trade imbalances which are greatly affecting our shillings vis-à-vis the foreign imports.

Hon. Omwonya, we pray that your family and friends stand strong at this moment. We also pray that we continue with the good principles and deeds he advocated for as he was representing the people of Zombo. I pray he rests in eternal peace.

3.35
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Like the rest have said, I would not claim to have known hon. Stanley Omwonya. As you are all aware, I am still new in this House, but in the little time I got to know him, I would like to thank God and also console the widow and the children. To me, he was a father and an elder who actually helped me appreciate my role as a leader. 

In Africa, the death of an elder is like burning down a library and indeed today as I see my elder and uncle lying before us, I feel we have lost a very big library. 

Many people have spoken positively about him. I have very fond memories of him as much as I knew him for a very short time in the Committee of Local Government where I served together with him. He was always very inspirational to me. He guided me a lot and I thank him today. 

I also want to thank the widow for standing firm besides the honourable. Today, while we are speaking very fondly of him, we know that you played a very big role. May God guide you, strengthen you and may God be with him. Until we meet again, fare thee well, honourable. 

3.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, the Alur Kingdom and community has lost a great leader. The late Stanley Omwonya stood to become the chairperson of the Nebbi community but was defeated by the hon. Grace Kwiyucwiny. The Nebbi community was a very good training ground. I also served there as a treasurer for six years before I came to this Parliament. 

In 2009, I recommended hon. Stanley Omwonya to be promoted to the position of a permanent secretary. However, since this delayed, he decided to come to this Parliament in 2011. 

You are all aware of what he has done. He has been in two committees, the Committee of Foreign Affairs and the Committee of Local Government Finance. He has served very well to the best of his ability.  

Mr Speaker, the late Stanley was very excited when Okoro County was divided into two, Okoro County and Ora. We are grateful that God had allowed him to go through in the primary election. It was something that he was excited about. However, should this be the price? He went through the election and then immediately succumbed to this heart problem. Is this what elections should be like?

The hon. Omwonya worked for this constituency. We pray that the people that have remained will ensure that this new constituency stands the test of time and is effectively built for the good of the people and for all.

Mr Speaker, hon. Stanley Omwonya went to St Joseph’s College Ombachi. During those days, we used to pray in Latin. In the Catholic Church, we thought God understood Latin better than any other language. Permit me to say this to this Parliament in Latin: “Parlamentum liberat ab omni malo”. It means, God liberate the Parliament of Uganda from all evil.  This is the ninth person in the Ninth Parliament to pass on. I am asking God to deliver this Parliament from the fangs of death. Mr Speaker, you mentioned this in your communication. You cannot complain, but I am lamenting to God to deliver us from this –(Interjections)– Mr Speaker, it is sad! 

The late Stanley Omwonya has left behind a widow and a very large family of 11 people. Having gone through what we went through, I am appealing to friends and members to – Possibly, most of the family resources have been used during this election. 

I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister who joined the family yesterday at the residence of the late. His residence location is as follows: Take the direction of Rider Hotel and then follow the Kirinya Road. You will find a place called Namboole High School and you will be guided further from there. This is because there will be Holy Mass there at 7 O’clock tonight. Tomorrow at 9 O’clock, there will be a requiem mass at Our Lady of Africa Mbuya Catholic Church. The body will then be transported to Warr for burial. 

On Friday, tribute will be paid to him by the district council for the good work he has done for that district in particular and Uganda in general. The burial will be on Saturday starting at 10 O’clock with a Holy Mass. We expect members to come and join the family during this last journey of our beloved friend. 

We thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. He was with the family last night. We encourage you to come and join the family this evening. We also expect H.E the President to be the chief mourner. May the Almighty God sustain the family and rest the soul of Stanley Omwonya in eternal peace. I thank you.

3.43
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO IN CHARGE OF POLITICAL MOBILISATION (Mr Abraham Byandala): Mr Speaker, I stand here to pay tribute to our colleague, hon. Stanley Omwonya, who passed away on Monday. I would also like to convey condolences of the people of Luweero and my family. 

When I learnt about the death of hon. Omwonya, I could not believe it. This is because we had been together. We had chatted on Sunday so it was really shocking. When my fellow colleagues spoke here that he loved children that is when I came to understand. This is because the late has been a great friend to my son. I do not know how that came about. My son always talked about the late. I would always ask him what his friend said. He would respond with what Stanley had advised him to do. I would encourage him to follow that advice. 

Therefore, I have really lost Stanley Omwonya because he has been a great adviser to my son. My son now remains with only hon. Lokeris since he always talks about him. 

Hon. Omwonya was one of the new Members of Parliament in the Ninth Parliament that I looked for. I was anxious to see who that gentleman was that had defeated my colleague in the profession, Engineer D’Ujanga. When I spoke to him, I saw a man who listens, who was steady and smiling very well. I have enjoyed my stay with him in all the years he has been here with me in the Ninth Parliament. 

He has been very dedicated, simple, but also very serious. I appeal to everybody to behave in the same way. My only advice to the family is to take everything to God. This has happened to you. It has happened to others and it is going to happen to many more in future. May his soul rest in eternal peace.    
 
3.45
MR MAXWELL AKORA (UPC, Marunzi County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to join my colleagues in paying tribute to our fallen colleague, hon. Stanley Omwonya Oribdhoghu. 

I first met hon. Omwonya in 1999 when he was the Under Secretary at the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, in charge of Finance and Administration. At that time, I was working at the Uganda Wildlife Authority as a director and I worked very closely with hon. Omwonya who was in charge of finance, ensuring that all the resources from Government are released to the Wildlife Authority. Subvention and project support from the World Bank were received in full and on a timely basis; that enabled the Wildlife Authority to restore and maintain the conservation integrity of the national parks in Uganda.

Hon. Stanley Omwonya was a respected member of the Luo community in Kampala. He was, as hon. Grace Kwiyucwiny indicated, a member of the Alur royal family of which he was very proud and at one time he was the head of the Alur community in Kampala.

Hon. Stanley Omwonya worked in many parts in this country including Lango. He personally told me that he was the Assistant District Commissioner in charge of Aloi sub-region in Lango and he grew very fond of the region. Indeed, he had travelled widely in the region more than I who comes from the Lango region. I realised that he was very fond of his experience and his relationship with people of Lango. On behalf of the people of Lango, I would like to convey our sincere condolence to the family of hon. Stanley Omwonya for this very tragic death.

Hon. Omwonya was a member of the Local Government Accounts Committee of which I am Vice-Chairperson. I have worked with him very closely over the last two years in the committee. He was a very reliable and committed member of the committee. Mr Speaker, you know that most committees have challenges of raising quorum and ensuring regular attendance in meetings. Hon. Omwonya would always turn up in good time whenever informed at very short notice, to ensure that the committee business take place. 

In that regard, he participated very actively in a programme that we initiated called the Government Accountability Performance and Participation Project, co-funded by the Parliament of Uganda and USAID, where we sought to reach out to the District Public Accounts Committees and the District Executive Committees, councils and stakeholders, to ensure that accountability at the lower local governments at the district and the lower local governments are timely and that accounting officers responded to issues that are raised by the Auditor-General.

In that regard, I personally travelled around the country to many locations with hon. Stanley Omwonya to whom I increasingly grew close. The last I remember, we shared the same vehicle and I was picked up when we came from Masindi by his son, who will remember that I had a very close relationship with his father.  As we pay tribute –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you were just concluding, please. Please use the three minutes; we will not be granting anymore. 

3.49
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join the rest of the House to appreciate and pay tribute to the loss of our colleague, hon. Stanley Omwonya. I came to know Stanley in 2010 while we were picking our documents from plot 10 and we had a few issues that we were sorting out while we were running for the primaries, before coming to Parliament.

Again, when we came back to pick our documents at the last hour, I realised that he was also contesting with some very big shot and I also had the scenario in Busia. We shared a lot at that time but good enough, he was able to get the flag and I lost at that time and I came as an independent. We thus became friends from that time.

We started generating projects with hon. Omwonya especially in the health sector. I had a friend who had promised to give me solar panels and while we were sharing, he was so inquisitive to know what is going on and how it could also get to his people. I remember I was travelling to Dubai and he gave me some money to buy him three panels which I brought and I believe he must have distributed them to his people. I also took about five to my people. From that time, we have been sharing a lot.

Towards this time when we were running for these primaries of NRM, we shared. He wondered whether I would make it. He wondered why I was moving from being independent to run for a campaign that I was not certain of. I assured him that I have the mandate of the people and this is a call. This is the type of person we know. 

What surprised me most was our colleague, hon. Stanley Omwonya, winning an election and not being happy with the win. That really puzzled me because we were at plot 10 trying to pick our bags to go to Namboole but you would tell from his face that he was not happy and there was something that I think God had indicated to us, which we did not know. I still wonder whether there is really no problem in this Parliament. We may be here standing and speaking but I think there is a problem that we need this House to help us investigate. I believe that there is big pressure on the Members of Parliament and this Parliament needs to come out clearly and support the members on how they can have support in their constituencies.

I know we are doing a lot of work that even Government would have done and this has left members in debt. You may win an election but with a lot of debts behind that you do not even get to be happy. Therefore, sometimes when somebody dies abruptly, people may not know. We can talk of – (Member timed out_)

3.52
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I commiserate with family of the late Stanley Omwonya, the people of Zombo and the nation at large. It is such another sad moment for the country and with Parliament. We are mourning a colleague whose death has occurred in a similar pattern with the previous two deaths.

Mr Speaker, the death of Gen. Aronda was such a shock to many of us who had not heard about his sickness; the death of the late Dr James Mutende was yet another shock to us who had been with him the previous day and we did not know about his sickness and now, to us who were with Stanley just the day before are shocked again. These three successive deaths are occurring in a certain pattern which really surprises all of us as Parliament and as a nation. 

Mr Speaker, I have associated closely with the late Stanley in this Parliament. I have known him as a very calm person, whose face always wore a smile, a man of humility, very gentle and was so nice to associate with. That he lies before us at this time is such a painful thing that we have to take in painfully, though. 

I would like to say that when we are going through the time of campaigns – this I am speaking to us who are here and to the nation out there – we need to remember that a time is coming when we shall be no more and people will be talking about us. A lot of things have happened in these campaigns. People have harmed others. People have killed others and some have actually shed blood although not died. It has been so bad that sometimes one wonders whether we know that a time is coming when we shall be before the Lord and answering questions from Him. 

I therefore would like to conclude my submission by saying that this is what our Lord Jesus says that, “Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” He is inviting us to come to Him so that He gives us rest. He is inviting saying that “I am knocking at the door, open your hearts and I will come in.” He is there close to us to comfort us and to give us life. He is the truth – (Member timed out.) 

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. Stanley is no longer with us today but we preferred it when he was with us.

To the family, I send my condolences and the condolences of the people of Ndorwa West and also to let you know that your dad did a lot of good to you as the family and to the country and we value his contribution.

Stanley was a loyal cadre of the NRM party. He had a stable character. What he said in the morning would be the same thing he would say in the evening. Every time we had a meeting of the caucus, you would be sure that what we agreed in the caucus is the same thing he would support in the House. We will greatly miss him. We would like to thank the people of Zombo District who raised him, nurtured him and gave him the values that he brought to the entire country.

Mr Speaker, the passing of the three colleagues in the last two months in a similar manner teaches us something; it teaches something written in the Bible that God teaches us how to number our days so that we can gain heart of wisdom. May we learn from the passing of hon. Stanley how to mend fences with those that we have hurt and those that have hurt us during this recent election. May we learn how to strengthen our relationships and friendships and may we learn that we will never learn the purpose of life until you become spiritual. You will never appreciate the purpose of life until you think about what life will be when this early life ends.

Stanley called me a few days ago and we shared a lot about what he had gone through during the primaries. I think as a party it is something that we need to address.

We will miss him as an individual. From the people of Kabale, we were happy when he served us as an administrator. He contributed immensely to the stability of our district. 
May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.59
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. Death is not a strange thing amid service. We have seen people die time and again. However, when it comes suddenly especially the way it has taken our colleague, brother and friend, hon. Omwonya, it is very difficult to accept, very difficult to bear and very difficult to get over it.

I kept on asking myself many questions from the time I received the news of the death of our brother and friend. I was wondering; could it have been due to stress and fatigue accumulated during the primary elections? Again I also wondered the way our brother handles his politics - I do not think he could have been over stressed. He handles politics with a high level of diplomacy, humility and gentility. In fact, he was more of an administrator than a politician. I have been to his constituency and the way he interacts with his people, the way he handles issues; it is really sad that he is now lying in front of us never to move again.

To the family, I would like to console you by saying that it is only God who has power over life, power to give and power to take. It is my prayer that during this very difficult time, the Almighty God, the giver of life comforts you and strengths you.
May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.01
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion in paying tribute to our fallen colleague, my uncle hon. Omwonya.

Mr Speaker, as it has been reported, within this short period, we have lost three colleagues and in this short period, we are still in the electioneering season. It has been reported that during this season, most of the politicians have developed stress. Therefore, this calls for the government intervention and the political parties to put in place mechanisms which can help the politicians to try and deal with the stress.

Stress is such a dangerous disease that if not handled well, people can lose life and I know we need these interventions. I would urge the government to make sure that in most of the health centres, we have these services of counsellors and the doctors must be on alert because the season is on-going until March. Where we have come from especially my party, it is not an easy season. We actually need treatment.

Mr Speaker, in this process, we may possibly need to revisit the timeframe of having these electioneering processes and all the activities because once you put a candidate and the people - you make them remain in that situation for a long period, this causes a lot of problems to these people! The brain is being overworked; physically you are overworked and resource wise you are being overworked. 

I would therefore urge the government to make sure that in future, we reduce on this timeframe because it will help both the families and the candidates since a politician does not work independent of the family and the community. If you move around the country side, you will find everyone is excited or stressed. Even when people are crossing the road, some do not want to hear the hooting and do not even see the cars. People are just crossing and you have to stop. This is a bigger problem than what we are seeing and, therefore, we ask the government to come in and see how to handle the situation.

Mr Speaker, my uncle hon. Omwonya was a trained administrator and a leader and this was evident in the way he used to present himself and in the way he used to talk. We have lost such quality in him which may not be recovered from anybody –(Member timed out_)

4.05
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. On behalf of the people of Agago and on my behalf, we would like to convey our condolences to the family of the late Stanley Omwonya.

Mr Speaker, when we relocated from Baumann House to a new office, we found ourselves sitting in the same office with hon. Stanley Omwonya. I recall very well that Stanley was such a very good man. Not only that but we used to chat a lot in the office and it came to a time when we were planning to go back for our election in the primaries. I remember in one of our discussions, Stanley said that it is not that he is a weak man if he is to lose the election but the whole thing will go back to how the civil servants are not responding towards Government programmes to implement them effectively.

He did mention issues about roads, schools, health centres and many other things that touch the community and indeed we were sharing and comparing notes both of the people of Zombo and Agago. In our discussions, we were trying to see how we can improve this.

Indeed Stanley was a humble man. On one occasion, we wanted to relocate our desks from the office and he first asked me, “Amos what do you think? Which corner would do you like to sit?” I said, “You are the elder; can you pick?” He said, “No, you start; I have given you the honour.” Therefore you can see how good such a person was.

I would like to convey condolences to the family of Stanley. The Bible says, “All things work for good to those who love Him” and it is a moment for us to begin looking for the will of God to what is happening now. I know He has the will and plan and a very good purpose for the family. The only remaining thing is, let us trust in Him and remain united; we know His calling is a good one and He is the answer. For He said He is the husband to the widow and father to the orphans and we believe He has a good plan. 

We shall remain to be relatives and friends; call on us, call on the Parliament and on people whom you have known because God has intended that this was the moment for us to know Stanley that we worked together –(Member timed out.)

4.09
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro North County, Isingiro): Mr Speaker, I wish to join my colleagues who have spoken before me to pay tribute to my friend and colleague. I have known the late hon. Stanley Omwonya since the mid-80s when I first joined the civil service as an Assistant Secretary in the Office of the President and I was placed under his guidance and tutorage and ever since that time, Stanley has been my very close friend until recently when we met here in Parliament.

As fate would have it, we did serve on the same committee which I did chair, the Committee on Foreign Affairs. He served with dedication, love and commitment; he never erred in any assignment that I gave him. He was very ready and willing to take any opportunity to be delegated to any part of the country or world to lead a delegation, which he did so well and reported back. I will ever remember him for his total guidance and counsel at times of difficulty in the committee and general work of Parliament.

He was a very quiet man, very calm but exuded a lot of confidence in whatever he put his hands on. I know him as a very strong character but in a very calm way. He is like a chain. A chain is so soft, very malleable but very difficult to break. That was Stanley here before you.

He was also a very dependable and reliable person. Every time we had a problem, for instance, he made sure that he spoke last and in his speaking last, he would give guidance to all of us and which we all took. I will always remember him for that; he never was a selfish person. He was so open and religious. At one time we were having a late lunch and I asked him about the trials and tribulations in the constituency and he told me: “Look here Alex, it is not easy”. At that time it was coming to about 5.00 p.m. and he was telling me he was going to board a bus to serve his people. It has always been something that I could not imagine. Old as he was, he was still traveling to his people, as late as that time. 

My heart goes out of course to his family which he was very kind to show me and I also showed him my family. Since that time we have become so close. I will always remember him for his kindness. 

His life can only be summarised as follows: He loved his people so much; he loved his work so much with a lot of dedication and support. He was so kind in other people’s troubles. He was ever willing to help others and was courageous.

4.12
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bubulo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to someone I used to refer to as my brother-in-law because Stanley is my brother-in-law; he is a brother to my late husband.

I wish to pay my condolences to the family, the widow and the children but I would like to advise you or give the same advice I have given to my fellow widows here that take heart and life will continue. I lost my husband at the hands of Idi Amin but I have lived on and I have brought up my children and I never saw his remains. Maybe he was thrown in Namanve or somewhere. Therefore, at least you have the remains of your husband and you will bury him and know he is gone but you will live along with him.

I remember Stanley, when I entered Parliament I joined the Committee on Foreign Affairs and I did not know what happens in committees. When I was talking to him, he asked where I had come from and what I was doing before. I told him I was a teacher trainer and became RDC then went into Foreign Service. Then he said, we have got some body with experience of foreign affairs, you will help us; that is the encouragement he gave me and we moved along well.

The next time, he gave me a piece of advice; it was in form of a joke. We went to Cairo and while coming back, there was so much turbulence that I got a bit scared. I looked behind in the seat he was and I told him about the turbulence and he said, but you told me you worked in foreign affairs, you must have flown around? Now why are you scared? I said every flight is different from the other. That was the joke he cracked on me. 

When I was told that he told his driver to take him to the hospital, I remembered the type of man who had courage. If he encouraged me on the plane, an old woman as I am; he had the courage to even go to the driver and ask him to take him to the hospital. Therefore, he has died a courageous man, a man of humility and we will really miss him on our Foreign Affairs committee. Stanley, go to God and let him rest you in eternal peace. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.15
MS ANN AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Moyo District and on my own behalf, I would like to pay condolences to the grieved family of the late hon. Stanley Omwonya.

Mr Speaker, I came to know hon. Omwonya when he joined Parliament and I was on the same committee with him, the COSASE. I knew him as a very humble person that you will not even know that he has done all the administrative work which has been mentioned in this place. 

The late hon. Omwonya was a focussed person in the committee. He would not talk anyhow but was focussed such that he guided us on many things that we discussed in the committee. He was a friendly person and I will miss him because he was one person who used to call me sweetheart and at times he also used the same word to refer to other people and I would always ask him: “When you see me you call me sweetheart and when I am not here you do not call me sweetheart.” Those were the kinds of jokes we used to have with him.

He is a person whom I will really miss. As the Treasurer for the West Nile Parliamentary Group, this is a man who was always there. When there was an issue to do with the West Nile Parliamentary Group, he always came forward to pay his contribution whenever we were required to do so. He was a person who was ready to bring unity amongst us the Members of Parliament from West Nile.

To the grieved family, especially to the widow, I would like to say that take and heart and be consoled in the kind words you have heard in this Parliament today. Your husband has been such a good person and we would like to pray that his legacy of love and hard work remains with the family. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.18
MR KENNETH ONGALO-OBOTE (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kalaki whom I represent in this House, I rise to support the motion of paying tribute to the late Stanley Omwonya. I first met Omwonya on 18 May 2011 as we sat in the North Wing parking lot waiting to be sworn in. He came after me by one person, hon. Hillary Onek, and from then on fate kept throwing us together.
 
We both served on the Committee on Foreign Affairs from the beginning up to the time he passed away and we were both executive members of the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Social Protection. Mr Omwonya was very passionate about the rights of the underprivileged and on the Committee on Foreign Affairs; he was ever concerned about the welfare of junior staff abroad and of Ugandans working abroad in kyeyo jobs. His concern even reached the extent where he often pushed our chairman to look for money to repatriate bodies of dead Ugandans abroad. On the Committee on Foreign Affairs, I travelled with him on a number of occasions and Stanley had that positive attitude around him that always attracted people.

His joy was infectious and everybody, no matter who it was, could not help but join Stanley in laughter. I find it hard that I will not hear that laughter anymore. On the Forum for Social Protection, he always fought for the extension of social assistance grants for empowerment (SAGE) throughout Uganda and really believed that this was one of the best programmes that the government has executed. 

I wish to take this opportunity to castigate the media in Uganda. I have wanted to do this for quite some time and I know it may open the wilderness net but I think the media should act responsibly when they report. I think we pay our hard earned money to buy newspapers and they owe us correct and accurate reporting. I met with Stanley on Sunday and he told me he had won the NRM primaries and was very happy about it. We hugged each other and I was therefore very shocked when I saw one of our newspapers reporting almost with glee that NRM MP loses miserably, dies.

I felt so bad about this and wondered whether these people have feelings for peoples’ families and I think the media should style up. I know they are going to take me on seriously but I am glad I have said this because I have wanted to say it for a long time –(Member timed out.)

4.21
MR AHMED AWONGO (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to my late brother, hon. Stanley Omwonya. 

The late was a friend of all. Before he died on Sunday at about 1.30 p.m., he rang me to say that he was organising some lunch for his friends and that I should join him for that lunch. However, because I had other things to do, I told him that we would have made time in the evening and indeed in the evening at about 5.30 p.m., he rung me again to say that we could have supper together.

I do not know why all this happened; I told him that I had some friends with whom I was going to have a small consultation meeting. He said, “If you are having a meeting with your friends, can we then meet tomorrow?” The following day at about 9.30 a.m. on Monday, I rang him but his phone was off and I wondered what could have happened. I tried hon. Drito’s phone because each and every day if I rang him and did not get him, I would call Drito and hon. Drito would be able to tell me where the late was. This time when I rang Drito’s phone, I was told that my brother had passed on. That gave me a very big shock. I remembered the lunch and supper he had invited me to, which I turned down.

I think he was just trying to say bye to us and more so bye to me. I am completely depressed and stressed by all this that has happened but what consoles me is the fact that each and every thing that we do in this earth comes from God –(Member timed out.)

4.24
MR AZA ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of West Moyo County and on my own behalf, I would like to send our sincere condolences to the family members, in-laws, friends and relatives for the demise of our dear beloved Stanley Omwonya. Indeed the people of Uganda, Government, the people of Zombo and West Nile have lost a giant in politics, leadership and governance of this country.

My dear family members, God gives and takes. Take heart; we are here to give you courage. We are here to mourn and at the same time celebrate. Mourn because our friend has left us abruptly. He had tasks to perform; he has not finished the work that he was doing and that is why we are here mourning. On the other hand, we are here to celebrate the good deeds and all that he has been doing for Uganda and for all of us. 

He has been a celebrated and seasoned senior administrator. He was a good leader and role model for all politicians; he was a family man and God fearing, a team builder, a consensus builder, a harmoniser – he developed harmony. He was a hard worker and a man of integrity and probity – that was hon. Omwonya. We are here to celebrate all these good deeds and I hope we can emulate his exemplary leadership style.

The members of APNAC, the Foreign Affairs committee and members of COSASE will all miss him. All the places he has worked in as District Commissioner, Under Secretary, West Nile Parliamentary Committee and the caucuses will dearly miss him.

I am here today to mourn him because of what he did for us. When we went to Moyo District on a fact finding mission over the border problem between Uganda and Sudan – Kajo-Kegi and Moyo District – nine of us were held captive but it is because of his diplomatic moves that our entourage was – (Member timed out.)

4.27
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): I thank you, Mr Speaker and Members. I rise on behalf of the people of Mitooma and on my own behalf to pay special tribute to the late Stanley Omwonya. I knew him as a colleague in the civil service where we both served with the several Government departments and he rose to the rank of Under Secretary before joining politics. He was a highly conscious person and dedicated public servant and a people person. He brought this wealth of experience and knowledge to Parliament. He was thorough in everything that he did.

A lot has been said – he was not only a soft spoken person but also had a calm and peaceful demeanour, he was non-controversial and non-confrontational and yet very confident indeed. He had a distinguished character and the way he carried himself brought value to the business of this House.

It has already been said that he was passionate about fighting corruption.

Mr Speaker, it was rather painful in these last elections to note that members who should be encouraging and supporting one another were busy fighting and tearing at one another adding onto the stress that is already evidently exerted by the electorate. If I would appeal to my colleagues, we should learn to support and encourage one another. 

My heart goes out to the family and as my colleagues have said, trust in God. In Jeremiah 29:11, the word of God says, “For I know the plans that I have for you,” declares the Lord, “Plans to prosper you and not to harm you, plans to give you hope and a future.” These things do happen and we get hurt but God’s plan still endures. Therefore, let us trust God. With that, may hon. Stanley Omwonya’s soul rest in eternal peace. 

4.30
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to the late hon. Stanley Omwonya on behalf of the people of Ibanda and on behalf of the African Parliamentary Network Against Corruption (APNAC) where I am the Vice Chairperson, Uganda Chapter and Board Member for Africa re5gion.

The late hon. Stanley Omwonya was one of our own and a very committed member of APNAC, which is very committed to fighting corruption. The late was really very committed as an advocate of fighting corruption.

The late hon. Stanley Omwonya on one of our outreaches when we had gone to Rwanda made a very intelligent contribution to the extent that many of the chapters that were present adapted what was presented by the late hon. Stanley Omwonya. I felt very proud having one of our own. I did not actually know him closely until we were in that conference in Rwanda. I was very proud and humbled by the submission of the late hon. Stanley Omwonya.

I would like to talk about the late hon. Stanley Omwonya as a very principled man, a diplomat and a man of integrity. This is for example why both sides of this House are actually very committed to paying tribute and mourning the late hon. Stanley Omwonya equally because he was very upright and friendly to each and every member of this House. He went out of his way to ensure that members, at the basic standard, were not rubbed the wrong way and I salute him for that. 

I believe that this Parliament should feel proud because the late hon. Stanley Omwonya has left a very rich legacy for both this House and for his family. To the family of the late hon. Stanley Omwonya, I would like for you to know that he was a very upright and wonderful man.

I hate to think that he actually died of stress because he was a real diplomat who would not take things very seriously to the extent that people would think that his death was a result of the stress of the elections.

Last Saturday, as we were heading to State House, there was a lot of traffic jam and the late hon. Stanley Omwonya and hon. Martin Drito found me heading to State House in my car and he actually requested if the three of them would join me. I was with hon. Jalia Bintu who had gone for the regularisation of her credentials and I was alone in the car. I said, “Fine. Jump in.” He was very happy and overjoyed and told me that he had gone through the primary elections and in his own words said, “They curved out a county for me and I am very happy that I have made it to Parliament.” I felt very happy for him but only to see the by-lines on the television that hon. Stanley Omwonya was no more. It is very sad indeed that we cannot talk or share anymore but he has done his part. 

The onus is upon our country, our party and this Parliament to emulate him and do our part. May your soul rest in eternal peace.

4.35
DR SAM OKUONZI (Independent, Vurra County, Arua): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion and want to convey condolences on behalf of the people of Vurra, members of the Greater North Parliamentary Forum and the members of the Foreign Affairs committee of which I am the chairperson and where he was an active member.

I came to know the late hon. Stanley Omwonya when we joined Parliament in 2011. He was a very warm, friendly and social person. It was as if I had known him for a very long time. 

We shared a lot of things. He was a colleague and neighbour in the constituency. I come from Vurra and Zombo is just my neighbour and we have shared functions together many times. The one that I remember vividly is when he was officiating the ordination of his son who had become a priest last year. He was deeply a religious person and that function really cemented our relationship. I came to know his family when he took me to his home. 

We shared a lot. I have dedicated a lot of my work in fact at the Foreign Affairs Committee to him because I thought he was a mature person; somebody whom you could rely on. Whenever there was a crisis and I did not trust myself to handle it, I would ask him to do it for me. The last one was when I had to compose a team to go to Cairo because there was a very serious crisis at the Cairo Mission. I trusted nobody else except him to go and handle that crisis. He came back and told me so many things that could have gone wrong in that meeting. People were almost killing each other in that mission. He handled it very well and gave me the report which we have discussed at the committee.

Therefore, he was a person of that calibre. In fact, members of my committee have complained that I have been relying too much on him. However, I can now see from what people are telling me that I took the right decision to put a lot of trust in him to handle some of the sensitive things of the committee.

However, Mr Speaker, I also would like to reflect a little bit about the things which are killing us as Members of Parliament here. Over the last three months, we have lost three Members of Parliament to nothing else except non-communicable diseases and mainly to do with the heart. I also note that all these members of Parliament are male. We know in the medical field that men are very difficult to deal with in exposing their medical problems. It is one of the things the government should take upon itself to inform the community including Members of Parliament about the dangers of non-communicable diseases, particularly heart diseases.

Many of us may not know that diagnosis of heart disease comes at the end unless you go and check yourself. Therefore, it is important for us to note –(Member timed out.)

4.40
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much. I bring condolences from Bugungo in Buliisa and Bunyoro in general as neighbours of the greater Alur community.

I have been calling the late Stanley “wod paco”. I did not know when I met him on Saturday at State House’s gate when he was disembarking with my brother Drito that it was the last handshake we would have. 

God gave us Stanley and he has taken him. It is for us as neighbours that when something affects the community across the river, it affects us too. It is because we co-exist as a community. We have an old relationship - when we had Sleeping Sickness long ago, a lot of our people went to Zombo and never came back. 

Therefore, we do not address you by tribe because we do not know who remained across and who did not. Even when we had the Kabalega conflict, people went as far as Lango and Nwoya. Therefore, we look at ourselves as relatives and friends.

Stanley always behaved very diplomatically as everybody has put it and he leaves that level of standard for us to emulate. 

Members have also talked about the stress and challenges we are having. You can imagine somebody victorious is out happy. As leaders, what are we going to do to make sure that the political dispensation we choose to go for stops this and de-commercialises the politics so that you are not there as a personal shock absorber? In the days of the multi-party system, we would see a party sponsoring somebody and there is no stress on an individual. I had an uncle, Yosam Mugenyi, who I did not see running around to become an MP? It was only structures and co-operators.

We need to learn something from the then political parties. Otherwise, you will say you are political parties, but you will move as individuals. When you become commercialised, then you will carry the stress as an individual and where service delivery is failing, you will have to stand in. At the end of the day, it will cause a very high risk. I think –(Member timed out.)

4.43
MAJ. GEN. PHINEHAS KATIRIMA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to support the motion and extend my condolences and that of the UPDF to the bereaved family.

Mr Speaker, I first met the late Omwonya in 1985 when he was the district commissioner of Bushenyi and I was just a young man; several years of age, emerging from the bush. I had been assigned state duties to operate at district level as a co-ordinator for Bushenyi. The late Omwonya, as an experienced administrator, received and supported me very well, although I was his junior in terms of years. 

The district at that time was very hostile. It was full of syndicate UPCs. He helped me turn it around to the extent that over so many years to date, Bushenyi is one of the greatest supporters of the people’s struggle and the movement.

I associate myself with Tthe so many positive attributes members have said about the late Omwonya. He was indeed a very good example of a civil servant. I call him an epitome of the civil servants in Uganda. If we had civil servants of his calibre, the resources which are now being eaten by the civil servants would be reaching the people in service delivery.

We did a reform in the civil service in 1987 and maybe it is high time, Mr Speaker, another reform was done so that we can make improvements in the Civil Service to get people like the late Omwonya so that this country can move more miles ahead and faster.

I found him to be a humble and soft spoken gentleman and the epitome of a civil servant. His character was selfless and he was a brilliant man, honest and sociable, as he has been described - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me recognise, in the VIP Gallery this afternoon, hon. Anthony Butele. He was in this House before. You are welcome.

4.47
MR MARTIN DRITO (NRM, Madi-Okollo County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. On my behalf and on behalf of the people of Madi-Okollo and my family, I wish to associate myself with this motion to pay tribute to the late hon. Omwonya.

Mr Speaker, hon. Stanley Omwonya was not only a friend to me, he was not only a fellow parliamentarian but more of a brother. We shared a lot of things in common and in most places that you saw him, when I was around, I was always with him.

However, there are certain characteristics of hon. Stanley Omwonya that one needs to pinpoint here that could illustrate better the type of person; our brother who is lying in state was. In my dealings with hon. Stanley Omwonya, first and foremost, I found a nationalist who knew no tribal boundaries, who embraced the country and reflected a lot on his background and the places he has worked in and the people he had associated with.

Above all and particularly so, I found and learnt from hon. Stanley Omwonya that to be a leader, you need to be very objective. He was a very objective person, very sober in his mind and very calm. Whatever turbulence was going on around him, you could always see that there was peace around him.

He served in several governments but one thing that I particularly liked about him was that when he was looking at all the governments he had served, there was never a time he would say that such a president was good or bad. He would always go towards the policies of the governments that he had served. He was a very brilliant person to work with. 

His family was known to my family so my relationship with him extended a lot deeper than what we were in Parliament –(Member timed out.)

4.49
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion. As we mourn the demise of our colleague, hon. Stanley, what should ring a bell in our minds as Members of Parliament is that death is not an end but rather an opener of doors to another life. When the Almighty created us, He told us that at a certain time in your life, you have to leave and go to the next world.

Mr Speaker, the late hon. Stanley has been a friend to many of us. When I joined the Ninth Parliament, I came to know him as a fellow member on the Foreign Affairs Committee. We had a trip to Tanzania and it was led by hon. Stanley. In our discussions - because at that time I was senior to him so I was the one who was supposed to guide him on the dos and don’ts of Parliament - he asked me how I had survived to be in Parliament for a third term. 

In our discussions, I told him that the most difficult term for MPs is the second term. He asked me why. I told him that it is because many people have a lot of expectations and they think that five years are enough for someone to make changes and the moment they do not see anything, those who were your agents and supporters turn against you. He told me that he had understood and that we would continue discussing how best we can win other terms.

I also found out that hon. Stanley lived a youthful life. At his age, we used to chat as if we were the same –(Member timed out.)

4.50
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join honourable colleagues in supporting the motion and paying tribute to our fallen colleague, hon. Stanley Omwonya.

Hon. Omwonya Stanley has been one of the most active members of West Nile Parliamentary Group in terms of participation in affairs of the region. We advocated for electrification in the region together and at one time, we had to summon the PS of Ministry of Energy, together with the other agencies, to explain the intermittent power supply in the region. I will mourn him for that.

I knew him through my father with whom he went to school in St Joseph’s College, Ombaci and every time he was in Arua, he requested to meet my father before he left and therefore he became my father while here in Parliament. Sometimes we shared evenings together just to confirm what the honourable Member of Kawempe North has said. You could not tell that he was far away from me in terms of age because we shared our social evenings together when the time was there and therefore he became a very close friend.

When the news broke out, it found me in Arua on Monday. I just went to the petrol station immediately to travel here. It is unfortunate, Mr Speaker, that I did not join him earlier as I had another senior member of Arua District Council who died yesterday in Mulago. Therefore, I have been trying to see how the body leaves Kampala for Arua.

We will remember hon. Omwonya for his selflessness. You could hardly tell that he was a Member of Parliament when out there in the community. He made life very easy for himself and also for members of the community. I was not surprised when he got re-elected as the flag bearer for NRM because I knew he had all the experience and you could see it in the way he does his things.

We will remember hon. Omwonya for standing out for his people together with the woman Member of Parliament for Zombo. I saw some level of cooperation that I did not see in West Nile Parliamentary Group. Even as we were working together as West Nile Parliamentary Group, there was another association of the old Nebbi District. 

This means that after Zombo broke away from Nebbi to form a district, they still maintained their unity as a district. I have seen them do certain things a little differently and we have a lot to learn from the way he wanted things to be done and I think –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I have received sad news that lightning has struck Nyakabingo Primary School in Igara West. Five pupils have died and three are in critical condition at Kampala International University Hospital in Bushenyi. I have been asked by hon. Raphael Magyezi and hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere to pass this message of sadness to the House.

Honourable members, it is time that I give to you the condolence messages that I have received so far. I have one from the Catholic Chaplaincy and they have contributed Shs 300,000.

I have one from the Secretary General of the NRM party, hon. Justine Kasule Lumumba. The party has contributed Shs 5 million. I also have a condolence message from the Government Chief Whip to the family. I have a condolence message from the Parliamentary Savings and Credit Cooperative Society Ltd. It is signed by hon. Mathias Kasamba. I also have another message from USAID Uganda Governance Accountability, Participation and Performance (GAPP) programme. It is addressed to the Clerk and signed by Tom Kanyuse, Deputy Chief of Party.

I have another message from the Buganda Parliamentary Caucus. It is signed by the treasurer, hon. Deogratius Kiyingi. I am also advised that they have a wreath to lay before we rise. We also have a message from the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme. It is signed by hon. Mary Paula Turyahikayo. It is addressed to the family. I have another message from Flight Captain George Mike Mukula to the family.

Those are the messages I have received and I will be handing them to the family with those that have financial contributions to see how to help with the arrangements.

Honourable members, we have all spoken about the death of hon. Omwonya and that it is sad. However, from your debate you know that he was not a small person. He looked very small but when he spoke, he immediately became tall. From the Speaker’s perspective, each time hon. Omwonya stood, he had to catch the Speaker’s eyes because he just never stood anyhow. 

When he stands up, he has to speak because something is serious and he wants to communicate. I am sure it was the case with the Madam Speaker and me. Each time hon. Omwonya stood, he spoke because of these rare qualities that he had.

You have talked about him as a consensus builder. I think it was detected by his father, Omwonya, when he gave him the name Oribdhogu. Oribdhogu means “consensus” and that is his real name. Omwonya is his father’s name. I am happy that he lived to his father’s expectation. In naming him Oribdhogu, he lived just to do that up to the time of his death. We salute him and ask the Almighty to rest his soul in eternal peace. 

I pass the condolence on behalf of the Speaker of Parliament and on my own behalf and on behalf of all of you and the staff of Parliament on his passing. We pray that the family may find solace in the Lord our God.

Honourable members, this would be a proper time for me to put the question to this motion. I now put the question that Parliament resolves as follows:

    1. That Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, His Excellency the President and the people of Uganda for the loss of a distinguished son of Uganda, hon. Stanley Omwonya Oribdhogu.

    2. That this Parliament takes cognisance of the dedicated service and contributions that the late hon. Stanley Omwonya rendered to his country during his life time.

    3. That Parliament collectively prays that the Almighty God sustains the bereaved and grants our departed colleague, hon. Stanley Omwonya Oribdhogu eternal rest.

I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am deeply humbled by your attendance of this sitting. Let me confess that I was worried. When this special sitting was called, I was a bit worried. I said, “Will we have the Members?” However, when I entered the House and all of you were here, what better show of solidarity can you demonstrate? I am very happy and humbled that you were able to come and pay respect to hon. Stanley Omwonya Oribdhogu. Thank you very much.

The East African Community Anthem.

The National Anthem.

(Exit of the late hon. Stanley Omwonya Oribdhogu)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this special sitting of this House now stands adjourned. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 5.09 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 

