Wednesday, 28 November 2012  
  
Parliament met at 3.10 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 
  
PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.) 
  
The House was called to order. 
  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 
  
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. Yesterday, I prematurely adjourned the House because the atmosphere was not conducive for handling any meaningful business. Honourable members were rowdy - involved in heckling, shouting slogans and generally disrupted the proceedings of the House. 

I would like to condemn in the strongest terms possible that conduct and behaviour, which in my view is beneath the dignity and honour expected of Members of this House. This House is a political arena where it is expected that all the battles concerning Uganda have to be fought in a civil manner through engaging each other in constructive debate. Our Rules of Procedure are clear on how to behave as Members of Parliament during debate, and also on how to conduct yourselves in an orderly and disciplined manner. 

I was, therefore, taken aback by this conduct, where the House degenerated into a mob and could neither allow the Speaker an opportunity to guide the House, in addition, to attempting to reach the Mace. 

During any debate, there are two sides; one side may support the motion and the other may not accept that side of the motion. This is a democratic institution, and it is expected that Members across the divide will listen to each other in respect, and ultimately either negotiate until a consensus is arrived at. Where no consensus is reached, the last option that can be explored is voting through any of the ways provided for in the Rules of Procedure. This is the minimum behaviour which I expect from Members of this House, and which I have tried continuously to remind you about. 

I also wish to remind you about the induction we had when the Parliament was opening. The former Speaker of the Kenya National Assembly spoke to you at length on the conduct of Members and their ways of handling debate. 

We are all Ugandans; there is room for us all as people’s representatives to dialogue in this House and generate consensus. It is only then that we should be able to conduct the affairs of this country in a sober and reasonable manner. I am sure that even the public must be wondering what type of Members we are. 

I am committed to chairing this House in a proper way and I will not entertain any behaviour that obstructs my ability to achieve that goal. Yesterday’s conduct went to that extent. 

I now, therefore, direct the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, to review the proceedings of yesterday; examine the videos and identify those who contributed to the disruption of the proceedings. And this should be done expeditiously so that sanctions can be exercised against those who will be found to have contributed to failure to conduct business. 

Therefore, I just want to inform Members that those who will have to be identified as having contributed to this disruption will have to face the sanctions as per the Rules of Procedure. 

So, in that context, I am suspending the work of this House until that committee has reported to us, and I also urge the Government Side, the Opposition Side and the Independent Side, to sit and see how they can bring harmony to the issues that were bothering this House on which we could not agree upon. 

So, I expect that the Rules Committee should work expeditiously from today and give us a report not later than Monday, so that action can be taken and order is restored to the work of this House. 

There is a lot of work we need to do, but I think that the conduct of yesterday does not permit us to work in an amicable manner or to ignore indeed what transpired. Otherwise, it will set a precedent that it is possible for the House to become unruly and business goes on as usual. This is not business as usual, we must put an end to these disruptions and ensure that we do the work which the people of Uganda mandated us to do. So, I adjourn the House. 

(The House rose at 3.17 p.m. and was adjourned.)
