Friday, 16 November 2012

Parliament met at 11.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I appreciate your efforts. 

This is a reminder to all Members of Parliament on the issue of registration with the medical insurance companies. This is from the hon. Bintu Jalia Lukumu Abwoli, Parliamentary Commission.

“All Members of Parliament are hereby reminded that the closing date to register with the medical insurance providers was today 16 November 2012. This, therefore, is a reminder to all of you to register, so as to enable the Clerk to Parliament to sign the agreement with the medical insurance service providers. 

Thank you. 

Hon. Jalia Bintu
Parliamentary Commissioner.”

In the public gallery this morning, we have pupils and teachers of Kibuli Demonstration School, represented by hon. Nabilah Sempala and hon. John Ssimbwa, Members of Parliament for Kampala District. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome.

We also have pupils and teachers of St. Jude Kyegombwa Primary School, represented by hon. Brenda Nabukenya and hon. Abraham Byandala, Members of Parliament for Luweero District. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, yesterday, we stopped at clause 131. So, today, we continue from there. If we get to the end, then we will see how to come back to the clauses we stood over.

Clause 132

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, under clause 132, we harmonised with the proposed amendment by hon. Kasirivu and I wish to submit that immediately after sub-clause 1, we insert the following new sub clause; “The licensee shall take into account the interests of the community after obtaining consent under sub-section 1” 

This is to provide for the community’s interests with regard to some of those critical community services.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it the same as the host community we adopted yesterday? 

MR WERIKHE: No.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is a different community? Okay. Honourable members, that is the amendment from the committee. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WERIKHE: (b) is to delete the current sub-clause (2) and insert the following; “(3) Where the parties fail to agree under sub-section (1), the matter shall be referred to the minister within 15 days from the date the parties failed to agree.”

Maybe, we pronounce ourselves on that first.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is there no justification for that?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, to provide for a process - the justification is with regard to sub-clauses (3), (4), (5) -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Then do all of them. We cannot take a question without your justification.

MR 	WERIKHE: To provide for a process of resolving an impasse between a licensee and the land owner.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, honourable members? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WERIKHE: The new proposed sub-clause (4) will read as follows:

“The minister shall within 15 days after receipt of a matter referred to him or her under sub-section (3) in consultation with the Authority consider the matter by taking into account the concerns of each party.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Within what? 

MR WERIKHE: 15 days.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: 15 days? Honourable members, is that clear? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WERIKHE: The fifth one is proposed as follows: “Following the consideration of the concerns -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which proposal is that?

MR WERIKHE: This is still under clause 132 because there are three proposals.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which part is this?

MR WERIKHE: This is a new proposed sub-clause (5) under clause 132.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are we retaining sub-clauses (3) and (4)?

MR WERIKHE: We deleted sub-clause (2); inserted sub-clause (3); then sub-clause (4) was amended as follows -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is this the existing sub-clause (4)?

MR WERIKHE: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The (4) in the clause was amended?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, propose the amendment.

MR WERIKHE: “The minister shall within 15 days after receipt of a matter referred to him or her under sub-clause (3) in consultation with the Authority consider the matter by taking into account the concerns of each party.”

That is the new sub-clause (4).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But why would you replace sub-clause (4)? Sub-clause (4) is a different subject.

PROF. KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, the amendments as moved by the Chairman in sub-clauses (3), (4) and (5) are taking interest of sub-clause (2). After sub-clause (5) in the amendments, then sub-clause (3) in the Bill becomes sub-clause (6), and sub-clause (4) becomes sub-clause (7).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, that is what I thought, because the existing sub-clauses (3) and (4) were not deleted. So, you are inserting three new sub-clauses. 

Mr Chairman, you have to be clear for the record.

MR WERIKHE: Yes, Mr Chairman. These are new proposed sub-clauses, which, actually, do not affect the current sub-clauses (3) and (4).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, can you read the last one then.

MR WERIKHE: The last one is, “Following the consideration of the concerns of the parties under sub-section (4)”-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, the one you read before. 

MR WERIKHE: “The minister shall, within 15 days, after receipt of a matter referred to him or her under sub-section (3)” - that is actually the new sub-clause (3)- “in consultation with the Authority, consider the matter by taking into account the concerns of each party.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Did we take a vote on that already? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Then the next one.

MR WERIKHE: The next one is proposed as follows: “Following the consideration of the concerns of the parties under sub-section (4)-” - which is the new sub-clause (4) - “-the minister shall make a decision and may authorise the licensee to exercise all or any of the rights under the licence on land subject to such conditions, as will have been agreed to by the parties.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, we have got it. You have to read it again without saying something in the middle. You they need to capture the text of the amendment. When you say, “of course, this is now sub-clause (4)” in the middle of what you are reading, that is what the Hansard will capture. So, you read without inserting anything when you are reading the amendment. It has to be exactly what you are presenting, without adding anything in the middle. Not even a comment.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, thank you for the guidance. “Following the consideration, - “ - this is the new proposed amendment -(Laughter)– okay, it will be as follows:

“Following the considerations of the concerns of the parties under sub-section (4), the minister shall make a decision and may authorise the licensee to exercise all or any of the rights under the licence on land, subject to such conditions as will have been agreed to by the parties.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable members, is that clear?

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I thought the best ending of that clause would state that, “-the minister shall make his or her decision and communicate to the parties -” so that we do not go into the niceties of the content of the decision, whether it is even agreed upon by the parties. The most important thing is for the minister to make a decision and communicate to the parties. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, what are you proposing?

MR NIWAGABA: So, I would propose that “- following the consideration by the minister, the minister shall make her decision and communicate to the parties.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clearer, Mr Chairman?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, Mr Chairman. I concede to the new proposal made. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, we will take the amendment proposed by the honourable member from Ndorwa, which now changes, as you withdraw yours. 

Honourable members, we agree to the proposed amendment. I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 132, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 133

MR WERIKHE: The proposed amendment is in sub-clause (1), to substitute for the word “of” appearing in line 1, the word “in” ; and for the words “interfere with” appearing in line 3, the word “disturb” to read as follows: “A land owner in an exploration or development area shall retain the right to graze stock upon or to cultivate the surface of the land in so far as the grazing or cultivation does not disturb with petroleum activities.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is clear, but what is the import of changing the word “interfere”?

MR WERIKHE: We discussed this and the consensus was that the word “disturb” was more appropriate with regard to this activity than “interfere”. So, that is actually what we came to. But since this is the Committee of the Whole House, we stand to be advised.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: “Interfere” is a more legal term than “disturb.”  

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I thought the better legal jargon would be to retain the word “interfere” instead of “disturb”.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, we retain the word “interfere” and withdraw the proposed amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, the only amendment in sub-clause (1) is changing the word “of” and replacing it with “in”. It will be “the land owner in an exploration or development area”. So, that is the change in sub-clause (1). I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Any other amendments?

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, in sub-clause (2) the proposal is to insert the words “after consultation with the Authority” immediately after the word “minister”. 

Justification:To require the minister to consult the Authority before giving the consent and this would read as follows: “In the case of a development area, the land owner within the area shall not erect any building or structure on the land without the written consent of the licensee or if the consent is unreasonably withheld, the written consent of the minister after consultation with the Authority.”  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Is that okay?

MS BINTU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Under this clause, when you look back to those areas where the exploration is taking place - let us take the case of Buliisa - we are asking that other person who wants to construct, be it a temporary or a permanent structure, to get written consent from the licensee. In the event that the licensee is not available in that area, that person should transport himself or herself to Kampala to come and look for the honourable minister. 

I have been looking at this clause and trying to think aloud; can’t we get a way of helping these people - because not everybody will afford to transport himself or herself to Kampala? Especially the women, they may not even be having money to buy food and now you are asking this person to get money to transport herself to Kampala. Possibly, by the time she gets to Kampala, she may not even find the minister there - when the minister is on other state duties. For somebody to travel from Buliisa or Nwoya to Kampala, there should be somebody who would stand in to help these people; at least to give them written consent like we have the RDCs or Chief Administrative Officer or the minister may be having his other people based in those areas, really, to help these people. Otherwise, we are making life difficult for the local people who are in those areas. But this is subject to amendment by the whole House, Mr Chairman. Those are my sentiments and concerns.    

MR ODOI OYWELOWO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. At the risk of sounding anti-people, I have the following to say; the evil this clause intends to cure is interference with the development processes, which is pretty much like what we have already passed in clause 1. The idea inherent is that exploration and development of oil must be done with the minister, if the developer thinks it will interfere with the process. It is not to ask too much. 

PROF. KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, when you look at sub-clause (3), “- to which the rights are exercised, and petroleum activities shall be carried out in a proper manner -”; it is trying to cure something in sub-clause (2); that whereas the land owner would be restrained from constructing certain buildings, the licensee should as much as possible not interfere with the land owner. 

However, we have what we call “safety zones” and I am sure that a land owner should not erect a building in the safety zone. But we are looking beyond the safety zone. A licensee can say, “Do not build even a kilometre way”, which would be unreasonable. In any case, if there is empathy between the licensee and the land owner, then I am sure the first person the land owner would run to would be their MP, who would bring them to the minister – I hope the ministers are accessible.

MR PETER LOKERIS: Thank you, Mr Chairman. If somebody is trying to erect a building, it means he or she has some means to do so. They could even have the means to travel a few kilometres, as hon. Kasirivu is saying, to see the Member of Parliament and report that they are being obstructed from erecting a building. These issues can reach the minister. But if we try to localise and trivialise these matters, there will be quarrels everywhere and it will be a village matter, and yet the issue of petroleum is a strategic profit issue, which we should handle carefully and we do not need to caution everybody that, “Do not do this or do not do that.” Otherwise, we shall not move.

I am sure what has been suggested is reasonable; it gives everybody a leeway, instead of saying everything should be in the village. In this case, we should allow the minister, who has that authority, at least, to look at the merits of either side. Therefore, I think the formulation is alright. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I can understand the sentiments behind the proposed amendments. But the question in point is the development area. Being a development area, it is within the ministerial powers, in consultation with the Authority, to determine what structures can be erected. 

I would like to propose to my colleague – if it was the general area, it is understandable. But the question we have is of a development area. Probably, what I would have inserted is; “ - shall not erect any permanent building or structure- “; I would like to propose that, “in case of a development area, the land owner within the area shall not erect any permanent building or structure on the land without the written consent of the licensee or if the consent is unreasonably withheld, the written consent of the minister in consultation with the Authority - “, so that it takes care of those concerns.
 
Otherwise, once it is a development area, it is risky; it would be interfering with the activities and it will not be in the interest of the country, and even the host community. Therefore, I would propose that you take this formulation. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If the consent is unreasonably withheld, the written consent of the minister - what if you give the responsibility to the licensee who has withheld consent to give notice to the minister that such a request has been made and he has refused it; to put the minister on notice that such a refusal exists. Would that be better?

Okay, I put the question to the proposals by the honourable member for Lwemiyaga, in the case of the land owner within this area shall not erect any permanent - “shall not erect”, okay?

MR KATUNTU: Really, I do not know what mischief the amendment that my colleague, hon. Ssekikubo is bringing, would like to cure. Are we just trying to protect a non-permanent structure?

In my view, the reason we have this clause is to make sure that there is as little disturbance to the development area as possible. But if, in the opinion of the licensee, any structure does not affect that development, then he will give consent. However, if he unreasonably withholds that consent, then the land owner has a right to appeal.

So, the land owner –(Interjections)– so, the ministerial level is for appeal purposes, when there is unreasonable withholding of that consent. I do not think – my colleague hon. Bintu, there are many ways of reaching a minister these days. I do not think there is anything very complicated about reaching these ministers, especially if it is such an important structure you want to put up. You can go through your Member of Parliament or through the RDCs at that level to reach a minister. We are not talking about small structures; we are talking about structures where you could even have put in money, and because of the nature of the development –(Interruption)

MS BINTU: I agree with you, but we also need to recognise the fact that even for those other small structures, which are put in place, those people contribute some money in putting up these structures. But I thought that what the chairman was proposing, we would possibly amend to say that if the licensee withholds the consent, then he should be able to inform the minister in writing so that the minister gets to know that there is this problem, even if the land owner delays in coming up to complain because he may be faced with other economic challenges; but the minister should be aware so that when it is brought to his or her attention, then he knows that there was this other problem.

However, Mr Chairman, if the way you proposed can be taken into consideration, then my concerns will be put to rest.

MR ODOI OYWELOWO: I thank you, Mr Chairman. A development area is a planning area. We are legislating for what is allowed and not allowed in a planning area. It is unreasonable for us to even protect semi-permanent structures in a planning area. You are not going to encourage a multitude of grass-thatched huts in a planning area –(Mr Niwagaba rose on information_) I will take it.

MR NIWAGABA: I thank you. If you look at the interpretation clause, particularly, the definition of a “development area” - and I will invite my sister, hon. Bintu to look at it. The amendment she proposes will serve no purpose. We would rather go with the position in the Bill and move forward. 

The definition of a “development area” itself looks at an area that is already delineated, where a commercial discovery has been found and we are legislating for the future and not the past. So, I invite you my sister, to abandon your amendment and we move forward.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Withdraw?

MRS BINTU: Mr Chairman –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You concede?

MRS BINTU: I concede, but it should be noted in our records that this concern was raised.  (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, is there any further amendment under clause 133? Is there any amendment? 

MR WERIKHE: I thank you. In sub-clause (3), we propose to delete the words, “lessee or,” immediately before the words, “land owner,” to read as follows: “The rights conferred by a licence shall be exercised reasonably and so as to affect as little as possible the interests of any lessee or land owner to which the rights are exercised and petroleum activities shall be carried out in a proper manner.” 

Justification: This provision was lifted from the current Petroleum Act, which was enacted prior to the 1995 Constitution. The amendment is just to bring it in conformity with the current Constitution.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is the new idea you are proposing?

MR WERIKHE: We are deleting, “lessee or” from sub-clause (3) – the words before, “….or land owner.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, what words are you deleting?

MR WERIKHE: The “lessee or” is being deleted and it no longer holds.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But you read it in your text again.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I said that in sub-clause (3), the proposed amendment is to delete the words, “lessee or” immediately before the word, “land owner.” The justification is that this provision was lifted from the current Petroleum Act that was –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Read, as amended now.

MR WERIHKE: As amended? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes.

MR WERIKHE: It will read as follows, “The rights conferred by a license shall be exercised reasonably and so as to affect as little as possible the interests of any land owner to which the rights are exercised and petroleum activities shall be carried out in a proper manner.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the amendment. Honourable members, I now put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 133, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 134, agreed to.

Clause 135

MR WERIKHE: The proposal is to amend clause 135 by substituting for sub-clause (1), the following, “Subject to section 132 and to any law relating to acquisition of land, a holder of a petroleum production licence may, if he or she requires the exclusive use of the whole or any part of a block in a development area, obtain a lease of the land or other rights to use it upon such terms as to the rent to be paid for the land. The duration and extent or area of the land to which the lease or other right of the lease shall be delayed as may be agreed upon between the holder of a licence and a land owner.” 

Justification: The licensee should be obliged to look for the owner rather than putting the burden on the land owner to look for the licensee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, honourable members? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WERIKHE: In sub-clause (2), the proposed amendment is by substituting for the word, “lessor,” the word, “land owner”. 

Justification: For clarity and to remove reference to “lessor”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, honourable members? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 135, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 136

MR WERIKHE: We propose to amend clause 136 by inserting the following new sub-clause immediately after sub-clause (3) to read as follows: “For the avoidance of doubt, the licensee shall, in addition to the compensation referred to under sub-section (1), restore the land to as near as possible to its original state in accordance with the NEMA Act.” 

Justification: To require the licensee to, in addition to paying compensation, to restore the land to as near as possible of its original state upon completion of the petroleum activities.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I thank you. Is it the NEMA Act or the National Environment Management Act?

MR WERIKHE: The National Environment Management Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, because I am not aware of a NEMA Act. For purposes of legislation, we have to state it in full.

MR WERIKHE: The proposed amendment is as follows: “For the avoidance of doubt, the licensee shall, in addition to the compensation referred to under sub-section (1), restore the land to as near as possible to its original state in accordance with the National Environment Management Act.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the amendment proposed by the chairperson. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 136, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 137

MR WERIKHE: Under clause 137, we harmonised with hon. Jalia Bintu to read as follows- substitute the words –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Where?

MR WERIKHE: Under Clause 137, sub-clause (1). To substitute the words, “and laws relating to health and safety,” with the words, “best petroleum industry practices, the Occupational Health and Safety Act, 2006 and any other applicable law” to read as follows: “Petroleum activities shall be conducted in such a manner as to enable a high level of safety to be maintained and further developed in accordance with technological developments, best petroleum industry practices, the Occupational Health and Safety Act, 2006 and any other applicable law.”

Justification: To enhance the observance of the Occupational Health and Safety Act, 2006, other than relevant laws and best petroleum practices.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, that is to make a specific cross-referencing there to another Act. Is that okay, honourable members? Okay, I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 137, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 138

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, under clause 138, the committee proposes that we insert the words, “in accordance with the Occupational Health and Safety Act, 2006 and any other relevant law” immediately after the word “necessary” to read as follows:

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Where?

MR WERIKHE: Under clause 138, sub-clause (a) at the beginning, to read: “An operator shall take such precautions as are necessary in accordance with Occupational Health and Safety Act, 2006 to ensure the safety of any person…” that is under sub-section (i), and subsequently. The introduction here is, “In accordance with Occupational Health and Safety Act, 2006.” 

Justification: To entrench the need to comply with the laws intended to promote occupational health and safety.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Members, you have heard the amendment proposed.  

MS ATIM ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Chairman. As we take the precautions, my concern is that  we are dealing with public health concerns of Ugandans, but the Ministry of Health has not really been part of this arrangement. How do we ensure that this ministry, in whose docket the public health of the citizens falls, is part of this arrangement? I beg to seek your guidance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you propose something?

MS ANYWAR: Mr Chairman, I would have loved that as we put in place this precaution, consultation with the Ministry of Health should be envisaged. I propose that we insert something like that somewhere.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, we are making reference to the Act itself - on public health.

MS ATIM ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Chairman, for that guidance. Actually, it is in reference to the Public Health and Safety Act, which puts the Ministry of Health on board. I just realised that now. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I now put the question to the amendment as moved by the chairperson of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 138, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 139

MS BINTU: Mr Chairman, under clause 139, I wish to propose an amendment to cater for the requirements on the presentation of a disaster response plan. I had already discussed this with the chairperson of the committee. So, can I present the amendment?
 
MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, yes, I received the amendment from hon. Bintu. But before coming here, I had some discussions with her and I thought we had actually agreed that her proposed amendment is taken care of under clause 71(3), (g) and (h) of the Bill. We had also agreed that since it is taken care of, we drop it. That clause reads as follows: “The field development plan referred to in sub-section (1)(b) shall contain particulars of (g); the safety measures to be adopted in the course of the development and production of petroleum including measures to deal with emergencies.”  

Paragraph (h) reads as follows: “The necessary measures to be taken for the protection of the environment.” I thought that rather than duplicating the responsibilities, her amendment would be taken care of under clause 71(3), (g) and (h).

Mr Chairman, I thought we had agreed on that with the honourable colleague; and I would like to request her to withdraw the amendment.

MR NIWAGABA: I would like to give further information in support of her to withdrawing the amendment. I would like to inform the House that even clause 139(1) covers situations that she is proposing to be captured in that amendment under sub-clause (4). So, I would urge that she withdraws the proposed amendment and we proceed.

MS BINTU: Mr Chairman, the clause that has been referred to – clause 71 (g) and (h), which provide for safety measures created in the course of the development is not addressing my concerns. My concern is to task the licensee, before going ahead with any activities, to be in position to present a disaster response plan to the Minister and the Authority, so that even when that licensee begins to carry out their activities, we should know that in the event that we experience, for example, mud flows and oil spills or explosions, there would be a plan so that this person would respond to the disaster in this way.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Isn’t that really captured under clause 71(3)(g)? In fact, clause 71 it is more specific than putting it under the general requirements, and following also in clause 139 (1). Should we take a vote on it?

MS BINTU: Mr Chairman, this clause covers mainly people who live in those areas. But with your wise guidance, I withdraw the amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I now put the question that clause 139 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 139, agreed to.

 Clause 140, agreed to.

Clause 141, agreed to.

Clause 142, agreed to.

Clause 143, agreed to.

Clause 144

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I propose to insert under clause 144 a new sub-clause (3) as follows; “The Minister shall lay before Parliament the report of the inquiry made under sub-section (1).” 
Justification: To inform Parliament and the public of the results of the inquiry.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it clear, honourable members? 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am sorry, but this is something just technical. Under the Commissions of Inquiries Act being referred to, it is only the President who can appoint a commission and not a minister. When you look at clause 144(1), it states, “Where an accident occurs, which the minister considers to be serious, in connection with petroleum activities to which this Act applies, the minister may appoint a commission of inquiry in accordance with the Commission of Inquiries Act.” I think there is a problem there. We just have to re-draft it and delete “Commission of Inquiries Act” from there because that is purely for the President under the parent Act. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Can I first take the vote on the amendment proposed by the chair to insert that requirement for the minister to report to Parliament? 

I put the question to the amendment to insert a new sub-clause (3) proposed by the committee.   

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I think with the guidance of the Shadow Attorney-General, since we appreciate the principle that is sought to be inserted, we can do with a board of inquiry because the commission of inquiry is already statutorily provided for and has specific limitations. But the change of nomenclature could solve the whole problem. I know of other laws which provide for boards of inquiries. For example, the Disputes Resolution, Arbitration and Settlements, Act. So, we could use the phrase - to avert the implications of the Commissions of Inquiry Act - we could refer to it as a board of inquiry as long as it does the same thing. 
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  You can also just replace the word “of” with “an” to make it “commission an inquiry.” Hon. Sseggona is saying instead of the word “Commissions of Inquiry,” you say, “Board of Inquiry” and what I am suggesting is, if you took out the “of” and replaced with “an” to read: “... the minister may commission an inquiry.”

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, that is okay.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, the proposal is to delete the phrase “in accordance with the Commissions of Inquiry Act”, and also, to delete the word “of” in between “commission” and “inquiry” and replace it with “an.” So, that it will now be, “Where an accident occurs, which the minister considers to be serious in connection with petroleum activities to which this Act applies, the minister may commission an inquiry to investigate the accident.” Is that okay?

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, before we move forward; we were informed when we were discussing this that there is a statutory instrument which amended the Commissions of Inquiry Act. So - 
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  A statutory instrument that amended the Act?
 
MR WERIKHE: That is what our legal officer advised us. So, I wanted to be educated on this before we proceed.
 
MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, first as an elementary principle, a statutory instrument cannot amend an Act of Parliament. But going on a speculative expedition here, if there had been an amendment in the Act itself, then it would have been reflected as a cross-reference.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, really, what you are saying is that the minister will appoint a commission of inquiry because they are appointed by ministers, but the minister will be acting on behalf of the President under the Act. So, commissioning an inquiry would be sufficient. Okay?
 
MR ODOI OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, the Commissions of Inquiry Act is Cap. 166 of the Laws of Uganda; and section 1 thereof gives the power to appoint a commission to a minister, and not the President.
 
MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, we discussed this issue and we were in a dilemma as to whether this is a preserve of the President or the minister, under the same Act.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Does anybody have the Act here?
 
MR WERIKHE: Yes, they are consulting. I can see the legal minds behind there. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I have been a member of three or four commissions of inquiry, and I was appointed by the minister.
 
MR WERIKHE: That is the argument we had. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that matter resolved? 

MR KATUNTU: I am informed that under the Transfer of Powers Act, the President transferred some of these powers to the minister. Unfortunately, the technocrats do not have that particular instrument that transferred those powers, with them here. If we had had the benefit of looking at it, maybe we would not have had any problem with the original version. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. So, which text is the honourable member for West Budama North reading from? 

MR KATUNTU: I think even that law has been overtaken by events. Maybe, if we could just stand over it for the next few minutes, we can ask them to pick up that particular instrument from their offices.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, we stand over this particular clause, specifically for this issue of whether a minister can appoint a commission of inquiry directly under the Commissions of Inquiry Act.

(Clause stood over.)

Clause 145

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, it is just a small consequential amendment – we had agreed that the provision for “etc.” should not be part of the head note. But I think we should take this as consequential.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Information, data. 

MR WERIKHE: It should be “information, data and reports” but delete “etc.” because we have “extra” and we had earlier on agreed that this was bad drafting to have “etc.” as part of the head note.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, it becomes “Information, data and reports?” Are you sure about that? Is that the position learned Attorney-General?
 
MR NYOMBI: Yes, I agree the drafting here leaves a lot to be desired. I agree with the proposal.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, so it will now be, “Information, data and reports”. Is that okay? 

I put the question to the amendment proposed on the head note of clause 145. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 145, as amended, agreed to.

 Clause 146, agreed to.

Clause 147, agreed to.

Clause 148

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We had circulated an amendment, but we wanted to find the appropriate place where to place it. We had initially looked at part III of the institutional arrangement, but we thought it would fit in well here with the availability of information to the public. I propose to insert “148(1) Public Interests and Accountability Committee” to read: “(a) A Public Interests and Accountability Committee is hereby established.” 

 (2) The committee shall, in the performance of its functions, be independent and shall report to the appropriate committee of Parliament.”  

I would also request to introduce a clause on the objects and functions of the committee, its objectives and functions as set out, and also a clause on membership of the Public Interests and Accountability Committee; then a clause on the tenure of the members and the eligibility for appointment; and a clause on the nominees to the committee published before appointment; the reporting and other functions. 

I thought it is appropriately housed under the availability of information to the public, and if Members could allow, and this is agreed upon, we hope it would encourage more transparency and more participation, not only by Parliament, but by the civil society organisations, in a way to extend and promote the availability of information to the public, and also to make Parliament and the sector accountable.

We propose that, if you allowed this, Mr Chairman, no fingers shall be pointed at this sector, and everybody will be conducting this sector in a transparent manner and indeed, we are not only accountable to ourselves, and we hope that if we put this in place, it would be the proper vehicle to enhance transparency and accountability in the sector. 

I pray that since the chairman has looked at this, I seek the indulgence of Members that it is well-intentioned. Any efforts aimed at extending the frontier of accountability and transparency should be welcomed. It is not in bad faith. We come with open hands, and it is appropriate, Mr Chairman, that you give it a kind eye.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Where is the text of the proposal?
 
MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, in our amendments, you will find it under clause 58, but as –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it harmonised? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Yes, we circulated it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What I am asking is, is it in the harmonised copy? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Yes, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What clause is it?
 
MR SSEKIKUBO: Clause 58, which initially should have been under institutional arrangement, but we thought that it may not be in the mainstream and that is why we placed it under the availability of information to the public. Otherwise, we would have introduced it in part III - institutional arrangement. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  What clause is it? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Clause 58 of our harmonised amendments; because we took into consideration the fact that it may not be an institutional body, but it is intended to generate the availability of information to the public to have participatory contribution of all the relevant members and bodies so that as a country, we move this sector forward. We should allow as much as possible if it does not do harm - maybe, if it causes harm - but in our view, it is our strong conviction that any generation of transparency promotes further accountability. 

And if we can have all the relevant stakeholders participating in this, it will be for the better of this country, so that there will not be any finger-pointing and allegations that it is either Parliament or the Executive, but you allow a wide range of actors as long as they are organised, and once this clause is accepted, we feel this is the appropriate place, because it will be enhancing public participation through those very organisations; they have representatives -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you are trying to create another institution in the Bill, outside the institutions already proposed in the Bill, called the “Public Interests and Accountability Committee”.
 
MR SSEKIKUBO: Yes, Mr Chairman. The question is, where we are placing it; whether under the availability of information to the public or we put it back under part III, under the institutional arrangements. Once we are agreeable, the placement could always follow, Mr Chairman.
  
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, can we deal with that at a different - because this one is already taken care of by this reference to Access to Information Act, 2005. So, this availability and how you access information is a stand-alone thing and if there is creation of another institution, the purpose would be different from what is under clause 148. So, maybe we could find another housing for it, but not under this. 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, before we even look for where to place it –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No. I do not want to start discussing it now under this. It will derail my -
 
MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am looking at both clauses 148 and 149. They are talking about confidentiality or access to information. In my considered opinion, there are two legal regimes that govern confidentiality of information. One, Article 41 of the Constitution and the enabling law made thereunder, which is the Access to Information Act. There can never be any other information which can be protected as “confidential” except as those provided for under the Constitution and Access to Information Act. 

Therefore, when you look at clause 148(1), “The minister may, subject to confidentiality of the data and commercial interest…” then they have introduced another tier. This “data and commercial interest” are all covered within the Access to Information Act. All the information is protected by the Constitution and the Access to Information Act. So, this law cannot protect any other information, because if it seeks to do that, that protection would certainly be unconstitutional.

My proposal is that we delete “confidentiality of data and commercial interest” and just say, “subject to the provisions of the Access to Information Act” because this is actually already covered in that Act; and when you go to clause 149, it is actually the same; “…except as provided under this Act…” So, it is giving two levels – “under this Act” and then, “Access to Information” - yet, you can only have protection under the Constitution or Access to Information Act. 

I do not know whether the Attorney-General is following my argument so that he could be able to respond.

MR NYOMBI: Mr Chairman, I would agree with the proposal made by the Shadow Attorney-General. In any case, if this clause he proposes to be deleted is included in this provision, it would have a tendency of curtailing the provisions of Article 41. Therefore, I agree with the proposal. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Katuntu, please re-state it properly, for the record.

MR KATUNTU: I am always uncomfortable to do drafting on the microphone, but I hope our people there can capture it and get it properly. What we are seeking to do is to delete any reference to “confidentiality of data and commercial interest”. And, availability of information to the public is only in accordance with, or subject to the Access to Information Act, 2005. So, I think they can re-draft it and make some consequential amendment even in the following sub-clause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But if you deleted that in the double commas; if you took that out, then it flows well, “The minister may, in accordance with the Access to Information Act, make available to the public…”

MR KATUNTU: I agree. So, the amendment should be, “The minister may, subject to and in accordance with the Access to Information Act, 2005, make available to the public…”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Did you say “subject”?

MR KATUNTU: No, not “subject” - “in accordance”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, “the minister may, in accordance with the Access to Information Act, 2005, make available to the public...”and it goes on. So, the proposal is to delete the phrase “subject to confidentiality of the data and commercial interest and...”

MR KATUNTU: Yes, that should be deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That should be deleted.  Is that clear? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 148, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 149

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, there is a consequential amendment to that clause, and I would propose the deletion of “as provided under this Act”. It will then read, “except as provided for under the Access to Information Act, 2005, all that has been submitted to the minister by the licensee shall be kept confidential and shall not be reproduced or disclosed to third parties by any party under this Act.” No, no. There are two exceptions – let me just have a second thought on the re-drafting. 

MS KWIYUCWINY: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am proposing an amendment that the first “except” should be deleted and it would read, “As provided for under the Access to Information Act, 2005, all that has been submitted to the minister by the licensee shall be kept confidential and shall not be reproduced or disclosed to third parties by any party under this Act except…” and then the rest follows.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I think in principle, let us agree that first, we are only subjecting it to the Access to Information Act. And secondly, the “shall” in clause 149(1) is a bit problematic. I would agree, “the licensee shall be kept confidential and may not be reproduced or disclosed by any party” then you leave out “under this Act”. The “exception” is a bit problematic again when it comes to, “the minister except with a prior written consent of the minister, in the case of disclosure by the Authority, prior to the relinquishing of the area to which they relate with the prior written consent of the licensee.” I think there is a problem with that. When we say, “may not be reproduced”, that would be enough; because, what happens thereafter? There are civil remedies.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, can we start the statement as follows: “All that has been submitted to the minister by the licensee shall be kept confidential and shall not be reproduced or disclosed to any third parties - by any party - under this Act except…” and then we add (a), (b), (c), (d), without referring to the Access to Information Act, because we have already considered it.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, actually, we do not need to go into the exceptions. We have already placed a prohibition. That is number one. Secondly, we are saying “by any party”; now, that party is already contractually bound to protect the trade secrets. So, why do we have to go an extra mile to provide for those exceptions? If a party to an agreement breaches it, the remedies are not necessarily statutory.

MR NYOMBI: Mr Chairman, my reading of this proviso, the word “except” is intended to provide an escape clause; to provide for those exceptions under the Access to Information Act. If we remove it, it means those exceptions under the Access to Information Act would not be acceptable. “Except” is intended to cover those areas that have been exempted under the Access to Information Act.

MR SSEGONA: Mr Chairman with due respect, we have already subjected the provisions of this Act to the Access to Information Act under clause 148; meaning that the management of that information acquired, falls squarely within the provisions of the Access to Information Act. We risk amending the Access to Information Act by providing for greater details than the general provision here - actually, by providing further exceptions.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. After a clear perusal of this particular clause, the content seems to be at variance with the marginal note. These appear to be special provisions for cases where information is explicitly allowed to be disclosed.

I feel, if we looked for a better phraseology, with a marginal note, and clause 1, we would get out of the dilemma because the provisions under this particular clause are all in respect of situations when data disclosure is specifically and explicitly allowed. 

Could I then suggest that maybe, we say, “disclosure of data” and say, “Subject to the provisions of the Access to Information Act, all data submitted to the minister by a licensee shall be disclosed in the following instances” and they are named- “may be disclosed in the following instances:  a) In case of disclosure by a licensee –” and the like.

MR NYOMBI: Mr Chairman, I think that proposal would capture the provisions of the Access to Information Act properly.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you now state it for the record, honourable member for Ndorwa?

MR NIWAGABA: The head note; we should substitute “confidentiality of data” with “disclosure of data” and we say, sub-clause (1), “Subject to the provisions of the Access to Information Act, 2005, all data submitted to the minister by a licensee may be disclosed to third parties in the following instances: –”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay? Does that capture it learned Attorney-General? Do I put the question to that?

MR SSEGGONA: I have to express my gratitude to the Member for Ndorwa. I think this is the area where we would provide for access by Parliament and other agencies of Government. I have in mind the example of URA, which may wish to access these documents for tax purposes. You may have - 

MR NIWAGABA: It is covered under sub-clause (3)(a)(i) “An agency of Government.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is taken care of, honourable members - 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, may we say “an organ of the state” instead of “an agency” because Parliament is not an agency.

MR NYOMBI: Mr Chairman, if we used the word “organ”, it would restrict the flexibility of Government to retain say, a private agency to conduct business on its behalf. [HON. MEMBERS: “and/or”] “and/or” ? That would be okay. 

MR SSEGGONA: It would read thus: Sub-clause (3) (a) (i) “An organ or agency of Government.” 

Can I seek clarification, Mr Chairman? What is the difference between “State” and “Government”? We have the definition of “Government” in the Constitution, but not the definition of “State”.

The amendment in clause 149 (3 )(a) (i) - “to an agency or organ” - and that is why I asked, what is the difference between “state” and “Government”? The state is different. So, let us say, “organ or agency of Government.”

MR NYOMBI: I think we need to improve that amendment because when you say, “of Government” it has the tendency of restricting the applicability of “organ or agency of Government”. My fear was that if we replaced the word “agency” with the word “organ” it would mean that the “organ” would be part of Government - restricted only to organs of the Government - since the two have been allowed. But when you say “agency or organ” of Government, we may not be moving a step further in that “the agency” or “the organ” is of Government. So, we need to give Government powers to deploy an organ which is not part of Government. But when we say “of Government”, 
the organ or the agency must be part of Government.

MR KATUNTU: Let us go back to what mischief this amendment would like to cure. When you say you restrict to “an agency of the government”, Parliament is not an agency of Government. An “agency of Government” in the circumstances the learned Attorney-General is referring to includes other agencies or departments of Government; and so on. Why we need to put “organ” is to specifically provide, for example, by Parliament -a parliamentary committee might cause the production of the data, which is being restricted under clause 149 (1). So, how do we include an organ of the state like Parliament, which is not an agency of Government? 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, what does “Government” imply? Government has three arms: Legislature, Executive and Judiciary. That is how Government is defined. So, if you say Parliament is not part -[MR KATUNTU: “It is not defined that way.”]- No, Government is. Let us look at the Constitution.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Suppose you start with the word “Government” and move forward? You start with “Government” and then you describe agency or arm. If you say, “to Government agency or organ” -

MR PETER NYOMBI: Let us assume, Mr Chairman, the disclosure is required for purposes of taxation, and Government has retained a private entity to receive this information; that is the circumstance that I want covered, because when you say, “Government agency or organ” -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Would you like to propose it?

MR PETER NYOMBI: Yes, I can propose.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You see, this (i) was specifically for agency of Government. There are other provisions (ii), (iii), (iv) and (v).

MR KATUNTU: Actually, if the learned Attorney-General could look at (3)(a)(ii), “to a financial institution or person acting as a consultant or professional adviser to the authority” - even if we said, “to the government” -(Interjections)- I thought we agreed that the authority is part of Government. So, we can say, “to the government” that would include the authority. Then under (iii), “arbitrators” and so on; our only worry is, how does Parliament get access to this data?

MR OTADA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I was actually sharing the Attorney-General’s worries, but I think that is cured under clause (3)(ii). So, I think he should concede. Attorney-General, I would like to implore you to concede on that point.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Have you looked through now, learned Attorney-General?

MR PETER NYOMBI: Mr Chairman, (ii) is also restrictive. It refers to a financial institution, which may not be part of Government; and then it refers to a person acting as a consultant or professional adviser to the authority. I am thinking of a situation where Government may retain, for example, a private firm of auditors. They are not part of Government or lawyers like the Attorney-General in the shadow. I am thinking of say, a private firm of auditors; they are not part of Government -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Persons acting on behalf of Government?

MR PETER NYOMBI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Propose.

MR PETER NYOMBI: So, the proposal I was making is, “To an agency or organ of, or retained by Government.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear? So, the proposal is that, “To an agency or” - can someone state it clearly for the records; the amendment in (3)(a)(i)?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, the proposal is, “To an agency or organ of, or retained by Government.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: “An organ to be retained by Government”? Start with “Organ”.

MR SSEGGONA: Okay. “To an organ or agency of, or retained by the government.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, that captures that.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I was reluctant to rise because I was trying to catch up with the rest of you, but if I can take a cue from what the Shadow Attorney-General was saying, which was, what is it you want to cure? What is the mischief? The idea he was raising of Parliament or courts of law, their powers cannot be limited by a provision of this law, obviously. Not courts of law; not Parliament. So, you do not have to have a specific provision in an Act of Parliament to say that Parliament or courts will assess documents or information. That limitation would be unconstitutional because they have constitutional powers to do these. So, I thought the Attorney-General was talking about - I hope I did not misunderstand him - others and he was talking about remaining open so that even non-governmental organs or agencies would be catered for. I hope I have it right?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, what the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is putting across is correct to the extent of allowing. First, this clause would be unconstitutional if it was limiting, but it is enabling.

Secondly, for the rest of the private individuals or entities, we have financial institutions acting as consultants; we have arbitrators and experts appointed under the agreement for statistical purposes; then (v), in connection with the award of new acreage. They could propose others. We would have no problem with that. Actually, if they had proposed them at Cabinet level before they came here, we would be happier, but what I propose is, first, let us deal with (i) as proposed by the Attorney-General, then when we get to those other private individuals - remember they will have their own different qualifications - then we can concede to putting them there. Our concern as of now is (3)(a)(i). 

May I move, Mr Chairman, that we adopt the proposal of the learned Attorney-General with respect to (3)(a)(i), namely, to make it, “an organ or agency of, or retained by the government.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Any other amendment under 149? Did I put the question to the proposal by the honourable member for Ndorwa on 149(1)? Okay. I put the question that clause 149, as amended, stands part of the Bill.
	
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 149, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 150

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, under clause 150, the committee proposes to insert in sub-clause (3) the words, “or service of the Authority,” immediately after the word “service” - that is in the first line - and insert the words “or member of the board of the Authority” immediately after the word “servant” to read as follows: 

Clause 150(3) “A person shall not, while in the Public Service or service of the Authority in the petroleum industry, or when he or she ceases to be a public servant or member of the board of the Authority, disclose any information which he or she may have obtained in the course of his or her employment for a period of 10 years.” –(Interjections)- Yes, it is in the report; page 49 of the report under clause 150(3).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it clear Members?

MR SSEGGONA: Is this pegged to the lifespan of the licence? What is the logic behind the 10 years? Because this has two elements; there is the element of the licence, which appears in sub-clause (2), but there is also the element of 10 years. What is the logic behind the 10 years? We need clarification. 

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, the logic behind this is the period that licences normally take. We have different periods for different licences and based on the period that we have proposed in this law, by the end of the 10th year most of the licences would have been dealt with. That is why it is important that a certain period is given before they can disclose this information.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In other words, after 10 years, you are free to go on the streets, on the top of the tallest building and start shouting about it. No problem; because the purpose for restricting the information would have lapsed.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, we have made sufficient provision on disclosure and non-disclosure in the preceding clauses. That is number one.

Two; we have subjected and subordinated the provisions of this Bill relating to information and disclosure, to the Access to Information Act. The Access to Information Act has its own parameters when somebody is applying to access information, including the reasons for which you are applying to access information. Aren’t we doing too much and making an obnoxious provision here by saying, “You do not talk about it.” Is it not going to offend the Constitution?  

My view is that the licensee we are protecting has sufficient capacity to protect himself or herself referring to other remedies. But when we start legislating and telling people not to talk about these agreements, what is it exactly that we have classified as confidential in the agreement? Before you block somebody and create a penalty, which I am seeing in sub-clause (4), you must define the parameters of what people cannot talk about. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Isn’t that kind of provision also in the Access to Information Act, where information can only be held for a particular period of time, after which, the protection ceases? It is the same principle.

MR SSEGGONA: Yes, it is the principle, but that is not he principle I am talking about here, Mr Chairman. My fear is the risk of crossing the red line provided in the Constitution in terms of expression. Somebody gets a copy of this agreement, and he says, “No, this thing is not a fair deal for this country. I criticise it for corrective measures.”

When you look at the clause we are dealing with, it is talking about, “for and in connection with implementation of this Act; for the purpose of, or in connection with any legal proceedings” – yes, we are dealing with 150(2) - and may I seek guidance. What happens to a private person who accesses this agreement?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It does not apply to the private person. It is for public officers. 

MR SSEGGONA: If it is for public officers, I concede. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment proposed by the committee in clause 150(3). I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Any further amendments under clause 150?

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, under sub-clause (4), the committee proposes to substitute the words “five hundred” with the words “one thousand” to read as follows: “Any person who contravenes subsection (1) or (3) commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding one thousand currency points or imprisonment not exceeding five years or both.” That is to provide for more deterrent penalty. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The proposed change is from “five hundred” to “one thousand”. I put the question. 
Yes, honourable member for Bujenje.

MS KABAKUMBA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am not in disagreement, but when you increase the currency points and you leave the years fixed, I think it is not fair, because there is a way you calculate these figures. So, when you double the currency points you could also double the years. (Laughter) Yes, you have to increase proportionately. So, I am proposing, “and imprisonment not exceeding seven years or both.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The proposal is to change “five” to “seven” years. 

MR WERIKHE: For someone disclosing information, I do not see why we should be so punitive –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, our issue is not that; our issue is that you have increased the currency points from 500 to 1,000. Why do you leave the five years without changing them?

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, it would be very dangerous if we did that because – the justification is that these years were considered sufficient. Actually, at one time, we proposed one million currency points – if you were to calculate using that formula, you would come to 1,000 years; we went through all this. That is absurdity; you cannot imprison someone for 1,000 years! So, we said, where it is considered reasonable, five years in relation to this crime was considered sufficient. Otherwise, if you went by that proposal, you would end up actually having up to 10,000 years for certain crimes. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member from Bujenje, the committee thought five years was sufficient and thought 500 currency points was too little; so, they increased it. But they felt the five years was okay.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In principle, I do agree with the honourable member for Bujenje. We do not even have to increase the currency points; what is provided for under the Bill is sufficient. 

We do not also have to make it very ridiculous, because nobody will be getting those billions just because they disclosed information which they were not supposed to disclose. So, my view is that we take what is provided for in the Bill; it is fair.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, there is no amendment in sub-clause (4). Any further amendments under clause 150?

MR SSEGGONA: Under clause 150(5); while I agree with the exception or the defence provided for “In proceedings on a prosecution for an offence under this section, it shall be a sufficient defence if the person charged proves that the information disclosed and to which the prosecution relates was, without that disclosure, generally known to the public.” I wanted to add the words, “Or the disclosure was in public interest”. You prove - not simply to allege - that the disclosure was in public interest. 

Now, “public interest” may be wide and that would be a matter for the court to decide. For example - for the benefit of hon. Sebunya - the court may be satisfied that you disclosed because there was fraud going on. It is sufficient defence; you could be a whistleblower. 

MR NIWAGABA: I believe “public interest” relates to the existing laws. So, why don’t you abandon that amendment because any disclosure in public interest, anyway, must comply with the existing laws. 

MR SSEGGONA: I did not think it is controversial. Actually, “public interest” is in accordance with the law and “public interest” is protected by the law. That is why I am saying that I agree with the phrase, “If that person proves” - actually the burden of proof is on that person who pleads “public interest” to fit in the four corners of “public interest”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, the proposal by the Shadow Minister of Justice is to insert the phrase “or the disclosure was in public interest” at the end of sub-clause (5).

MR KATUNTU: I invite the minister to think about it. The protection being sought under the amendment is to protect public interest. Actually, in almost all circumstances, “public interest” should supersede all other interests, including commercial interest. It is for the greater good. 

However, as the Chairperson observed, “he who alleges must prove” that actually they did it in the interest of the public. Because it is a defence; we have created it as an offence under sub-clause (4). So, if somebody has committed that offence, can he raise this as a defence? And, it is for only one reason; “public interest”. Why should we not subject everything to “public interest”?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In other words, he is saying that the person who is charged with the offence can say, “What I am accused of disclosing is information that was generally known to the public”  or that, “the information I am being accused of, I disclosed it in the public interest.” 

MR PETER NYOMBI: Mr Chairman, whereas “public” is quantifiable, it would be very difficult to define “public interest”. [HON. MEMBERS: “In the courts of law.”]

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This is a case-by-case basis. It is for courts to determine.

MR SEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I also want to seek clarification from the honourable member. How do we differentiate between “public interest” and “commercial interest”. Supposing I was caught with information and I plead “public interest”, how do you judge that it was not “commercial” but “public interest” because everybody will plead the easiest  “public interest”?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That would be for the court to decide.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I would entreat Members to give a second thought to this. “Public interest” is so profound that at the end of the day, it could be information coming to that person regarding the environment or activities that are profoundly affecting the lives of people. Now, if we attempt to block this, it will be the greatest disservice done. As long as the competent courts can establish whether it was in “public interest” or not, that should be left within the purview of courts. But for us as Parliament, we should provide for that to protect any person who within public interest comes out to divulge such information. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I put the question to the amendment on inclusion of “public interest”?

MR PETER NYOMBI: Mr Chairman, you know, when you are dealing with lawyers, you do not know what they may have up their sleeves. (Laughter) If you add “public interest” we may actually be negatively affecting the previous provisions regarding disclosure, and that is clause 149.
 
MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I thank you learned Attorney-General for giving way. The information that I want to give you is that, the proposed amendment is within the four corners of the Constitution. A reading of article 8A would certainly inform that position and I will read it verbatim: 

(1) “Uganda shall be governed based on the principles of national interest....” You just have to stop there; “national interest” and “public interest” must always inform the basis of every decision that we take. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment –

MR SEBUNYA: I just want to confirm that we may go to the “national interests” just for the record.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: “National interest” is a term familiar in the text of the Constitution. I put the question to the insertion of the phrase, “national interest” immediately after the end of that clause.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 150, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 151

MR WERIKHE: We propose to substitute in sub-clause (1) for the words, “well head”, the words, “delivery point.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What words?

MR WERIKHE: “Delivery point”. Justification: To allow the government to collect more royalties at the delivery point by avoiding deductable costs for cleaning and transporting crude oil between the well head and the delivery point, which will mean less royalties to the government.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This is a clear proposal. Members, I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WERIKHE: We propose to delete in sub-clause (3) the words, “or during any extension period allowed by the Authority,” appearing immediately after the word, “date.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In (3), in the middle of the second line, there is, “or during any extension period allowed by the Authority.” You propose to delete that phrase?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, delete that phrase in (3) so as to read as follows: “Where the licensee fails to pay any royalty payable by the licensee on or after the due date”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No. “on or before”. You want to say, “on or after”.

MR WERIKHE: “On or after” 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Where are you?

MR WERIKHE: “Where the licensee fails to pay any royalty payable by the licensee on or before the due date, the Authority may....” It is a long one. Can I read the whole of it?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That one is okay, because the amendment is exactly where you have passed now. 

MR WERIKHE: Okay.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, the amendment is to remove the phrase, “or during any extension period allowed by the Authority”. The committee proposes to delete that phrase form sub-clause (3). I put the question to that.

(Question out and agreed to.)

MR SSEGGONA: May I seek some clarification? Mr Chairman, we seem not to have defined “royalty” in this Bill, and I find it dangerous. My understanding of “royalty” is actually rent – money going to a land owner, and I stand to be corrected. We have a different formula in the Constitution. 

Would it not be necessary to have “royalty” defined in the context of this Bill? Before we even go into the substantive issues, we need to understand “royalty” with clarity because the meaning assigned or gathered from the Constitution seems to be different from the ordinary meaning of “royalty”. So, unless we define “royalty” in a contextualised manner, it may bring confusion in the future.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you define it in any other way than in the Constitution? I thought you said it was defined.

Honourable members, “royalty”?

MR SSEGGONA: We may leave it because there is sufficient provision that contextualises it in this particular clause 151(1) itself.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Are there any further amendments? 

MR WERIKHE: In sub-clause (5), we propose to substitute for sub-clause (5) the following –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You propose to delete the existing sub-clause (5)?

MR WERIHKE: We are amending. We propose to amend sub-clause (5) to read as follows: “The Authority shall in each financial year prepare an annual statement stating the value…” we are actually inserting the word, “value” after “stating”. We are removing the phrase, “all the monies” and replacing it with, “the value of certificates issued in accordance with this Act.”  

So, it will read as follows: “The Authority shall in each financial year prepare an annual statement stating the value of certificates issued in accordance with this Act.” This is to harmonise it with the Income Tax Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is the proposed amendment.

MS KABAKUMBA: This is to do with royalties on petroleum. But the chairman is now talking of certificates received. I do not understand why he does not want us to know exactly how much money has been received from royalties, and he is instead opting for certificates. He seems to be mixing up things.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you deriving it from sub-clause(4), a certificate of the Authority? 
  
MR WERIKHE: This was drawn from the provisions of the Income Tax Act. If you look at sub-clause (4), “A certificate of the Authority certifying that a specified amount of money is payable by a person specified in the certificate shall in any proceedings instituted against...” – this is derived from sub-clause (4) and it is in accordance with the Income Tax Act provisions.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But in sub-clause (5), it is about financial statements.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, the Authority does not receive monies. It can only provide a certificate stating the values. It is URA to collect that money. So, if we say that the provisions will state all the monies received from royalties paid in accordance with this Act, we will be saying that the Authority will be physically collecting the monies;  but, they can only provide the certificates stating the values.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, Members? Okay, I now put the question to the amendment moved in respect of sub-clause (5).

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WERIKHE: In sub-clause (6), we propose to delete the word “financial” appearing immediately before the word “statement” in the first line to read, “A copy of the statement prepared under sub-clause (5) shall be submitted to Parliament not later than three months after the end of the Financial Year to which the statement dates.” So, we are deleting the word, “financial”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear Members? Okay, I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OTADA: Mr Chairman, I am seeking guidance from the committee chairperson with regard to “royalty on petroleum” under 151(1). It reads in parts: “Subject to this Act, the licensee shall pay a royalty to Government on petroleum recovered at the well head...” – you made an amendment to that, which I accept - “...as stipulated in the petroleum agreement.” 

My clarification is, since there has been a popular demand from districts - which are potentially regional governments if we decide to operationalise the regional tier, and even from cultural institutions, there has been popular demand on the sharing of these royalties from the oil that has been discovered. There is even still more oil to be discovered in Nakasongola where the Attorney-General comes from. But there is also information that there is oil in Kanungu where the Rt Hon. Prime Minister comes from. And, even in Bugweri County, where my friend here comes from, and many other places. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is the clarification?

MR OTADA: My clarification is, what is the committee’s position in as far as these demands are concerned? I am asking this because we made a submission to the committee. Also, some cultural leaders met the committee and made submissions on the same. Before I move my amendment, let me first seek that clarification from the chairman.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, it is true that hon. Owor Otada appeared before the committee with Omukama – the king - of Bunyoro. But the issue of sharing these royalties is something that is going to be considered under the Revenue Management Bill; we cannot consider it in this Bill. What you are talking about are those percentages and how they are going to cascade these down to the lowest local authority. But like I said, that will be taken care of under the appropriate Bill – the Revenue Management Bill.

MR LOKERIS: Thank you very much. I would like to state that the Government of Uganda has a decentralised system. We have levels, which by law receive monies, for example, sub-counties, districts and Government itself. What is envisaged here is that all royalties would be deposited on a single collection account from which it will be paid to the different levels of the sub-units of Government as will be prescribed in the Revenue Management Bill.

We are not running a centralised Government like, for example, that of Cuba. Therefore, our decentralised system envisages that and so, distribution of those royalties will be prescribed.

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Chairman, I have listened carefully to the explanation of the minister, but we are warned not to legislate in anticipation. Also, I notice that what he has explained is not what is indicated in this law. You can maybe say that royalties will be paid to a government fund and will be distributed according to the law. But when you explain it differently from what the law states, and by the time we get to the Bill they are referring to, it will be too late. I also know that that Bill you are referring to has its own challenges, though this is not the time to discuss that.

To allay the fears of hon. Owor Otada and the people from that region, I would like to request that we explicitly state this. We are not stating percentages; we are only stating an indication that the areas from where this oil is explored will receive royalties. Unless you are going to say that Government includes the districts and the landowners as the minister has explained – (Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, let me assist my colleagues. You see, we are talking about the petroleum, which vests in the Government of the Republic of Uganda by the Constitution. The owner of this petroleum is Government of Uganda. It is that very Government contracting with the licensee. Part 9 provides for payments, which should accrue to this contracting party called Government, of course, on behalf of the people. It further talks about royalties, annual fees, signature bonuses, payment terms, and so on. After this revenue has been collected, you now get to the second stage, which is called revenue management. That cannot be covered in this law; it can only be covered in the law that will stipulate the management of these oil revenues.

MS KABAKUMBA: The management of oil revenues – (Interjections) - Mr Chairman, kindly protect me from the heckling of hon. Theodore Ssekikubo. (Laughter) The management of oil revenues cannot be indicated in this Bill; I am aware of that. Hon. Abdu Katuntu refers to provisions of the Constitution, but it is this same Constitution that clearly states that the people of Uganda will receive royalties from the oil according to those categories. What we are proposing is just for an indication to be made. This is also in the Constitution.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you propose that indication?

MS KABAKUMBA: I would like to propose the following: “Subject to this Act, the licensee shall pay royalty to Government on petroleum recovered at the well head as stipulated in the petroleum agreement, to be shared according to the categories stipulated in the Constitution.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question to that amendment -
 
MR KATUNTU: We really do not even have to go to that stage of putting the question, Mr Chairman. Which provision of the Constitution is the honourable member referring to?
   
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which provision, honourable member?
 
MS KABAKUMBA:  Let me look for it.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You want to look at 244? 

MR WERIKHE: Maybe 244 will assist the honourable member.
 
MR OTADA: Mr Chairman, I just wanted the House to be aware of what is coming up and not to anticipate. I believe this is an upstream Bill which is talking about production, exploration and development - three things - and it stops right there. So, I would implore my sister to concede and we proceed but with the records being made clear that we have intentions, which are not ulterior.
 
MR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, I do agree with hon. Katuntu but what harm would it do if in 151 (1) we said, “Subject to this Act, the licensee shall pay royalty to Government and other interested parties.”
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No. You cannot pay directly to other interested parties. Other interested parties are not part of the contract. 

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Chairman, I think my point has been made and clearly, I was reading the provision and trying to adjust my amendment. I believe the royalties are not only after we have started exploiting petroleum but all these payments come because there is petroleum in Uganda. So, when we come to the other Bill, we shall be here to move amendments. I concede. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 151 as amended do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 151, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 152

MR WERIKHE: We propose to substitute paragraph 2(a) with the following: “acreage rental, including for stratigraphically delineated acreage.” The justification is: to accommodate the licensing of stratigraphically delineated areas.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 152, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 153, agreed to.

Clause 154

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, we propose to delete sub clause (2). The justification is that it is for clarity. The licensee’s obligations in respect to payments will be discharged in accordance with relevant laws. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Members, that is clear. I put the question to the amendment.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OTADA: Mr Chairman, clause 154(1) says, “All payments made under this shall, unless stated otherwise, be in a freely convertible currency through a bank designated by the party receiving the payment.”  I thought this money should go directly to the Consolidated Fund. We all know the bank that receives the consolidated funds, why do we give discretion to the receiving party to choose a bank where this money will be remitted? I am seeking clarification so that I am clear on this.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I think let us look at the payment terms in sub clause (1). It says, “All payments under this Act shall, unless stated otherwise, be in an international and freely convertible currency through a bank designated by the party receiving the payment.” The implication here is that it is not only Government; there are other parties who may not necessarily be using Uganda shillings.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear?

MR SSEKIKUBO: If I captured the concerns of hon. Otada, we should say, “For avoidance of doubt, all payments due to Government shall be made to the Consolidated Fund.” If we thought this could be under 154 – (Interruption).
 
MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The income tax law is very clear. The only collector of all Government revenue is URA. Maybe for the avoidance of doubt here, it will be important for us to mention the particular agency, which is URA, because in the subsequent Bill on oil revenue management, it is very clear which account should hold oil revenues. Maybe the contention here is the parties. We could amend so as to specify but when you talk about URA, it is Government. That is the only assigned collector.    

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, they are saying there are many other parties other than Government that might be receiving money. 

MS KOMUHANGI: Mr Chairman, I cannot envisage a situation where there are other parties receiving payments other than URA under this Act. Actually, payment terms were very specific. I think members should concede and we move on.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Concede to what?
 
MS KOMUHANGI: If we want to specify the party, it is URA on behalf of Government.
 
MR PETER LOKERIS: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Maybe I give you a practical scenario. When we look at what is happening now, it is URA which collects all revenues, including royalties from minerals and so on. Because the law states that this should be given to the different categories of lower governments, the URA takes what is Government’s and pays it to the Consolidated Fund and then cheques are forwarded to local governments. If it is a district or a municipal council, they receive their cheques and even the owner of the land receives his. That is why we think it should not immediately go to the Consolidated Fund because getting it is difficult. So, what is envisaged in this Act is that it will be given to different persons who are entitled to get this money according to the law.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I do not think we are yet where the minister is taking us. There is an element for revenue management which will come. For now, we are dealing with the money paid to Government. There is only one party receiving this money and this party is called Government. This Government has a known account where the money is supposed to go. 

We are trying to cure a mischief where somebody opens an account with a bank X operated by Medard Lubega and hon. Lokeris and then they simply deposit our money there. Ours goes to the Consolidated Fund. The other details will come when we get there. So, who are those other parties envisaged here? 

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, maybe I could give further information. You recall when we were discussing one of the clauses and members sprung up to indicate that money should be put in the Consolidated Fund -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Members either “rise” or “stand”.

MS MULONI: At that time we agreed that we would not know what kind of fund was going to be created until we discussed the Finance Bill. Limiting or restricting ourselves to the Consolidated Fund may disadvantage us because we do not know what we are going to pass in the Finance Bill. It could be a petroleum fund instead of the Consolidated Fund. So, we would rather wait for that moment when we have determined how the petroleum revenues are going to be managed.
 
MR OTADA: Mr Chairman, I understand what the minister is talking about but we have a live scenario of the road authority or the road fund. We had agreed that there would be a road fund account and the fuel levies would go directly to that account, but this has never happened. So, that is where my worry is coming from. I would be more comfortable with Government receiving money in one pool, and that does not stop Government from channelling it to whoever it deems it fit to receive the money.
 
MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, I think the biggest problem is the wording of this particular clause. When it says, “all payments under this Act”, there are very many payments being made to different parties under this Act. We have landowners who will get compensation; we have entities under clause 4, who will be dealing with environmental matters for transportation; we have operators and the like. 

I believe that we could maybe restrict ourselves to “payments under this part of this Act”, because payments under this particular part are payments made to Government and not to any other party. So, we could say, “All payments under the part of this Act shall, unless stated otherwise...”, so that we do not capture other payments made prior to this particular part. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are royalties also paid to licensees and operators?

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, we are amending but we seem to have reached a position that requires and tends to indicate that this clause and the payment section generally, section 14, should not have been in this Act. The Income Tax Act clearly defines who handles all payments and since the revenue management part is also coming, this part should not fall here; it should have gone to the revenue management part. So, it could be totally deleted from here so that we handle it when we are handling revenue because it is not this law that should handle the issue of revenue. So, I propose, Mr Chairman. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I propose a way forward. By designating banks and so on, we have already jumped the stage of revenue management. We should just say, “All payments made to Government under Part IX of this Act shall be in an international and freely convertible currency” and we stop at that. When we are dealing with revenue management, that is when we shall designate the banks, the fund and so on, but not under a production law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: “All payments due to Government under this part shall be in an international and freely convertible currency.” Is that okay?  So, the amendment to clause 154 (1) is: “All payments due to Government under this part shall be in an international and freely convertible currency.” I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 154, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 144

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we go back to 144 on the commission of inquiry; it is a simple one. I think we have now been informed of the status.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I do concede. Our attention has been brought to the Transfer of Powers and Duties Act plus the instrument, the orders made by the President therein. I think the clause can remain as it was in the Bill originally. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The proposal is that we drop all the amendments we had passed under clause 144 and we retain the original text of clause 144. I put the question.  

 (Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 144, agreed to.

Clause 155

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, we propose to substitute clause 155 with the following: “Where a person does not make a payment under this Act on or before the time when the amount is payable, the person shall pay as a penalty, a surcharge of five per cent of the amount in default for each day of default.” The justification is: To ensure early and timely payment in compliance with the Act. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, honourable members? I put the question to the amendment.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 155, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 156

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, we propose to substitute the words “in a court of competent jurisdiction” with the words “in accordance with the Income Tax Act, Cap 340”. So, it will read as follows: “Payments under this Act are a debt due to the Government and may be recovered in accordance with the Income Tax Act, Cap 340.” The justification is: To harmonise with the position under the Income Tax Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is clear. I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 156, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 157, agreed to.

Clause 158, agreed to.

Clause 159, agreed to.

Clause 160, agreed to.

Clause 161, agreed to.

Clause 162

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, in paragraph (a) we propose to substitute the words “two hundred” with the words “two hundred and fifty”, and the word “ten” with the word “twenty”. It will now read as follows: “A person who wilfully or negligently contravenes any directive issued under this Act commits an offence and is liable on conviction – 
(a) in the case of an individual, to a fine not exceeding two hundred and fifty thousand currency points or imprisonment not exceeding twenty years or both.” 

The justification is: To provide for a more deterrent penalty.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that consistent with what we passed?

MR SSEGGONA: No, Mr Chairman, it is not consistent. For consistency, I suggest we use the words “without reasonable excuse”, like we have used before, instead of the words “wilfully or negligently”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If you use the words “wilfully or negligently”, the burden of proof is on the prosecution. But when you use the other phrase, it will be a strict liability one; so the burden will be on the person who is saying, “I have an excuse for doing this thing”. I think that is the shift he is proposing. Is that clear, honourable members? So, it should read, “A person who, without reasonable excuse, contravenes any directive issued under this Act commits an offence and is liable on conviction...” Can I put the question to the amendment by hon. Sseggona? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What about the committee’s proposal that we change from two hundred to two hundred and fifty and then from ten years to twenty years? Haven’t you now knocked down the absurdity rule by yourself? (Laughter)

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, I believe that particular sentence could contravene the Law Revision (Fines and Other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters) Act which we passed in this Parliament since it corresponds the term of imprisonment with the currency points. So, I believe the shift from ten to twenty is on the higher side and may contravene that provision. I pray that we maintain what is provided in the Bill. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Committee chairperson, would you like to, with dignity, withdraw the proposal? (Laughter)

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, with your wise guidance, I withdraw it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 162, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 163

MR WERIKHE: Under clause 163, the committee proposes to substitute in paragraph (c) (i) the words “five hundred” with the words “ten thousand” and “five years” – I think I will not amend that one; we leave the years as they are. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, why don’t you leave the thing as it is?

MR WERIKHE: I think let us leave it as it is and we move on.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 163 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 163, agreed to.

Clause 164, agreed to.

Clause 165, agreed to.

Clause 166, agreed to.

Clause 167, agreed to.

Clause 168, agreed to.

Clause 169, agreed to.

Clause 170, agreed to.

Clause 171, agreed to.

Clause 172, agreed to.

Clause 173

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, with your indulgence, clause 173 says, “Where the Minister is satisfied that a person is in possession of any information or data relating to petroleum activities or to petroleum recovered or to the value of petroleum, the Minister may, by notice in writing, require that person…” I thought we had overcome this and we had placed this responsibility in the hands of the Authority. May I be assured, for purposes of record, that this is a consequential amendment to what we had agreed upon?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In terms of what?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Particularly, in terms of information or data relating to petroleum activities. I thought it would directly go to the Authority and it is the Authority to process this information, not the way it is provided for here. 

If you also looked at clause 173 (1) (a), it says “to provide the Minister with that information or data...” Now, the minister is coming in to receive that information for a period and in (b) it shows what the minister ought to do, the identification. Mr Chairman, all these were things I thought we had covered. Should we proceed and have it the way it is, it will be contradicting what we had agreed upon.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think the determination is to what extent the amendment in clause 9 affected the rest of the provisions of the Bill; I think that would have to be ascertained properly. There will be a process of ascertaining this so that we clean up properly. I will put the question to the clause as it is now bearing in mind that we passed clause 9.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 173, agreed to.

Clause 174, agreed to.

Clause 175, agreed to.

Clause 176, agreed to.

Clause 177, agreed to.

Clause 178, agreed to.

Clause 179

MR NIWAGABA: I have a simple amendment, to remove “etc”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We agreed on that. It says, “Right to place facilities, etc.” So we take out “etc”. I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 179, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 180

MR WERIKHE: We propose to substitute sub clause 2(o) with the following: “the methods, measurement points and equipment to be used for measuring petroleum, water and other substances in relation to petroleum activities.” The justification is: To specifically empower the minister to prescribe regulations for the measurement of petroleum.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you state it again. 

MR WERIKHE: “The methods, measurement points and equipment to be used for measuring petroleum, water and other substances in relation to petroleum activities.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, Members? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, in sub clause 2(ac), that is on page 126, we propose to substitute the words “exploration, appraisal, development and production” with the word “petroleum”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Petroleum or petroleum activities?

MR WERIKHE: It should be “petroleum activities”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPESON: So, the phrase should end with, “petroleum activities”. So, it should be, “...budgets and costs for petroleum activities.” That is the amendment proposed by the committee. I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS ADONG: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to propose an amendment to sub clause (1) to provide for participation of Parliament because the ministers may issue statutory instruments that may not be workable and good for the public. So I propose an amendment to read as, “The minister may, by statutory instrument laid before Parliament, make regulations generally giving effect to the provisions of this Act and for its due administration.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you want all the statutory instruments to be laid before Parliament for approval? All of them, or there are those ones that do not have to be approved by Parliament? To be laid for what purpose?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, if I captured what was said by hon. Adong, I think the statutory instruments would be laid before this Parliament and Parliament would scrutinise and approve these very statutory instruments under this Act. It could look too big but the spirit of our participation should be understood, because you can have a good law and by the time you realise, the statutory instrument goes a lot against the spirit of the law. It is for that matter, Mr Chairman, if we are not really demanding for too much, that we should let that harmony be there. If you know that there is no mischief in the statutory instrument, what is the problem? As long as it is laid, it cannot take long for that matter -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there are three categories of statutory instruments. There is one that requires parliamentary approval before it starts working; that is what we call an affirmative instrument. Then there is one that is just laid before Parliament for information. Lastly, there is one that is subject to a negative vote, it starts operating until Parliament says “no”. Now, will all these - I do not know how many they are – powers that you are giving to the Minister require prior approval of Parliament?

MS ADONG: Mr Chairman, I am referring to the information to be given to Parliament. The ones laid before Parliament just for information. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The advantage of laying an instrument before Parliament is that Parliament can later on vote against it. When it votes against it the only difficulty is, the resolutions that are subject to a negative vote start operating and any transaction carried under the authority of that instrument remains valid even up to the time it is invalidated by Parliament. That is the only difference.

If you give a timeframe that it should be laid immediately, before it starts operating, then Parliament can quickly possibly do that, and if they think it is not proper, they can come back to say, “No, this one is not proper”, but not prior approval. Is that okay? So, if you give a timeframe within which it should be laid before Parliament before it starts operating, then Parliament can –

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. There are some regulations we have passed especially on clause 4 and some other clauses that I do not recall, which specifically require parliamentary approval -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, there are those ones that have been inside the Bill - 

MR NIWAGABA: I would support my colleague’s submission that really, not all of them should require parliamentary approval; they are simply too many. However, we could maybe say that subject to those already passed to be laid for parliamentary approval, these ones can be laid for information purposes.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, we leave it as it is?

MR KATUNTU: I still have a problem with sub clause (2) (b) about confidentiality. I do not know what sort of rules are envisaged to be made by the minister under this clause. Confidentiality is governed by a different legal regime, the Access to Information Act, and the minister makes rules and the minister is a different minister. So, which other set of rules are these you want to make under this provision?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Or under this Act?

MR KATUNTU: Or under this Act; which different rules are you going to make?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you the minister now? (Laughter)

MR SEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I am not the minister but since we have not passed the honourable Nwoya’s amendment, I would like to just give information. Most of these instruments we lay in Parliament are for information in other legislations, but the ones that require parliamentary approval have been tedious. We have one in my committee about procurement, and those regulations have taken us almost a year to peruse through. They are very voluminous documents. So, I would recommend that those instruments are laid in Parliament for information. When there is a lapse of the 14 days and nobody has raised a query, they begin to operationalise them. I thank you.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I think clause 180 (1) should read, “The Minister may, by statutory instrument laid before Parliament, make regulations generally for giving effect to the provisions of this Act prior to their taking effect for its due administration”. I would propose that that be the formulation under clause 180 (1).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Once it is laid, it starts working; is that what you are saying? So it works until Parliament again comes and says, “No, wait a minute, it is not right”, then you stop it. That would be the essence of that proposal.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I would imagine prior they would say that the instrument would be giving notice that within this period, we are starting to operate. Is that what you meant, Mr Chairman?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, that would be the general rule once it is laid before Parliament. The authority is granted for it to start operating but Parliament takes it own time to look at it and has a right to stop it later. Is that okay?

MS ANYWAR: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose that it reads as follows: “The Minister shall, by statutory instrument, make regulations...” This is because it is not optional since we need to effect this Act.

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, my understanding is that the lists which were indicated, and without limiting ourselves to them, is to give the option or the flexibility for making regulations that would give effect to a number of provisions under this Act. So, when you make it mandatory by using “shall”, it implies that even in some of the areas where you do not intend to make regulations, you must make regulations. I thought the word “may” gives the flexibility. 

On the second issue of confidentiality being listed here as one of the areas; yes indeed, this Act considers confidentiality of information which is going to be accessed, and therefore, there is need for making regulations. That is why it has been listed among the areas because it is confidentiality of accessing information.

MS ANYWAR: Mr Chairman, the minister should be happy that we need these instruments because they put into effect this very Act. Actually, what we are praying for is that those instruments would give this a kick-start. You know that without them already in place, this Act cannot be operationalised. So, it is not optional but it is a must that you should have put that in place before it takes effect. It is not optional. I pray that we take on the word “shall”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is the proposal? “The minister shall...” No, that is not proper. It is discretionary power that you are giving to the minister; otherwise, you do not give it. The minister may make statutory instruments where it is required. It may not be necessary to make the instrument but where it becomes necessary, the minister will do it. This is the general way you give the minister the authority.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Much obliged, Mr Chairman, but the spirit is, once there is a statutory instrument made. For the discretion whether to make one or not, yes “may” can apply, but once she has indeed put pen to paper and there is a statutory instrument in place, then it is laid. That is the spirit-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, the laying here is what you are referring to? No, that one is okay. What is the phrasing then? I thought the “may” is referring to the minister making statutory instruments.

MR SSEKIKUBO: What we are saying is that once that instrument-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, just read it.

MR SSEKIKUBO: “The Minister shall-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay? The minister may make statutory instruments but once made, they shall be laid before Parliament. That is what you are saying. Okay?

MS ANYWAR: Mr Chairman, if it is true that the minister has the option and it is at her discretion, what happens when these instruments are not yet put in place and yet the Act ought to be operationalised? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is no contradiction. It is in the interest of the minister to see that the Act is operational. The minister cannot now come on one day and heap the statutory instruments like this as you are suggesting. So, it is “may”. That is the general power. That one is standard. You can rely on me on that one. 

Okay, what we should capture is that once the statutory instruments are made, they should be brought to Parliament. That is what we are trying to capture here. The drafting can be purified. So, shall I put the question to this now as amended? I put the question to the amendment to bring the issue of those statutory instruments being brought to Parliament once they are made.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I see hon. Bintu standing. There is a proposal to insert a new sub clause (4) to read as follows:

“For the avoidance of doubt, the Minister shall make regulations for the protection and preservation of cultural and historical heritage sites located in an area in which a petroleum activity takes place.” 
The justification is: To provide for the protection of important cultural and historical heritage sites in areas where petroleum activity takes place.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it okay, honourable minister, for you to be given permission or the Authority to regulate that area or historical site by instrument? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, an issue was raised by hon. Katuntu about sub clause (2) (b). It says, “Without limiting the general effect of subsection (1), the Minister may make regulations relating to- (b) confidentiality.” Even Parliament as an institution has suffered a lot trying to access PSAs, to be exact, with citing of guidelines, procedures under confidentiality. Mr Chairman-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, the instruments that are going to be made cannot be inconsistent with the Act. If they are inconsistent with the Act, they are invalid because it is the authority given by the Act. So, the minister cannot go and say “confidentiality” and then start amending the Act. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: I would like that to be at the back of her mind. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, that one cannot happen; just like you cannot pass a law that is against the Constitution. A statutory instrument cannot exceed the authority given for the making of it by the Act. I put the question that clause 180 as amended stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 180, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 181, agreed to.

Clause 182, agreed to.

Clause 183

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Clause 183 provides for obligation to comply with this Act, and it says, “(1) A licensee and any other person engaged in petroleum activities under this Act is obliged to comply with the Act, regulations, decisions and directions issued under this Act. (2) A licensee shall ensure that any person working for the licensee either personally, through employees or through contractors or subcontractors, complies with this Act.” 

Any person, whether natural or corporate, is obliged to comply with the laws. So we find this provision redundant and superfluous and we propose that it be deleted from the Bill. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, you think without clause 183 people would violate this law?

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, this clause was for emphasis, to ensure that the people who are involved, even people who are engaged by the licensee, comply with this Act. It is a matter of emphasis. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What happens if they do not? You should then have proceeded to create penalties under that.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, a law is never made in vain. A law is made to be complied with. The reason why we have been going through these various clauses and even creating offences is to make sure that the people or the institutions and the entities that are being given obligations under this Act obey. Where they do not obey the obligations, then penalties have been provided for. Just do not make your law too thick with very useless clauses. Why are we making this law? We are making it to obey it. So, this clause 183 is redundant. It adds no value to your Bill. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The motion is for the deletion of clause 183. Let the minister be on record that it should be deleted. 

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, I concede. It is okay.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 183 be deleted from the Bill.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 183, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 184

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to insert at the beginning of the provision the words, “Subject to the Constitution”. So it should read as follows: “Subject to the Constitution, this Act shall take precedence over all existing Acts relating to petroleum activities in Uganda and where there is a conflict between the provision of this Act and any other law, the provisions of this Act shall prevail.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay?

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I am sorry I had not addressed my mind to this but I am having a problem. Assuming there is a conflict between this Act and the National Environment Management Act, what happens? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: On issues of the environment. 

MR KATUNTU: The member is asking, “On issues of environment or petroleum?” Well, they are all related. You may not divorce them really. What does the supremacy of this Act have against protection of environment in relation to petroleum activities?   

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Petroleum activities are defined. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, including access to information, for example. 

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. For reasons of being consistent with other Acts we have passed in this Parliament, we have always deleted this supremacy provision. There are other laws that may have legislated concerning the environment, as he has said, and this law cannot supersede other laws that are related to the environment or any other law or the income tax law. We have always not provided for the supremacy clause. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: My issue is that the phrase “petroleum activity” in which this Act seeks to have supremacy is defined, and no other Act regulates petroleum activities other than this Act.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, this is not the first time. The National Audit Act, 2003, section 44, provides as follows: “This Act shall take precedence over all existing Acts relating to the Office of the Auditor-General or to the functions and powers of the Auditor-General and any Act in contradiction with this Act is modified to conform to the provisions of this Act.” 

The Uganda Road Fund Act, section 48, provides as follows: “Supremacy of this Act. Where any provision of any written law relating to the public road traffic or road safety is inconsistent with any provision of this Act, the provisions of that shall be invalid to the extent of the inconsistency.” 

We also have the Securities Central Depositories Act. The precedent is there.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, it is true; in fact, there are many other laws that subject other laws to themselves. However, on this particular one, when you look at the definition of “petroleum activity”, it means all or any of the operations including planning and preparations related to exploration, development and production. 

The reason I am raising this is because of the protection of the environment, which is very cardinal in oil exploration and production. In fact, that is why we are trying to have harsh penalties regarding environmental protection. We just want to protect our people; we do not want to be reckless. It is not all about making money.  So, it is not that I have hard feelings about what the clause should be, but there is a doubt in my mind that there is some priority which we are missing out when we enact this clause as it is.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let me ask this question: Is environmental activity part of petroleum activity as defined? If it is not, then it is not blocked by this provision. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, the answer is certainly in the affirmative, because you have to include any operations that are involved in the planning, preparation, exploration and in the development and production of oil activities. It has a direct relationship and link to the environment; you cannot divorce it. The only argument is that even environmental management is a petroleum activity for purposes of this Act. 

MR NIWAGABA: I want to seek your guidance; what is the effect of the Acts that are cross-referenced in a Bill? What is the effect of the Acts of Parliament used as cross references in a particular Bill vis-à-vis this particular clause?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You see, this drafting is done this way so that the general mapping of the law is even. So, if there is anybody dealing with a particular sector, you cannot foretell which other provisions are in other laws by just looking at these. So, those are general provisions to guarantee that in case there is some law straying somewhere which has similar provisions but in relation to matters of petroleum activities, this one takes precedence because it is considered deeply. We have looked at all the areas in greater detail than any other law could have done. So to that extent, when it relates to petroleum activities, this law will take precedence. In other words, the provisions in this law are better captured than in any other law. 

In matters of the environment, another law is superior. Now, when you talk about petroleum activities in relation to planning, exploration, development and production, this law regulates those particular petroleum activities better than any other law. But when it comes to issues that arise from petroleum activities, the consequences of petroleum activities like environmental issues, those are not covered by this clause. In other words, there may be other laws that are superior to this one. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, you have guided well. However, what if we remained silent about clause 184, so that those matters falling under the ambit of this Bill are well catered for under all the provisions as envisaged. Those straying into the environment, for example, can be catered for elsewhere. 

It is true we are looking at petroleum exploration, development and production and the law that governs them. However, at the back of our mind, we have a cardinal responsibility to protect the environment, the people, which are equally critical, bearing in mind that the sector we are legislating for, within forty or fifty years, will come to an end but our environment and our heritage last beyond this. So I would propose that if it does not do harm, we do away with clause 184 because now it is putting us in a position to decide which takes supremacy. We would all be home and dry if we kept clause 184 out. After all, all these other provisions can apply and they are sufficient. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I said those words because they sought guidance from the chair. Honourable minister, it is your Bill, better stand up to it. 

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, I want to thank you for the guidance you have given us because you have clarified the matter very well. What this is providing for is in situations where there is a conflict. Otherwise, throughout the entire Bill, you realise how much we kept referring to working hand in hand with the NEMA Act. We are referring to the other Act as much as possible but this provides for instances where there is a conflict. You guided very well, Mr Chairman. So I request my colleagues to accept that.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I seek further clarification on this. As we talk about petroleum activities, let the minister clarify what the components of petroleum activities are. Is it in isolation of other components like the environment and access to information, which we are talking about as part and parcel of petroleum activities? 

Furthermore, in the previous submissions, we have been referring to different Acts that cater for the different undertakings, like the environment in particular. Why is it singled out at this point as being supreme over other laws? Mr Chairman, I propose that this provision should be deleted because the other supplementing Acts are part of the activities of the chain of petroleum activities.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, accessing information is not a petroleum activity. Environmental management is not a petroleum activity, but it is part of the management of the consequence of a petroleum activity. Petroleum activities in relation to this Bill are exploration, production and development. Those are the activities. 

As these activities are carried out, there may be consequences. So, what this provision is saying is, in relation to exploration, production and so forth, this law will take precedence where there is a conflict with another law.  No other law could say anything better about the production aspect of petroleum; no other law would say anything better about exploration and development than this one. So, where there is a conflict with any other law about issues of exploration, development and production of petroleum, this law will be the one to be looked at or to provide the guidance. 

The consequences of what happens as a result of petroleum activities taking place, like environmental impact, are not covered under this. There cannot be any conflict on that because you are citing other laws that are stronger on issues of environment than this one. On the issue of access to information, you are also citing other laws that are strong on issues of information than this one. So, that kind of conflict cannot arise. So, this provision cannot apply to the National Environment Act in relation to the environment and the Access to Information Act in relation to information. 

MS ANYWAR: Mr Chairman, can we then give the exception to that, so that it is clear. I am still uncomfortable because as you clearly explained to us, and I concur with my honourable colleague here that once it comes here and it does not come out clearly that the environmental issues are not going to be considered under this law – because if you talk about the activities, in my view really, even during production, the –(Interruption)

MR WERIKHE: I appreciate what my colleague is submitting but I think as guided by the chairperson, where there is really no conflict then the petroleum laws will be supplemented by all other applicable laws. We are talking about conflict with regard to petroleum activities, which have actually been well defined here to mean planning, preparation, installation ­– By the way, we actually amended “petroleum activity” to mean planning, preparation, installation or execution of activities related to petroleum including reconnaissance, exploration, development, production, transportation, storage, cessation of activities or decommissioning of facilities. All these activities constitute petroleum activity. So, should there be any conflict with regard to these then this law is the one which will give guidance. These other laws will supplement the petroleum law but in case there is conflict, then this one actually gives guidance.  

MR KATUNTU: That makes matters worse. (Laughter) When you talk about decommissioning, it is all about the environment and when you look at this law, it has not gone into any detail about that decommissioning; it just provides a general framework. In most cases when you are decommissioning, you fall back to the environmental laws and so forth. However, Mr Chairman, it is not really a very big issue and I will concede so that we proceed.

MR BWAMBALE: Mr Chairman, when you look at the National Environment Act, Section 108, it says, “Any law existing immediately before the coming into force of this Act relating to the environment shall have effect subject to such modifications as may be necessary to give effect to this Act; and where any such law conflicts with this Act, the provisions of this Act shall prevail.” So, we are very safely covered under the National Environment Act.

MR KATUNTU: You see, that law is clear; it is talking about before the coming into force of that law – (Laughter) - This one is after.

MR BWAMBALE: Then, Mr Chairman, what we shall need is maybe to amend this one, the National Environment Act. (Laughter)  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, members do we take a decision on this, to harmonise? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, it appears that the spirit is that we proceed, but even if you look back at what we covered under clause 4, sub clause (3), for example, we said, “the National Environmental Management Authority in consultation with the Authority.” It means, in regard to the vital aspects of the environment, we have not cited many other authorities but we captured it even under clause 4, sub clause (3). It really means that for the safety of us all, we needed to –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let me just ask this because it is not really very important: in which area is this particular law superior? Is there any area where this law is superior to any other law in this country apart from the Constitution? Is there any? 

MR KATUNTU: I think in matters of exploration, development and production of petroleum, this law is superior. What is going on in my mind, however, is: is there any other law which deals with exploration, development or production of petroleum? So, where is the conflict? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is no visible conflict but should any show up – (Laughter) - okay, honourable members, do we delete this or we keep it?

MS KIIZA: I thank you so much, Mr Chairman. Having listened to the many submissions from the members and realising that we do not deliberate in anticipation, I propose that we delete the clause.

MR LOKERIS: I thank you, Mr Chairman and members. We are describing technical aspects of what is done during the petroleum activities. Let us say, you are at the first stage, exploring, you may get specimens that you want to test and you carry them somewhere for testing – (Interjections) - No, that is what is being done and it is not speculative. When you discover, you are testing the flow of oil inside to know whether the wells are communicating or not. This is purely a technical aspect on petroleum activities. If you are producing, you are trying to say what is the incline that this will flow, or where do you get it from? 

These are very technical and are not just activities. The environment is there but when it comes to the technical aspects, we must save these ones so that when we are carrying them out, there is no interference. They are very technical. 

MR KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA: I beg to move that the question be put with a view to retain the clause as it has no effect – (Interjections) -  I think, as amended by the committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is an amendment proposed and maybe we should have disposed of that amendment first, and that is on the issue of inserting, “Subject to the provisions of the Constitution” at the beginning and the rest of it should continue. That was the amendment proposed by the committee. I put the question for the adoption of this particular amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is the amendment to qualify and subject this law to, besides the Constitution, the Access to Information Act and the National Environment Act. So, we subject them to those laws also in establishing the supremacy of this law. Will that be okay and make everybody comfortable? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, it will read as follows: “Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the National Environment Management Authority Act –

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, it is the National Environment Act.

MR WERIKHE: No, it is the National Environment Management Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is the National Environment Management Authority Act. (Laughter)

MR BWAMBALE: Mr Chairman, the Act is here with me.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What does it say?

MR BWAMBALE: Mr Chairman, it is the National Environment Act. It is the revised edition, 2000.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, that is the only Act and it is the National Environment Act. Why don’t you complete the drafting, honourable member?

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you. It should read as follows: “Subject to the provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the National Environment Act and the Access to Information Act, this Act shall take precedent of all existing Acts relating to petroleum activities in Uganda and where there is a conflict between the provisions of this Act and any other written law, the provisions of this Act shall prevail.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay? Right, I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 184, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 185, agreed to.

Clause 186

MR OTADA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am sorry I did not propose any amendment to this clause in writing. So, I would like to request for your indulgence to allow me seek some clarification on it.

To me, the force majeure clause is a safety catch clause. It is a very important clause that a lot of things can be hidden under it. When I read this clause, I noticed that it talks about so many things beyond the reasonable control of the licensee. My problem is about this statement, “or from any other cause prescribed in the licence or the petroleum agreement”. I have a bone to crack with those exceptions. This is because I think that the agreement and the licence should derive their  force majeure prescriptions pretty much from this Act, to the greatest extent possible. 

The other reason is that this clause seems to envisage other conditions that are considered force majeure, which will be different in the licence and the agreement but which were not envisaged in this Act. So, are we trying to envisage a situation where conditions of force majeure – because we have tried to describe what force majeure is in this Act, but we are subjecting it to other conditions, which seems to show it will be different yet they will constitute force majeure in both the licence and agreement. Is that what we are trying to say?

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, I would like to request that the honourable member repeats his concerns.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The issue is, the normally understood facts that constitute force majeure are those natural things such as war, hostility, insurrections, storms, floods, earthquakes or such other natural phenomena beyond the reasonable control of the licensee. Now the next part says, “or from any other cause prescribed in the licence or the petroleum agreement as constituting force majeure.” The member’s concern is, can those constitute force majeure? 

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, we can leave that out.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, the proposal from hon. Owor Otada is to delete the phrase, “or for any other cause prescribed in the licence or the petroleum agreement” So, we say, “...beyond the reasonable control of the licensee as constituting force majeure.” The rest should be deleted. That is the proposal. I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 186, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 187, agreed to.

Clause 188, agreed to.

Clause 189

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, we propose to delete that particular clause. The justification is that the offices mentioned there under are creations under the Public Service Act and regulations made there under. So, it would not be justifiable to provide for offices other than those already under the Authority and its staff. So, I would like to move that this clause be deleted.

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, I do not agree to what the honourable member is proposing because the office of the commissioner is explicitly provided for by section 6 of the Petroleum (Exploration and Production) Act of 1985. This office is tasked with regulating the day-to-day activities of the licensees in the sector, which is ongoing. So, repealing that 1985 Act without providing for the transitional arrangement will create a vacuum where no institution will have the legal basis of regulating and supervising the sector before those institutions come into place. So, we have to provide for it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, this is a transitional provision; where one is going to hand over to the other, what happens?

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, I do not agree with the minister on the fact that this is transitional. Look at sub clauses (2) and (3); first of all, the Act being repealed has no mention of the department of petroleum exploration and production. That Act is silent on that. It only mentions a commissioner. 

Two, you are creating jobs under this particular Act, which are not only permanent and pensionable but have nothing to do with even the Public Service Act and regulations made there under. I thought if this was intended to save the employment of those under the department, they could still be saved under the existing Public Service Act and regulations there under. 

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, the fact that the position of the commissioner is indicated in this Act, when you repeal it, what happens? It is expressly provided for in the Act. So, that is why we have to provide for it until the new institutions are in place because we have licensees who are in operation. 

When we talk about regulation, there is actual supervision in the field out there. By the time you put the Authority in place, who is going to oversee the existing licences? Who is going to oversee the existing licensees? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, is there an existing department of petroleum exploration and production in that Act? If it is not there, just delete that one because how do you sustain something that is not existent? If this was the commissioner and other officers in existence, that captures that group of people. But now you are talking about a department of petroleum exploration and production which is not in the law you seek to repeal. How do you give it life when it is not there? Is it there? 

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, this is a continuation of the office of the commissioner and others. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is the department of petroleum exploration and production there in that Act?

MRS MULONI: It is not a directorate. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I said “department”. This is what is in sub clause (2). If there is no department of petroleum exploration and production in the Act, then you cannot justify this.

MR NAKABALE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to seek clarification. It is the practice that where an Act seeks to repeal and replace another Act, all actions, including appointments undertaken under the law being repealed, are saved. How are we going to take this into account?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is as clear as it has been stated there. (Laughter) That is what is done. 

MR NAKABALE: That is why I am seeking your clarification. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is what is done. That is the clarification. It is already very clear on its own. I do not need to explain anything. There is what you call “transition”. If you look, for example, at the Constitution, the transitional provisions have now since gone but when the Constitution was enacted, there were specific transitional provisions.  

Even now if you look at Article 274, for example - existing law - laws that were in existence were saved but only that now you understand them in the new context and the modifications are there. Enactments not yet in force - those are now transitional provisions. Even this one is a transitional provision. So, what we are trying to investigate now is if that office exists in the Act, then there is need for it to continue until the new establishment under this new Act is put in place to take over. But if it is not in the Act, then we cannot give it life; you cannot give life to a non-existent entity. 

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, section 6 of the Petroleum (Exploration and Production) Act, 1995, revised in 2000, says: “(6) Commissioner for petroleum exploration and production. Subject to the provisions of any written law relating to the appointment of persons to the public service, the President shall appoint a commissioner for petroleum exploration and production and such other officers as may be necessary for carrying into effect the provisions of this Act.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is captured in sub clause (1). We are talking about sub clause (2), the department of petroleum exploration and production. Is it in that Act so that we can save it also? You are not repealing the policy; you are repealing the Act.  

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, the directorate is in the policy. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is not in the Act and so you cannot give life to a non-existent thing. Is it still in doubt, honourable member? 

MR SEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I can understand the Minister and I can see she is frantically turning over pages together with the chairman –(Laughter)- but certainly the 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Lwemiyaga, let us do business here.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, you know in this legislation, we cannot create an office within this statute. I agree for those in existence immediately before, which are being catered for under clause 189 (1) in these transitional provisions. Now, for us again to try to put these sub clauses (2) and (3), there is no way - because they are hanging and we are now trying to have a creation. I propose that we delete.   

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Sub clause (1) is sufficient. Honourable minister, let us delete (2) and (3). 

MR LOKERIS: My worry is that as long as we can expressly say those offices are affected.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Sub clause (1) takes care of that: “Notwithstanding the repeal of the Petroleum (Exploration and Production) Act, the office of the Commissioner and other officers in existence immediately before the commencement of this Act are continued in existence subject to this Act.”

MR LOKERIS: Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, are you the commissioner?  (Laughter)

MR LOKERIS:  I am speaking on behalf of the commissioner as the minister in charge of the commissioner. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Your job is safe. Can we decide on this? Honourable minister, would you like to be on record over this so that we can move?

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, it is okay; we can delete sub clauses (2) and (3). 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Good. I put the question that sub clauses (2) and (3) be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 189, as amended, agreed to.

Schedule 1, agreed to.

Schedule 2, agreed to.

Schedule 3

MR WERIKHE: The committee proposes to insert the following new paragraph immediately after paragraph 3:  “4. Stratigraphical delineation
(1) 	A block may be delineated stratigraphically.

(2) 	The reference map according to paragraph (1) shall be used to define the size of the blocks in the horizontal plane.

(3) 	In the vertical plane, strata or depth coordinates may be used to define the block. 

(4) 	A stratigraphically delineated block shall use the same identification as provided for in paragraph 1 (4) but with the addition of a letter or a number to identify that the block is stratigraphically delineated.

(5) 	Where there are more than two stratigraphically delineated blocks in the vertical plane, a letter or number shall be used to identify the different layers of blocks counting from the surface.”

The justification is: to make provision for licensing of stratigraphically delineated areas. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Any stratigraphical amendments? (Laughter)

MS BINTU: Mr Chairman, can we get some clarification on what it exactly means before we can take a decision on this proposal? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It means exactly what it says. (Laughter) I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 3, as amended, agreed to.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I was looking at a provision for schedule 4 where in the course of the debate we had agreed to have a template of the production sharing agreement attached to this, so that we know the standard format and the content of the template. I was envisaging that the chairman had agreed to that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member for Lwemiyaga, can you present the model agreement?   

MR SSEKIKUBO: With your permission, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Bring it and we adopt it. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: I thought that we had worked with the chairman.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, just before we leave that, attached to this Bill are cross references and I just wished to make two corrections in them. The first, in order of preference, should have been the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda appearing as No.1. The second is about the Companies Act, Cap. 110, which has since been repealed because we passed a new Companies Act this year. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I think those are noted. This is cross-referencing and the drafts people should take care of the cross-referencing. It is not part of Bill so we do not need to approve it. However, you need to rank the Constitution as the grand law. It would make sense if they were alphabetical. Also, take note that the Companies Act, Cap.110, has since been repealed. So, we have a new Companies Act, which should be properly reflected in this.  Are we okay? 
                                                         
MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.04
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Irene Muloni): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is that the House resumes and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.05
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Irene Muloni): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill, 2012 and considered clauses 132 to 189 plus schedules 1 up to 3 and passed them with amendments.  

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.05
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Irene Muloni): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the motion is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report Adopted

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, thank you very much. We have made huge strides and we have come very close to wrapping up this Bill. Thank you very much for your endurance. It is really inspiring when you sit in the Chair and everybody is there and they are contributing constantly, looking through the details with all the energy. It makes the Chair feel comfortable even when the day is long. So, thank you very much.

The last lap of this is to go back through those clauses that were stood over and we pass them. Also, I expect the clean up of all the other parts that were supposed to be cleaned up to be done before we come back to them so that when we come back to them, it is easier for us to take final decisions on them and we wrap up this Bill. 

Thank you very much. I always say, there is no reward I can give but I can promise you that when the House is in session and any of you should stand up, you will always catch my eye. (Laughter)  That is the deal I can make with you today without any fear of contradiction because I know all of you by face. All those ones who came and spoke and left, I have also noted; they have entered the darkest part of my eye. (Laughter) Honourable members, I was going to ask if we could continue on Monday morning so that we can finish with this.  

THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Peter Nyombi): Mr Speaker, on Monday Cabinet is scheduled to have a meeting.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why is Cabinet taking a parliamentary day? Learned Attorney-General, it is so important if we could wrap up this Bill. This Bill has taken a toll on many of our lives. We have been sitting every single day and only avoided weekends. So, can you seek leave from whoever has convened the Cabinet to give us Monday and Tuesday so that we can wrap up this Bill? It is really important. Maybe the key ministers, including the Attorney-General, who must be here can come with our members and we proceed. We have another Bill, which is almost as hard as this one, but since we have covered this, the other one might be lighter in process. So, please consult.

MR NYOMBI: Mr Speaker, we will consult and get back to you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I will adjourn to Monday morning. Is that okay? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] Any other business is accordingly stayed. As long as it is parliamentary business, it is stayed by order of the Speaker. 

MR AMOOTI OTADA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank you for the deal that you have just made with us this afternoon. I have a request to make because there are many clauses that were stood over and personally, I do not have a recollection of all of them because I was not keeping track of them. I request, through you, that the committee chairperson helps us enumerate those clauses – I do not think they are even many – so that we can prepare for Monday accordingly to avoid wasting a lot of time. It will enable us do some consultation over the weekend if we know the clauses.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clauses 2, 3, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 83, 87, 110, 112 and 125. Those are the clauses we stood over and there is only one thing tying all of them; if we solved the situation of one, the rest will fall in place. That is how easy it will be, so that we can wrap this up in a short time on Monday morning.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Recalling that you have guided us well and indeed we debated the upstream and midstream Bills concurrently, may we be informed if after one we are moving into another so that we appropriately arrange and we harmonise in time so that we do not have to – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, that is the position because both Bills were now at committee stage; we process them together and when we take a third reading and pass this, immediately we will go to committee stage of the next one. These processes – the consultations – should begin so that the sticky issues are resolved. That Bill is not as complicated as this because this is breaking ground and the other one will follow from our decisions on this.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I had become worried. However, I have already shared with the committee chairperson that we should try to squeeze time, maybe on a Sunday, to harmonise on the second Bill so that next week our programmes can proceed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can do it on Monday afternoon if Sunday is too much.

MR SSEKIKUBO: No, we shall use the whole of Sunday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will use Sunday? Very good. Meet on Sunday and try to put things together and come with common positions. Those who have amendments, the committee chair is here. (Interjection) Honourable  member, I am sure you will not qualify to be among the people – (Laughter) Honourable members, this House is adjourned to Monday, 10 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 5.16 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 19 November 2012 at 10.00 a.m.)
