

Tuesday, 23 November 2021

Parliament met at 2.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I will cause some alterations on the Order Paper to allow us process some business faster. The amendment that I would like to cause on the Order Paper is that the first item we will handle, before anything else, is the National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill so that we can get done with it. (Applause) And because of the presence of our guests, we will handle item 6(2), which is the motion on the netball team, to accommodate them and give them time to go and attend to other business. 

Honourable members, on the 16th of this month, I received a letter from the Minister of Education and Sports. The background to the letter is that we have had a situation where schools have been closed. We have had debate in this House about the plight of children, parents and teachers, arising from the COVID-19 situation, which led to the closure of schools.
The Minister of Education and Sports informed me that there are now preparations - and they are now sure – to reopen all schools in January but that there are processes that she needs to update Parliament and the country about. This will require that we make arrangements for that.

I received that letter and the Deputy Speaker communicated its content to the House last week. However, I have watched and read some of the comments about this particular request and noticed some use of very strong language, which ordinarily, as Members of Parliament, we should try to desist from because it does not help. You can give a very strong opinion without actually using strong words that cause people to be anxious. 

After listening to them, I would like to make one final appeal to you. Essentially, this is about those parents, children and teachers that have had it rough countrywide. The opportunity is coming for the schools now to be reopened and the communication is coming for us to pass the message on how these processes will be handled.

We had sent a message that from yesterday, we should be testing for COVID-19 so that we can go and listen to this message and maybe have a discussion, if we find it necessary and see how to pass on this message and prepare the parents, teachers and children on how this should be done.

It has been a very difficult time for these categories of people and for you, Members of Parliament. These questions have been asked to many of you. Every single day Parliament sits, there is a matter raised about the reopening of schools. People have even prayed about it in churches and mosques. 

The opportunity we have is to have this meeting tomorrow at 10 o’clock at Kololo, listen to the message and see what we can collectively do to facilitate the smooth reopening of schools. So, I am calling upon you, those who have not tested, to please, - the testing arrangement is within this building. Simply step out, do your sample; we will try to make sure the results are out quick enough, so that we can be there tomorrow by 10 o’clock. 

It will be a semi-parliamentary sitting - semi in the sense that I will be presiding without a wig. It is a mixed-breed kind of thing. I will be in the Chair but it will not be a formal Parliamentary sitting because they have invited other people like CAOs and others, to also be part of this meeting. This is to allow the same message to be passed on, at once, to all those who will be there.

I urge you, Members, those who have not tested, to please, go test and let us be there tomorrow at 10 o’clock, listen and see how to pass on that message. That is my request to you - and I hope we will be there tomorrow; that is my prayer. (Mr Mpuuga rose_) Now, we have started “procedure.” (Laughter) We have now started debating by procedure. Yes, Leader of Opposition.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your communication, to which I will seek your further indulgence and clarification.

First of all, your communication, in addition to what we received last week from the Deputy Speaker, has attempted to shift the nature of the meeting, which is understandable; namely that the Speaker will be presiding.

What sticks is that it will not be a House of Parliament sitting and therefore, it puts into perspective the consequence of the debate that will ensue. Are we wrong to say there will be a community meeting or sitting at Kololo to discuss education and therefore, I am free to call elders from Masaka to come and partake of the conversation at Kololo?
THE SPEAKER: All they need to do is test for COVID-19.

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, I can understand that. Why this is being questioned – let us forget about the potentially coarse language that Members used - the deeper appreciation of this forum, Mr Speaker, is that the House of Parliament seated anywhere, as long as the Speaker has described, that that is the House of Parliament, is that you can debate, you can amend, you can take binding decisions and that kind of arrangement.

So, what will be the framework for implementing the outcomes of an informal conversation? Of course, you are the House Speaker. I will be guided on the consequence of a semi-House sitting. I mean, what is the nature and form? What will be the input? What is the shape and consequence of the input of Members? 
However, all said and done, the import of Rule 53(2) is that when Members debate a minister’s statement, they would be able to cause the necessary debate and effect change to a position of a minister. Somebody should convince me that that will happen in the meeting. 

Secondly and related to that, is that hitherto, we would convene in the parking yard atop with tents fixed; that will be the House of Parliament sitting. What is the inhibition from the honourable minister to climb down and address the House of Parliament from within the precincts of Parliament and to have the House properly convened so that Members give their input while they debate? The debate will be consequential in law and practice.

It is an innovation but the danger with it, however, - (Interjections) – Just hold your fire, hon. Ssewungu and I finish this –

THE SPEAKER: The Leader of the Opposition is on a procedural matter and usually, the rules do not anticipate Members giving information on points of procedure.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. The major concern of Members is whether this will not open a Pandora’s Box that ministers would run to the Speaker when they are avoiding consequential issues and request that they address them in an informal forum - a semi-Parliament. I will not speak about the desire for a COVID-19 test. I am here with the Speaker. I go to his office as regularly as I can and nobody asks for a COVID-19 test.

This kind of outlier issue brings into perspective whether there is no attempt to try and regulate and bring the sanctity of Parliament into perspective. So, you are going to meet the minister – very honourable at that – and you must take COVID-19 test. We convene here with the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker routinely, but that does not happen.

Mr Speaker, you are the custodian of not just the rules, but also of the sanctity of Parliament. I have been getting so many messages from my team whether this is normal and I have been constrained to say it is normal. I am here to seek your deeper guidance as to whether this does not open a Pandora’s Box and therefore, consequently, we shall not have control over the actions of ministers subsequently to allowing this kind of arrangement to take place. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Can I deal with this and we see whether there is anything left. Then we can proceed with this matter.

Honourable members, I take that the points raised by the Leader of the Opposition and the spirit in which he raises it is good. The concerns that he raises need to be addressed for the comfort of all Members of Parliament. 

Members, it will not be the first time that Members of Parliament have continued with discussion of things that have happened in the House outside Parliament; it will not be the first time. I remember when there was a serious security situation in the country and the President addressed Parliament - because of the rules again, we could not debate with the President. So, we set up a separate arrangement for us to interrogate further what the President had presented to us. So, a meeting was convened in the hall at the Prime Minister’s office; we all went there – I was there. We sat in front and up with the Speaker and Members sat in the – We had a debate about what had transpired. 

Will this set a precedence that will potentially undermine the sanctity and authority of this institution? I do not think so. Will it curtail further interrogation of what we will receive at 10 O’clock tomorrow? Will it curtail any further discussion of the matter? I do not think so. Will it stop Members from making suggestions on what should change, what should be removed or what should be added in the process of the reopening of the schools smoothly? I do not think so. 

Why? It is because we will receive the statement in whatever form it will be presented to us. We can then agree that we substantially debate the matter when we come back to the House at 2 o’clock; we can debate and make adjustment. We will have received the proposal anyway of what is going to be done. We can then engage in a debate. Nothing stops us from doing that; ask all the fundamental questions, make all the serious suggestions we want to make and propose what should be removed or added. That is all open. This House can then sit and do just that.

The reason it became acceptable in the circumstances is because we need all Members of Parliament. Like I said, there is indication that the Chief Administrative Officers and some Permanent Secretaries will also be in attendance. So, it is kind of mixed but the brief is mainly for Members of Parliament. That is what is going to happen. The proposal is because of the mixture. 

I was persuaded. I also act on your behalf in taking some decisions. I might take them in error, but I am always guided by the good faith spirit - that I act in good spirit to get information for our Members and country people on something that has been bothering them for a long time. So, that is the circumstance under which this matter came up. As your leader, I took this decision on your behalf. I am requesting that we do it and then we see how we handle the rest of the debate thereafter.

Procedure from hon. Ssemujju; I do not do clarifications.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me the opportunity. I do not know whether you are now beyond persuasion, having been persuaded by the letter. If you are not beyond persuasion - and you will allow me a second before I read the rule - I take this opportunity to persuade you not to go for that meeting for the sake of the institution of Parliament. (Laughter)

In the case of the particular minister making this request, I also need to be persuaded that she is doing so in good faith because she has never stepped in this Parliament. She was even vetted on Zoom and throughout, hon. Muyingo - highly respected in Buganda here - became the person to represent the minister in this Parliament. I am trying not to use the language you said is not good. (Laughter)

Therefore, - 

THE SPEAKER: No. Let me just get it clearly. Are you saying hon. Muyingo became the person to represent the Minister of Education and Sports? He is the Minister of State for Education and Sports, isn’t he?

MR SSEMUJJU: Yes, he is a minister, but there were occasions when we demanded for the senior minister – because they were all approved to do different things. However, the one we approved to head hon. Muyingo usually sends him.

The procedural issue I am raising is that I have seen when the Head of State wants to speak to the whole country; he addresses a press conference. Members of Parliament, the permanent secretaries and the Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) would be listening. Everybody will be listening.  This innovation of a minister subjecting Members of Parliament to COVID-19 tests - Mr Speaker, you did not subject us to a COVID-19 test today to come here. However, this innovation of a minister subjecting all of us to queue and take a COVID-19 test - because the minister has said “I want to speak to the country.”

The specific procedural issue I am raising is under Rule 52, which I cited last week and I want to be guided. First of all, I have high respect for you, as a person, who follows the rules. Under which rule, if it is not Rule 52, will this meeting be convened? Rule 52 requires ministers to come here and make statements. This particular Minister has never been here to make any statement. Instead, as I said earlier, it is the hon. Muyingo - very obedient - who keeps coming here with statements.

I fear, Mr Speaker, that if this Parliament joins in elevating a particular statement - we have just processed a supplementary of about Shs 3 trillion here and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development did not call Parliament anywhere. They have all been coming to the Budget Committee, the committee made a report and it was debated here. Therefore, this innovation – I want to plead with you, Mr Speaker, to not go. We can ask a Parliamentary Commissioner to represent you, like Commissioner Silwany. However, to have a whole Speaker of Parliament to go to Kololo - For our sake, do not go, Mr Speaker. 

The issue I am raising is: what happens with Rule 52 requiring ministers to come here, if a new window of a semi-sitting of Parliament is opened for them.

THE SPEAKER: Procedure.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am the Vice Chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation. At one stage, we invited the Minister of Education and Sports and she assured us that she was going to appear on Zoom. Indeed, Parliament prepared everything. We waited for the Minister, of course, hon. Muyingo came physically as usual and the minister failed to appear. We said we shall give her another time. 

When we are talking about education, we love it but there are things we must give consideration to. There is no school in Uganda, which is ready to start in January that has received even Shs 200,000 to set up for the opening. However, the preparation for tomorrow's meeting alone, according to the information I have, is going above a billion shillings. That money would be taken to Kaabong or Kalungu to prepare for the reopening of schools. (Applause)

We are setting a dangerous precedent here, where ministers have to summon Members of Parliament, yet we play a supervisory role on the ministers. Therefore, wouldn't it be procedurally right, as hon. Ssemujju has stated, that you talked to this Minister to go to either radio stations or other media houses to give her room to talk so that the money that would have been spent at Kololo, worth a billion shillings goes back to Kalungu, Kilak County or Bunyoro and we prepare for the reopening of schools with the money rather than spending it on an individual. (Applause)

This business is very dangerous. This is what President Mugabe’s wife was doing in Zimbabwe –

THE SPEAKER: The procedural matter.

MR SSEWUNGU:  The procedural matter I am raising is: wouldn’t it be procedurally right, as she wrote to you, that you write back stating, “Before you do anything, can we get that money you are going to use for testing of Members of Parliament and take it back to Ruhaama, where you represent, so that these schools get the money to prepare for the reopening of schools by putting in all those SOPs required by schools?” Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the point is clear. It looks like I am preparing to speak and so, you should prepare to sit.

The issue is as simple as it should be. We represent the people of this country and there are serious issues touching the people of this country. There is information that is being made available for us to prepare to solve a problem but the method of presenting this particular information to Members of Parliament seems to be an issue.

In law, there is something we call “procedural justice” and another we call “substantive justice”. What do we want to achieve? That was my assessment because I am being requested to review my earlier decision. Usually, when a person who has made a decision is being requested to review it, substantive grounds are raised to persuade that person to change the position.

I have listened to hon. Ssemujju but I have not heard a ground that would make me even be caught thinking about changing my decision. When the matter was presented, I looked at the global picture of these children, parents and teachers. I said anything that can come, either by way of information or indication that there is preparation to deal with this particular problem, whichever way, I would prefer that we receive it. That is what informed my decision. 
It is better to get this information in the shape it will come, we have a debate and prepare the country to reopen all the schools in this country. That is what guided me. It is not because some minister is bigger than another. It was about it being a big issue and we needed to deal with it.

Honourable members, we have all been here. Issues of support to private schools - banks are taking their properties because schools are closed and they cannot get revenue to service their debts – all these issues have come here. Issues of teenage pregnancy because children are at home, have come here. Motions have been moved and resolutions have been passed by this House.

This is a process that is going to bring all these things to some meaningful guided conclusion. That is what led me to take the decision that we could do a hybrid because of the members of the public who have been invited, who cannot sit here. Even if it were only us, we would not be able to sit here. That is why I said, “Okay, we will do that.”

Honourable members, if there is any debate that will be required to follow up, we can now reconvene in another setting and have a full debate, take our own decisions and give our own guidance on the matter. The issue is just about receiving the information. We could have received it by Zoom or by any other means but this time, it has been proposed that we receive it in this form.

Honourable members, rule 52, which is being cited, does not arise. Why? It is because it will not be a parliamentary sitting where the Speaker will sit there in a wig and start – procedure, order – no, it will not be that. It will be a kind of informal information-receiving gathering that we will sit and listen and then see how to process this information. 

Honourable members, this is my request. Can I make my request so that - [A member rose] - I can allow you? My request is that we receive the information the way it has been proposed and then we handle it thereafter the way we would want to handle it as Parliament. That is my request to you.

MR BASALIRWA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you. I definitely do not, in any way, want to disagree with your sense of judgment. 

The procedural issue I seek to raise relates to both the present and the future. I would like to derive it from rules 7 and 8 of our Rules of Procedure. The first one is your general authority, as Speaker, under rule 7. The second one is in cases where the rules are not specific on a procedural aspect. 

The other day, we discussed aspects of these rules. Definitely the issue you propose of a semi-sitting is alien to our rules. It is also very difficult to trace it anywhere in the Commonwealth. You have alluded to the fact that there is history; you did mention that this has happened before. It is happening now. I want to assume that it will also happen in the future. 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to consider - because under rule 8, if as Speaker you set a precedent, then it becomes part of our rules until the rules say so. It has happened before; you alluded to it, it is happening now and it will happen in the future.

Can’t we think about making it one of the procedural issues in the House; that a minister can write to you seeking a semi-arrangement of this House? It should be clear in the rules so that they write citing the rules. When that happens, you avoid the imbroglio that is here today. I would like us to begin thinking in those lines. Otherwise, the more you explain, the more we ask, ‘under what rule’? How are we going to justify it? Mr Speaker, I am looking at it from that perspective. 

Again, from our rules, when COVID-19 struck, these rules were amended and there is now a provision for virtual sitting. I would like to know, from that communication, whether there has been a provision for virtual receipt of that information so that those who may not be comfortable going to Kololo can receive the information quickly. Those who think it is okay can take the COVID-19 test and go to Kololo. 

I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Somebody is asking whether the Speaker took the COVID-19 test. I take COVID-19 tests every three days; whether there is a meeting or not. It is standard procedure for me. It is a good habit to have, if I were you. Well, at least I know that I do not have a problem. 

Honourable members, sometimes by the way we do business, we bring to surface what should never come to surface. Due to this insistence of ministers inviting Members of Parliament - I have received letters from ministers inviting Members of Parliament for meetings outside the precincts of Parliament. I have insisted that Members should not go and have meetings in places, except with the express permission of the Speaker or in the conference room of Parliament.

However, honourable members, you know as well as I do, what has been happening. It happened last year, it happened last week and it is going to happen tomorrow. I do not want to go into details about this. Hence, these arrangements are there but I do not want to go into details.

Requests have been made for these specific kinds of things where they would like to engage Members of Parliament on specific matters at particular times and I have allowed them to take place. If there is a Member who has not been part of this process, I would like that Member to stand up. We have all been part of this process and I know it. 

Therefore, why are we making it difficult to deal with an important matters and are putting all kinds of complications in the process? The reasons we are now giving are that “We invited the minister; she said she was going to appear on Zoom but she did not appear. Then, we gave her a second chance to appear on Zoom but she did not appear, so, now, we do not want to listen to her.” That reasoning should not make us refuse to receive information.

Honourable members, I acted on your behalf by the authority you conferred upon me through supporting me to become what I am and I sit here in this shape and the funny things that I wear, to do the things that I do, which most of the time you try to make it so difficult for me, like now.

Therefore, honourable members, can we agree that those who - because let us not extend this too much. Those who would like to come to Kololo and can do so, should come to Kololo. There is no threat that if you do not come, something will happen. No, it is free. That is why we said those who would like to come, please do the test and then come. Those who would not like to attend, arrangements will be made for you to watch and listen from wherever you are. The only challenge is that you may not be able to say anything that can be heard where people are having the meeting. 

Therefore, let us have this. Honourable members, those of you who would like to be in Kololo at 10 O'clock tomorrow to listen to the statement on the reopening of schools, please come. Let us do the test that is required so that we can go to Kololo. For those of you who would not want to come to Kololo because you do not want to do tests or for other reasons, you will stay wherever you will be in the morning. The meeting will take about one and a half hours and then we will come back here for plenary at 2 O'clock. 

There is no point in stressing this debate. There are those who do not want to come and we accept that. There are those who would like to come, we also accept that. Let those who would like to come to Kololo come. For those who do not want to come, it is okay. You will also get this information in some form. Thank you very much.


Honourable Members - clarification from the Speaker? Yes, honourable minister.

DR MUYINGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the good guidance you have provided only that I feel like I should make some clarification before we proceed.

Mr Speaker, one of the honourable members here said that the ministry is going to spend over a billion shillings, which is not true. This is a meeting like any other meetings we have been conducting before. As the Ministry of Education and Sports, we are not spending anything. I want to make this clear. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, can we proceed? (Several Members rose) On this same issue? Let us do this, honourable members. If it is about the matter of tomorrow, I think we have concluded it. Those who would like to come to Kololo, come. Those who do not want to come, stay wherever but at least, be able to get the information.

I think that is the best way to avoid some people saying they have been forced to go anywhere.  - No, it is voluntary. I will personally be there because Members will be there. 

2.49
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I am very much aware that your ruling cannot be vied by any Member. However, I am at pain because the reality is that we are setting a precedent that will be very tough, that we deem some matters much more important than others. 

THE SPEAKER: Of course, that is the reality. Some matters are more important than others; that is a fact of life; not all matters are the same. 

MR NSEREKO: Mr Speaker, we handled, with your permission, the issue of a Supplementary Budget, committing Ugandans to funds from the Consolidated Fund, which I deemed to be a very important matter, like education.

We have called for the presentation of the recovery of this economy, post COVID, which is actually also a very important matter. We have handled matters of health in this august House, which are equally very important, just like that of education. 

Mr Speaker, the issue is about the precedent. I am alive to the fact that the ruling has been made and it is not coercive. However, will it be very much possible that hon. Francis Zaake here, has an important matter to address the nation on and that there will be fairness that we move to his House or to Mityana or to a place where he will have organised in the future or today and that a sitting of the House, formal or informal, in any nature be conducted? That leaves a big question and I believe we cannot do this in anticipation. 

Anyway, the trend and precedent we are setting, Mr Speaker, of an honourable member, who was virtually called to attend meetings of a Committee of Government Assurance and twice or thrice, they did not honour - if in any case, we want to process this very important matter as Parliament, we can do it virtually on Zoom, just like other Members always join us in the debate on Zoom and we interact. We are not saying no. We are also part of this programme of Parliament. It would have been a very good august House sitting and someone can communicate. 

The President has ever presented a statement in the other Parliament while in State House and it was well received. I am not saying no, that if a Member probably feels they cannot present the matter here, they can do it virtually. Present it to us on Zoom, we view them on the screens and we present our rebuttals, and we have a cordial debate on the matter while representing all our countrymen.
Otherwise, for the honourable minister to present a statement, and then we come back and process a statement in her absence, then who will give responses to our questions? Will she do it virtually when we come back to the House? Will she be physical; this is the engagement that we would want. 

If in any case she cannot come, then we have a provision in our rules to do it online. We will respond to that statement online; we will also ask questions online; she will respond and we rest the case. In that way, we will all be moving as a House, not saying those that agree and those that disagree not to be there; it will leave us as a divided House, Mr Speaker. 

My prayer is, Mr Speaker, that the matter of education is as important as other matters. This one is very urgent and our constituents need effective representation on this matter and responses from the minister in charge of the docket. How shall we interact with her when it is not a formal sitting of the House? How shall we interact with her when she is not presenting that statement virtually? 

The only gateway is the virtual zone. It is that zone that will let us ask her questions as she responds. 

You talked about questions of recovery for schools that are heavily indebted. Who will give me that answer when she is not here in the afternoon to respond? That is all I would like to ask. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I conclude on this? Honourable members, should hon. Zaake, in the future feel like inviting Members to his house, he will do so and Members will not be forced to go to his house. Those who will like to go will go; those who will not feel like going, will not go; that is it.

For me, like I said at the beginning, I am trying to look at the bigger picture of what we can do to participate in the process of reopening schools that have been closed for very long. That is all and there is no other thing. 

2.54
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): I want to thank you, Mr Speaker. I am moving a motion without notice, under Rule 59(1) of the Rules of Procedure. 

Mr Speaker, as required by Rule 59(2), I rise to move that this House considers this motion requiring the Minister of Education and Sports to consider making that statement to Parliament - because the privilege I have here to represent the people of Kira Municipality is such that I am entitled to the same information like any other member of Parliament and that privilege cannot be taken away.

Therefore, the motion I am seeking to move is to require the Minister of Education and Sports to consider making that statement not in an informal place but to the sitting of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, sometimes you make me feel the urge to - these same rules that are being cited by hon. Ssemujju are clear on how you handle guidance given by the Speaker.

Hon. Ssemujju is very smart; he is trying to find a “backhand” way to challenge a guidance of the Speaker. (Laughter) 
In other words, he is trying to say “The decision that the Speaker took on our behalf, that we receive the statement from Kololo, should not stand. Instead, we should not receive that statement from Kololo but receive it in some other way.” That is proposing a review of the Speaker’s ruling without using the rules. 

That motion, therefore, is not sustainable in law. (Applause) Hon. Ssemujju knows more than I do that he is just doing the usual thing - (Laughter) - he likes doing, when I am presiding, to try and test my knowledge of this.

Honourable members, let us leave it at this. I think we have had enough discussion on this matter. Yes, procedure from Mukono?

MS BETTY NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have guided that what is going to take place tomorrow at Kololo is not a parliamentary sitting but a meeting where many people from other offices will also be, including – if I heard you properly – the Chief Administrative Officers.

That being as it is, Mr Speaker, it instead worries me because the very purpose we would like to interface with the Minister of Education is as representatives of the people to be able to hear her plan about reopening of schools and, therefore, making an input by way of debate here.

Now that we have understood that that is not a parliamentary function but an exercise by the Ministry of Education to reach as many people as possible - including the MPs; when does the Minister of Education, therefore, intend to bring to this House, for discussion, matters related to the reopening of schools?

Mr Speaker, we, your representatives in committees, are facing a very difficult situation. My deputy addressed you, a while before I got here, about the situation we found ourselves in as the Committee on Government Assurances, where we were required to have an interface with the First Lady. She wrote back saying, “I will not be able to come on the 4th of September but I will definitely come on the 23rd”. 

We waited patiently. A day to the 23rd, she wrote again, this time saying, “I will not be able to come in person, but my other ministers and heads of departments at the ministry will. However, I will address the committee through Zoom and others.”

We organised and sat in the Conference Hall, waiting for the Zoom meeting but eventually, we were told that she would not also be able to appear on that.

Mr Speaker, I always look at the provisions of Rule 208(d). I always want to believe that this is what I am, when I am seated to chair a committee, that I have powers of the High Court. There is a provision where you can cause attendance, summoning somebody and sending police to bring that person to the committee – (Laughter)- so that that person can give the important information needed by Parliament, through the committee.

Just think about this; when I have to send police to bring to me hon. Kataaha Museveni –(Laughter)– so that she can talk about the assurances her ministry is supposed to handle, made to various - concerning education –

THE SPEAKER: The procedural matter?

MS BETTY NAMBOOZE: The procedural matter I am now raising is, now that you told us we have powers of the High Court, would it be procedurally okay, having sought the attendance of hon. Kataaha in the Committee on Government Assurance, that I notify you, Mr Speaker, that I am now going to send police to bring her for me? (Laughter) 

I had thought, Mr Speaker, the only consolation I had was that well, Parliament is going to sit at Kololo but now you have said it is not even Parliament. Those things will not be anywhere on our Hansard. So, I am so frustrated and I know many other people are.

Mr Speaker, the committee –

THE SPEAKER: Can you help me now guide and I rule on the matter?

MS BETTY NAMBOOZE: The guidance I am seeking now –

THE SPEAKER: You have already sought it. Can I now rule?

MS BETTY NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, are we dealing with the minister or the First Lady -(Laughter)- and why do people want now to incite us, to provoke this House into taking harder options to cause the appearance of this MP, who is the Minister for Education?

If we say she cannot come here because of COVID-19, why does she send Muyingo? Dr Muyingo, I think we face the same risk when it comes to COVID-19. (Laughter) That is what I thought – (Applause) - that old women like me – I am 50 years – are facing difficulty with COVID-19.

I now want you to guide me: How should I cause the appearance of hon. Kataaha Museveni, the minister, to come to the Committee on Government Assurances because we are stuck - we cannot move further without her. What can we do?

Mr Speaker, would it be procedurally okay for me to propose here that it is high time that Uganda thought about advising the President to drop his wife because she is a First Lady? We must protect her exactly the same way we protect the President. This new situation we find ourselves in – the new normal –

THE SPEAKER: Can I guide on this matter?

MS BETTY NAMBOOZE: The new normal – How do we handle the Minister of Education in this situation of –?

THE SPEAKER: You have asked that question many times. Can I now guide? 
Honourable members, the rule just cited by the honourable is 208. That rule is very clear about what you need to do and it has no provision to say, “You seek the authority of the Speaker to do it”. It is a rule complete on its own, giving full authority to the chairpersons of the committees to act as the rules say; you do not need the Speaker’s guidance on that matter. (Laughter)

Please, you do not need any permission or authorisation from the Speaker. Simply wave your rules and proceed; okay, honourable member for Mukono Municipality? That is what the rules say. If that is what the rules say, you are empowered enough and you can do as you propose to do; that will be fine.

I think let us leave it at this. Let us move on from this and we do some other business. I have the NSSF (Amendment) Bill, 2021. Honourable members, we need to deal with the NSSF (Amendment) Bill, 2021 now so that we complete it. 

I have Members with very urgent matters but it is now 3 O’clock. Let us deal with the Bill now. Then, I will figure out how to accommodate Members who have urgent matters to raise and thereafter, see how to proceed. For now, let us deal with the Bill. (Mr Ssenyonyi rose_) Would you like to cite under which rule you rise on this procedural matter so that I can be guided? 

MR SSENYONYI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure on another matter -

THE SPEAKER: Under what rule?

MR SSENYONYI: Mr Speaker, the Rules of Procedure provides for point of procedure, point of order –

THE SPEAKER: And the same rules say that if you are raising a point of order or a point of procedure, state the rule under which you rise.

MR SSENYONYI: I am going to state it, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Then you can sit down, Sir. That is the procedure. 

Honourable members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have leaders from the National Organisation of Trade Unions (NOTU) and the Central Organisation of Free Trade Unions (COFTU). They are represented in Parliament by hon. Abdulhu Byakatonda, hon. Rwakajara Arinaitwe, hon. Charles Bakkabulindi, hon. Margaret Rwabushaija and hon. Agnes Kunihira. They have come here to observe the proceedings. I think specifically, they want to see how we handle the NSSF (Amendment) Bill, 2021. It is important that we do that.
 
Before I do that, let me deal with the procedural matter being raised by the Member of Parliament for Nakawa Division West. 

MR SSENYONYI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your change of heart. 

THE SPEAKER: It is not a change of heart but it is just prerogative. 

MR SSENYONYI: I am confident that you might consider hon. Ssemujju’s plea. Anyway, tomorrow, while you and a couple of other Members of Parliament will be in Kololo –

THE SPEAKER: Is it on the same matter?
MR SSENYONYI: No. I am saying while you and other Members of Parliament will be going to Kololo, medical workers will be on day three of their strike. It is an emergency situation. I am sure many Members of Parliament have been called by their constituents. Hospitals are flooded and there are no medical workers to attend to them.

Medical workers have gone on strike because severally, they have been promised – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have two Members who had come to raise that matter formally before the House; the Member for Luwero and – 

MR SSENYONYI: Mr Speaker, it is an emergency. That is why I thought I would raise it through procedure. 

THE SPEAKER: Sometimes, the Speaker can guide. So, I am saying that the matter has already been listed and the information we have is that right now, there is a meeting going on with the Head of State and the leaders of the medical workers. Hopefully, by the end of today, a solution will have been found. However, that matter is going to be raised formally.

MR SSENYONYI: Could you allow me –

THE SPEAKER: Not now. We are now dealing with the NSSF (Amendment) Bill, 2021 as I requested. 

MR SSENYONYI: It is an emergency. 

THE SPEAKER: I know. I have already put it on my list of things to be raised today. So, can you give me the latitude to do these things as the presiding officer? Thank you. Can we deal with the NSSF (Amendment) Bill, 2021 now.

BILLS
SECOND READING
THE NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021

3.11
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We had already moved the second amendment. A report has already been presented by the committee. We are left with debate and the subsequent stages. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The motion had been formally moved and the report of the committee received by this House. The question had been proposed for your debate on the principles of the Bill on the motion for second reading. 

Honourable members, you will recall that this particular Bill had been completed by this House. The principles that guided the amendment had been adopted by this House and a decision taken. However, by the operation of time, something occurred that affected the progress of this Bill. Subsequently, it also returned for reconsideration; laws got complicated and decisions were made to try to restructure how to handle this very important Bill.

The motion for the second reading of the National Social Security (Amendment) Bill, 2021 was moved, debated and passed by this House. The record shows that it was debated and the principles were passed. There are no new principles that are being proposed in this new Bill.

So, if it was okay, we would go and re-examine. Otherwise, what the President returned is what I had guided we could look at again because substantially, the rest of the Bill had already been approved and there is no disagreement. I would have preferred, if it was okay with you, that we go to the substance of the amendments proposed and see if we can conclude this matter and send the Bill back to the President so that the workers can begin benefitting from what they have been waiting for, for a long time. I am sure all of you have been receiving messages from the workers of this country.
 
If it did not hurt any substantial procedural matter, I would propose that we take a decision on the motion for second reading of the Bill so that we go to Committee Stage, examine the proposed amendments and conclude this matter in the shortest time possible.

3.14
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The only fear I have in adopting that procedure is that it waters down the ruling you made on the business of the last Parliament. Because we all want the NSSF (Amendment) Bill, 2021 to be passed, we may say it is okay and then, another Bill is brought that we may need to debate.

I plead with you that even if it is a limited debate, we take the procedures as they are, such that in future, this is not used as a reference, that a matter was handled; either concluded or not concluded, can be brought and we quickly go to the Committee Stage. This is the only fear I have. 

THE SPEAKER: That is exactly what the Rules of Procedure say. Rule 235(3) states “The reinstatement of a Bill, Petition, Motion or other Business before Parliament or a Committee shall be treated as a fresh reference to the Committee.” So, we are guided by this rule but when you are examining a particular matter, you handle it on a case by case basis, based on the facts surrounding this particular case. You do not generalise. 

In the case of the NSSF (Amendment) Bill, 2021, where had we reached? Do we need to redo what we already did? Those are the questions that we should ask. My proposal is that there are things that we do not need to repeat, especially debating the same principles, which have not shifted. We debated, adopted the motion for second reading, approved the whole Bill and sent it but it was returned on account of three clauses. 

When the matter came back and I was referring it to the committee, I said, please, focus on those three only because the other matters had already been substantially dealt with. We only deal with those three, save time and give the workers of this country the law, which in the circumstances of what we are talking about - COVID-19 has hit very many people so badly - they can begin to draw benefit as has been proposed in the law. That is all. It is not that we are circumventing anything. That is why I am proposing to you that if it is okay, we can move. If it is not okay, we can debate. 

3.17
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to persuade you that this debate on the report processed by the committee can be given some attention, first of all because this is a fresh report by the committee of the 11th Parliament. Had the committee accepted and adopted the report that was presented in the 10th Parliament, it would have been proper that we do not go back into that debate. 

Secondly, this Bill has introduced some new elements. For example, the principles and objectives say, “To provide for taxation of the retirement benefits.” In the 10th Parliament, we did not have that. It was not part but if you read this Bill, it is provided there. We would want to know what the committee has recommended on that particular matter. 

Thirdly, this report differs in substance; I have read it. The committee has departed very much from the recommendations of the committee that processed it in the 10th Parliament. 

For those reasons, I would like to persuade you that you give us opportunity to comment on the principles that have been brought in this Bill. Some may be the same as the past one but since there are new things that have come, we need to debate it and take a decision. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: No problem, if this is the opinion of the Members. However, let me just give guidance. On Bills, we never debate reports of committees; it would be a misplaced debate. What we do, like in this motion for second reading, is we debate the principles of the Bill. 

The committee report informs our debate on the principles of the Bill. There will be no question put to approve the report of the committee because it is not one of those decisions that is required by the House. The decision that is required by the House is, do we agree with the principles of the Bill? Then we pass a second reading.

The committee report, we do not debate it. They just looked at it and informed you, “This is what we found out, take your decision.” Therefore, if there is going to be a debate, let us start debating on the principles of the Bill now. 

3.19
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I see that this Bill has the same principles. This is a very important Bill, waited for by Ugandans and it has been so for a very long time. 

Therefore, if there are issues that we can deal with at the Committee Stage, I plead that we go to the Committee Stage and deal with some of these at that level. This will not be the first time where, if we have some issues that are not very clear, we do some kind of debate at the committee level. Thank you.

3.20
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Mr Speaker, as per Rule 235 that you cited, rule 235(3) states: “The reinstatement of a Bill, Petition, Motion or other Business before Parliament or a committee shall be treated as a fresh reference to the committee.” 

Mr Speaker, you know the attrition levels of Members of Parliament. The biggest number of Members of Parliament are new.

THE SPEAKER: I thought we had agreed we start a debate.

MR SSEWUNGU: I was trying to disagree with the honourable member from Oyam. 

THE SPEAKER: There is no point. Is there a debate? No, it cannot be before debating. Debate. There being no debate, I put the question – (Members rise) – Debate. 

MR ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for processing this report. I want to agree that one of the principles on enhancing the social protection in this country was important. The report touches on a number of issues including ease of joining, voluntary savings, the principle of free entry and free exit, which I totally agree with and I support to protect our people. 

However, the issue I wanted to raise in this report that the chairperson has to clarify is that the history of this amendment, if I recall well, was that a number of Ugandans who had been saving with the NSSF were affected by COVID-19 to the extent that they are not able to sustain their livelihood. As a result, they requested that an amendment be made so that they can access part of their savings, which should help them. 

In this report, we do not see clear guidance by the committee on how many of these members are out there. I am alive to the proposal that people who have saved for 10 years and have clocked 45 years are the ones being allowed, in this principle, to access their savings. 

Mr Speaker, the committee should have stated - and I feel this needs to be clarified - how many people are we talking about in the category of 45 years and above and who have saved for 10 years? We do not have to sit here and raise the hope of Ugandans as if we are responding to their cries then in the end, we pass something that does not address their concerns. 

I had expected that category by category, we should have been guided in this report. People who have saved for a year; how many are they? What age group are people who have saved for two years and up to 45 years? As I understand it, the people who are demanding for this midterm access are many. The restriction of saving for 10 years and being 45 years and above, which we had not agreed to in the past Parliament, which has now been supported here, needs to be dealt with. 

Secondly, I want to commend the committee on their strong stand for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to be the overseer of this Bill. I think we need to support that position. (Applause)
We understand that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is involved in financial matters but their attempt to interfere and meddle into the issues of the workers should not be accepted by this House. We already know so many things that are happening in the ministry that need to be addressed and we cannot accept to plunge our workers in the same hands. I beg to submit briefly.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Again, honourable members, we are not debating the report of the committee. The motion is by the minister. We are debating the motion moved by the minister that the principles of the Bill be adopted - No, that is the motion we are debating. I am guiding the House. You have finished. 

MR ODUR: I wanted to refer to the rules because they are very clear that we debate with reference to the Bill and the report of the committee. 

THE SPEAKER: The report of the committee is guidance. You do not take a decision on it. It is guidance on the debate. That is the distinction. We cannot now subject the committee report to a debate. 

The motion is for second reading of the Bill; principles of the Bill. The report of the committee informs that debate. What we are discussing and taking a decision on are the principles of the Bill. That is it. 

3.26
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I would like to thank the committee for the work they have done, considering the plight of workers in this country. 

On the issue of the principles of the Bill, there is a very important matter that I know must be considered at the committee stage. The recommendations on principle 24A read, in part “commencement will be after a certain period of time…” They have recommended 60 days and yet, that same principle requires the minister to make regulations. 

I am also aware that regulations are derived from the principles. Therefore, if it does not commence, which principles will the minister use to make the regulations? If we talk about the implementation, after it is passed here, when shall it be implemented? It should not be on commencement. 

The other principle that the President alluded to concerns people with disability. After thorough consultation, we have realised that the number of people with disability saving with NSSF is very minimal. 
Therefore, they will not affect the Fund in any way. So, we seek Members' support so that that principle is passed to consider people with disability. 

Another principle that had been mentioned concerns supervision. We are aware that NSSF currently manages the Fund. However, when the Fund was transferred, that was done through the directive of the President; the law was never changed. The Minister of Labour has continuously handled the issue of implementing the policies and everything. 

Therefore, I call upon the Minister of Labour and that of Finance to ensure workers’ money is protected. The law should be clear on who should be supervising it. If it is going to be dual supervision, it should be clearly stated. 

I beg to submit. Thank you.

3.29
MR STEPHEN MUGOLE (NRM, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are two or three things in regards to the principles. One of them is the principle on the payment of an annual levy, by the Fund, to the Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority (URBRA). This one, in the discussions we have had, should be deleted because URBRA should not get money from NSSF to regulate it. I cannot pay you to regulate me. 

The URBRA was formed by Government to regulate the retirement benefits schemes; it is a non-state organ. It was formed because there was going to be liberalisation of the pension sector, which failed. 

Therefore, in principle, if we still provide that we shall pay a levy to URBRA, that would be wrong. Whereas URBRA is relevant, it is not supposed to levy state organisations like the Parliamentary Pension Scheme or NSSF; it should levy the private sector pension schemes. 
Number two, which we think should – and recently, in various meetings, it was resolved that URBRA should not levy NSSF. 

There is a principle under (f) on taxation where it provides for the deference of taxes on contributions and scheme income to the time of payment of benefits. This one is also not agreeable to the stakeholders, most especially by the workers; that we should be taxed at the end, when we are getting our money, yet, as we contribute, we are being taxed. 

I wanted to put across those two, Mr Speaker, as well as to allude to the point raised by the honourable colleague who talked of numbers. I am an outgoing member of the NSSF Board and one who has been sitting on its committee on finance. I know very well that NSSF is capable of paying these monies to the workers but has been segregated. 

If we put it that everybody that has made contribution for 10 years or made 45 years of age, the Fund will be depleted. The NSSF is not a bank. It is a provident fund and so, they cannot pay it out like that. 
I would like to say that if you have worked for four to five years, you would be correct. I can tell that no country in the world, apart from one, Australia, has paid out money from its social security fund to savers because of COVID-19. I am speaking about this as the workers leader. I would really be stupid to say so because I would face the wrath of the workers. 
Anyhow, we have looked at all this and noticed that what the committee has provided for is better and viable. The NSSF can pay that money and continue saving for the rest of the savers.

THE SPEAKER: You could have used a better word instead of the one you used. You could have said, “I would have been unwise” instead of using the other one. Thank you. 

MR MUGOLE: Mr Speaker, I did not get the word I used so - 

THE SPEAKER: I do not want to repeat the word you used. 

MR MUGOLE: I withdraw and apologise for that. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.34
MR RONALD NDYOMUGYENYI (Independent, Rukiga County, Rukiga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the comprehensive report they presented. My worry regarding the report is on the benefits to the disabled people who are 40 years, where the report says that they can get 50 per cent of their savings. 

Whereas it is true that most disabled people are unlikely to get jobs as compared to the able-bodied ones in advanced age, they are also more vulnerable, especially when it comes to finances. If we say that they should get 50 per cent of their savings when they turn 40, we will make them more vulnerable, in the long run. 

Although the report talks about that, as Parliament, we need to analyse it further and see if it is more advantageous or disadvantageous to the disabled savers. This is because if they access that money at 40, the vulnerability may not be atoned to their capacity to get income from elsewhere. At an advanced age, of course, they cannot earn. It is very important that they keep more money with the Fund, as opposed to withdrawing it, when they turn 40. 

In addition, as you are aware, Mr Speaker – (Interruption)


MR BUMALI: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way.  The information I want to give you is that research has indicated that persons with disability may not live as long as you may live in terms of life. Therefore, if we push to the other years that we are talking about, maybe someone may not get a chance of getting his or her money.

MR NDYOMUGYENYI: Thank you so much, hon. Bumali. However, I do not think that is backed by evidence because I do not think there is definite data that shows that disabled people die earlier than their able counterparts. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Tororo, then I come to Kasese. 

3.37
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Ugandans are waiting for this Bill. It would have been my wish that we would move straight to Bills, Third Reading. However, you have asked us to debate. Therefore, on that matter, I want to appreciate the honourable minister, and I do support the principle in the Bill, which opens up savings to even those in the informal sector.

We have an extremely poor saving culture to an extent that those who are not saving with NSSF, when they lose their jobs, are completely caught off balance and cannot even meet their immediate needs. 

Therefore, I would like to appreciate that principle of opening up to all workers, because initially, it was for companies that employ five workers and beyond. But now it is open, implying that it is advantageous to even those that employ less than five people in that the company will also be contributing something towards their saving. Even those who want to voluntarily save with NSSF - even Members of Parliament, even if you belong to another scheme, you can still go and save with NSSF. This is a good idea, and I hope that all Ugandans can be able to pick this up and save with NSSF. 

Mr Speaker, the other issue that I would like to support - I think it would have been a big mistake for us to allow the managing director to be an ex-officio member and at the same time have voting rights. It has never happened in any institution. This would be creating a very powerful managing director. I want to suggest that all other institutions must ensure that the managing director is an ex-officio member, because you cannot be the person being supervised and you have equal rights with the people that supervise you. 

Mr Speaker, we have also people that save in this country; the public servants. We have asked time and again, that let the public servants have a contributory scheme where they also contribute so that they do not suffer. I do not know where this Bill is. We passed it but I do not know where it is now. 

However, it is important for us to consider this approach because Government alone cannot find all the resources to put there for the civil servants in their pension scheme. 

Currently, it is wholly contributed by Government; if it had been contributory, we would not be having the challenges that we are having today. That a teacher retires and then cannot get his/her pension in time; it is all because of that problem. How I wish the Government could also bring that Bill so that we can move on.

I want to conclude, Mr Speaker. I had an issue that I wanted to raise, but I have put it aside and we shall come back to it. We cannot sit in this House to pass laws, and the Executive does not implement them. 

I raised an issue of the NSSF board – nine members, but only one woman as if we are not qualified to be on those boards. In addition, people are trying to give different excuses. 

I have put you on notice, Mr Speaker, that I will come back on that subject matter because we are not going to leave it. This is a constitutional matter, where in all boards and authorities and every institution, we must have at least 30 per cent representation by women – “at least”; that is the minimum. (Applause) 

However, if you go to 10 per cent - hon. Ecweru, you are looking at me but we are women, we are educated, we have the ability, and we can sit on those boards; we are not going to sit back. (Applause) 

The Minister of Finance who pledged to come with a response in two weeks is seated there. I am glad the Attorney-General is here, I want to give you notice; if you do not correct that matter in two days, we shall come back to this House. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: That is the statement from the chairperson of UWOPA; I can see that it has received a lot of support. 

3.43
MR FERIGO KAMBALE (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Colleagues, we are talking about benefits to our savers with the NSSF, which is a very powerful institution. 

As we speak, NSSF’s net asset value is around Shs 15 trillion. The computations have indicated that if we implement this Bill, where people who are eligible to get interim benefits, those who are 45 years and those who have saved for 10 years, around Shs 800 billion will be released, if we implemented this Bill. 

Now, my proposal is that as we pass this Bill, can we subject this arrangement that after one year, we get a report from the Ministry of Finance on the actual expenditure as far as implementing this Bill is concerned? Why? Mr Speaker, these computations are made with the assumption that all the savers who are eligible to get their benefits will be given that money; that is the assumption. However, when you look at the practical situation, there are savers who are eligible to get money and are not ready to receive that money; they leave that money to accumulate as a way of investing. 

Therefore, the 20 per cent, in my view, should even be increased 
after making a review on the actual expenditure, after implementing this. We may insist on 20 per cent, yet, Shs 800 billion will be spent, when in actual sense, some of the people who are eligible will not receive the money but leave it to continue accumulating. In fact, we can even end up spending about Shs 500 billion.

This would mean we have tied those who are ready to receive the money to 20 per cent provision yet, the actual figure could even make them get more than 20 per cent. My proposal is that as we endorse this Bill, let us get an annual review and the real actuals. What did NSSF spend after implementing this Bill, so that we can now review the percentage upwards? 

When someone reaches 45 years, he or she may need about 30 per cent of the savings. With the way things are moving, the economy is not doing well. Someone might have money and may want to do something better but money is saved yet, we have now limited it to 20 per cent. At the end of the year, NSSF should present a report so that we know the actual expenditure, which should be a basis for raising the percentage upwards. I beg to submit.

3.47
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I thank the committee for the very good work. I support the proposal and recommendation of the committee, which is linked to the principle of inclusivity and fairness to all human beings. 

Persons with disabilities need more support, meaning that if you are getting to 40 years, it is better to get 50 per cent. A formal structured strategy like this goes with mind-set change and capacity building so that whatever investment is done, people are empowered to manage themselves and grow better.

Therefore, I support the recommendation of the committee by putting persons with disability in that lane and we need more support. We even live longer. We can even do better when supported. I urge Members of Parliament to take a lead in empowering persons with disabilities to ensure that we do not remain backward. Remove us from being dependents to self-reliant persons.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I support the committee’s proposal that the overseer of this Fund should be the Ministry of Gender – I totally agree. You cannot be the sponsor in one way or the other and monitor independently. We trust our ministry and the community that the ministry oversees lies highly here. Once again, I thank the committee and support this recommendation.

COVID-19 exposed us to understand our poverty levels. As we sit here, the community loves that this Bill was passed yesterday; not today. People need to recover; they are asking for support so that they can recover.
Mr Speaker, I propose – since we do not know about the future, we cannot legislate for uncertainties. However, COVID-19 has taught us a lesson. I propose that there should be flexibility, when a similar event strikes us. 

I had a very bad experience. Workers in Adjumani District wanted to meet me because they were totally broke and they did not have alternatives. They could not go and borrow because they had not refunded what they borrowed – COVID-19 swept it.

In such a fund, where there is the aspect of social protection and security, let us embrace flexibility, when a situation arises. Otherwise, we are doing all this to ensure that everyone grows and lives, in times of challenges, in a better situation. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.51
MR RICHARD SEBAMALA (DP, Bukoto County Central, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for their report. 

Whereas I agree that the 45 years and above be given part of their money, I would like to know what incentive is given to those people who do not withdraw their money after 45 years, such that we encourage people to save beyond 45 years?

Mr Speaker, I agree that after 45 years, people will be having problems or some issues. However, some of them will want to continue to save but they will need some extra incentive, such that rather than removing their money to invest elsewhere, they can keep it with the Fund.

Whereas, I agree with the Ministry of Gender to regulate the fund, I would like to see a situation, where both ministries – Gender and Finance come up with a proper proposal why they should be the suitable ones. 

Much as deep down, we are biased with the Ministry of Finance getting loans time and again, we believe that they might be biased to use our money. I also believe they might come up with a better proposal than the Ministry of Gender. We should be able to make discussions from an informed point of view. What is your offer as Ministry of Gender? What is the offer of the Ministry of Finance, in case it is the regulator?

I also differ from the – (Interjections) - Just a minute. I would like to differ from the pre-current Member who talked about URBRA. The URBRA is helping to regulate a Fund that is Shs 15 trillion, at only around Shs 5 billion. This would cause what we would call “selective application of the regulation”. 
Mr Speaker, this Parliament decided that everyone that is saving should be regulated, irrespective of who they are. Just Shs 5 billion to regulate Shs 15 trillion is a mistake, if we just leave NSSF not to be regulated.

I also want to talk about voluntary savings. Mr Speaker, the informal sector would love to save much higher. Actually, they have more money to save than the public sector. However, what legal incentive have you put in place for voluntary savers? What incentive do we give these people? I am sure very many people save Shs 500, Shs 1,000, Shs 5,000 per day. This is money they could easily transfer by mobile money to their NSSF accounts. However, there is no will, as an incentive, for them to save – (Interruption)

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank my colleague. He was looking at incentives. He started with a 20 per cent advance as midterm access. It is not compulsory. In fact, that is why my colleague said that not all those that are 45 years old will get the 20 per cent. 

When it comes to voluntary saving, you are looking at what motivation you are giving him. I am keeping my money. Last financial year, they gave a 12.5 per cent interest. That is already a motivation.

When you come to Uganda Retirements Benefits Regulatory Authority (URBRA), I think you need to know the history of how it came about. There was a move to liberalise NSSF and URBRA was formed in anticipation, which was blocked. We are saying, in accordance with the law, we have done enough consultation including with the Attorney-General on what URBRA should regulate. That is how they came to say since URBRA was formed by Government, it should be paid by Government through appropriation of Parliament but not by getting money from the funds of the workers. Otherwise, I thank you for your concern. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members.

3.57
MS SHAMIM MALENDE (NUP, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Our workers are indeed waiting for this law. My major concern and the concern of the people of Kampala that I represent is in respect to the issue of implementation. The law may be prepared and passed but the issue of bureaucracy in respect to accessing the fund should be dealt with before this matter is put to rest. 

They have had issues previously; for example when one loses a loved one when he or she had money in NSSF, accessing those funds may take nine to 10 years. One has to first get a letter of administration from court before accessing those funds.

These are some of the issues that I think, before this law is laid out, should be considered. As we speak about the overseers, the issue of bureaucracy should be looked into because it has spoiled many of our things. 

In this regard, let this law be clear on the mode of asking for that money, the days within which the money is supposed to be processed and how it is supposed to be transmitted so that it is a clear process. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. Let us pause this debate here; we have had sufficient engagement. We need to deal with the substance of the proposals. I was going to propose that at this stage, we conclude the debate on the principles and then we go to the actual provisions of the Bill at the Committee Stage. If you allow me to do this, honourable members, then we could go to the next stage and we conclude this matter. Is that fair? 

Honourable members, I now put the question that the Bill entitled, “The National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2021” be read the second time. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE
THE NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021

4.00
Clause 1
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, before we examine the clauses, as a result of this Bill being referred, many discussions and consultations were held and positions agreed upon, I want to take a brief from the leaders; the chairperson of the committee and the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development on what has been agreed upon so that we do not waste time on them. Is that fair? Because there were only a few sticky issues. Therefore, on what has been agreed upon, we do not need to go over them again. Who goes first; the minister or the chairperson? 

4.01
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I want to first confirm that the Attorney-General wrote to you in reference to issues raised by Members in the memorandum in respect to taxation that we have agreed we shall delete. 

Secondly, in the memorandum, (m) which talks about levy of the fund by URBRA shall be deleted. 

The sticky issue has been the mandate between the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We have reached consensus that we shall introduce Clauses 13, 14, 15, 16, 18 and 19 which will amend Sections 30, 31, 32, 33, 35 and 36 of the principal Act to provide for financial matters to be handled by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the rest of the roles shall be handled by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. At an appropriate time, I shall then move those amendments. 

On other issues, most have been agreed upon between the committee and the ministry. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. The motion was moved for Clause 1. I put the question that Clause 1 stand part of this Bill –

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Flavia Kabahenda): Thank you, Mr Chairperson. The committee has recommended that the Bill entitled, “The National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2021 be considered. 

In Clause 1 on commencement, the committee recommends that Clause 1 is substituted for the following:
“Commencement 
    1. Subject to subsection (2), this Act shall come into force upon publication in the gazette. 
    2. The minister shall, in consultation with the board, by statutory instrument, commence Section 24 (a) within 60 days from the date of publication of this Act in the gazette.”
 
The justification is to create certainty on the time of commencement of midterm access that was not provided when His Excellency the President guided. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable members, that is the amendment being proposed by the committee on Clause 1. 

MR NSEREKO: Mr Chairperson, I think this introduces a new legal interpretation in law that the minister shall, with the consultation with the board, lead to the actualisation and commencement of a particular section when it becomes an Act. That leaves it at the liberty of the minister because there is no time that is capped –

THE CHAIRPERSON: The time is 60 days. 


MR NSEREKO: For the particular section?


HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I can understand the rider that offers the 60 days’ period except the rationale, for me, does not hold. The partial implementation of the low can be problematic. Can we get to understand why we cannot have the law commence at ago so that we have a more certain law in place? 

I am asking this because the tendencies here are well documented on how implementation of a particular law is problematic. For us to secure the workers, we need to have this law’s commencement to be on the same date as the date of gazetting. I am yet to appreciate the separation of commencement of section 24A. Why the 60 days? 

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairperson, the 60 days are for the minister to develop a statutory instrument that specifies and spells out the regulations and the way they are going to pay out this money. 

Given that this includes money and calculations and preparation of what to pay to the beneficiaries, the minister is required to give the statutory instrument that will spell out the how, when, who is not going to get it, how many are going to get it and how much, therefore, should be prepared. As a committee, we thought that 60 days would be enough when the minister requested. Actually, the minister had requested for 90 days but we instead gave 60 days. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it is not unusual for a particular law to have different sections, different parts, commencing at different dates; it is not irregular. So, let us debate the purpose for which it is being proposed. Otherwise, it is not irregular to have different parts coming into effect at different times.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairperson, maybe you need to guide us more. When we talk about commencement, yet 24A talks about the minister making regulations - how will the regulations be made if this particular principle has not commenced? 

However, I would suggest that under that same section, the time for implementation should be put - the amendment should carry the time for the implementation in that particular clause.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. When I read 24A, I notice that it talks about mid-term access to benefits and clearly spells out who the beneficiaries are. You must be 45 years and must have contributed for at least 10 years. 

Mr Chairman, there is no other regulation to be made in this respect because the people who qualify are stated in the law. If they are, it is just a matter of us entering the man or woman’s contribution and he is paid what they are supposed to be paid in their mid-term. 

The moment you try to say that the minister will do this, in short, you will be saying that the minister should bring another law, which might be even contrary, first of all, in delaying processes. Worst of it, we are not still in analogue. We are now in a digital world. We should really move faster that this commencement date - we agree, you can defer some sections to start on a different date. However, given the reason why this law came - it was basically to enable workers access their mid-term benefits. 

Mr Chairman, I would suggest that the chairperson of the committee agrees with us. We say that the date of commencement should be the date this law is gazetted. (Applause)

MS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I have reservations on the commencement within 60 days. If we are to subject commencement to the date of publication, then we should also determine within the time the publication in the Gazette will be done. 

The minister can choose to take 30 days to go to the Gazette yet we have subjected the commencement to the publication in the Gazette. We now have to determine the two dates; when should this law be published in the Gazette? We need to agree. Then, we can agree that from that day - then we can subject it to maybe 30 days and so on. 

Otherwise, taking it from what the Member for Budadiri has said, there is no new element, which is to come in the regulation. I am interested in the regulation in the sense that the minister should come up with a regulation and table it before Parliament, so that we can know the details of who the beneficiary is and how the money is to be accessed. Those details will be beneficial to all of us, who are stakeholders. 

Therefore, we will require that the minister tables before Parliament, the regulations to guide the process. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable members, we are not opening up a debate on this matter because it is clear. We just need to decide whichever way. 

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. This is a new provision and it is to facilitate access to the benefits. Some of the provisions that are in the current principal Act are clearly operationalised by a statutory instrument, which clearly stipulates how to access and what the terms and condition are. For example, if you want to access it because of a medical issue, you go to the accredited Government or private hospital, get the doctor's confirmation that you are medically unfit and you will access it on medical grounds. 

Similarly, on mid-term access, we need terms and conditions. The law alone cannot operationalise it. It is you to go, pick and fill a form and have the terms put to the board. The board has to sit and do all this. Those will come in the regulation. That is why we are saying that under section 24, we can, from the workers’ representatives - I can accept that we say 24A (1) and (2) because (3) is where the minister, in consultation with the board, will determine terms and conditions. What should now be, subject to the 60 days, can be 24A (1) and (2).
I beg that for us to make regulations for workers to be able to know the terms and how to access the money, we need to agree on the 60 days because we wanted 90 but now – (Interjection) – yes!

MR ODUR: Thank you, honourable minister. Can you clarify if you envisage a situation where somebody who has met 10 year requirements and also 45 years of age can be denied access? Do you foresee a situation where somebody who has saved for 10 years consecutively (Interjections) – I just want the minister to clarify. 

It is very important for us to understand whether this provision needs a statutory instrument. Therefore, do you foresee a situation where a saver who has saved for 10 years and is also 45 years may be denied mid-term access? 

MS AMONGI: Honourable members, the law is clear in its proposition that one should have saved for 10 years and clocked 45 years. I do not envisage that. However, I want to put up a procedure to say, “Come with your national ID; come and make an application to this office.” Then, all those procedural issues are made administrative. There is no way you can do it haphazardly. The board and the minister have to put that regulation in place to help people to access the funds. That is the regulation. You also need a legal framework for people to access – some kind of administrative regulation on how people will access that money. 

I think the debate should be; should the regulation come into force in 30 days or 60 days? It should not contest the requirement of a regulation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is a proposal that the regulation should come to Parliament. What do you say about that?

MS AMONGI: We have no problem if Parliament – there are many regulations that come to Parliament; so if it is deemed fit, we will be okay.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you absolutely sure about that?

MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA: Mr Chairperson, the laying of statutory instruments before Parliament should not be a problem at all. We will be happy to do that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, the question is laying for what purpose?

MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA: No, laid for information because the honourable member said they needed to know what we are doing. It is laid for information.

THE CHAIRPERSON: They needed to know what we are doing; the implication is that we must approve it. 

MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA: No, laid late for – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, listen carefully. There are three aspects under which we handle statutory instruments. One, we lay for information only; the instrument comes into force immediately, but we bring it to Parliament for information. 

The second category is that you lay statutory instruments subject to what we call “an affirmative vote”. “Affirmative vote” means the instrument does not start operating until Parliament approves it. 

The third category is the one subject to a negative vote. That one means it starts operating immediately until Parliament says “No.” However, all actions taken under the authority of the instrument remain valid; they cannot be nullified.

Therefore, the question being raised by the honourable member for Dokolo is not as simple as it sounds. If it is for approval of Parliament, then you have to assess the implication of that proposal properly.

MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA: Mr Chairperson, it is for laying before Parliament for information. The statutory instrument will commence upon being gazetted but it shall be tabled before Parliament for information.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, in other words, you are opposed to the proposal of the honourable Member for Dokolo. The committee proposed that one.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairperson, the committee proposed it for approval. It actually goes for the second idea because even the honourable Member for Erute – all those fears must be allayed so that everybody is treated the same way with equal opportunities.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I beg to be protected – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Proceed, honourable minister; you have protection.

MR OBOTH: We have precedents here; I know that this Bill is very important, including the subject matter. However, there is a double legislative role that this Parliament wants to play. Unless we are not sure of the safety nets we have provided in the body of the law, subsidiary legislations world over – Mr Chairman, we still have a challenge in this Parliament, that we do not have a committee, specifically, designated to handle subsidiary legislation. 

My fear is that when this matter comes back, the same Committee on Gender will again have to look at this and do what? Can we change a statutory instrument when we have delegated legislative role to the minister? It is usually for information. If we feel it is so important that we need something there, it is our role now to expound the section or the clause and put it – (Interjection) - Mama wants clarification. For such a senior person, what would I do? (Laughter)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you for giving way. Mr Chairman, clause 12 already provided for the statutory instrument to be laid before Parliament for approval. 

However, I would like the minister to know – and that is the clarification I am seeking – that this is a very sensitive matter. It touches very simple people who are scattered all over the country. All of us in all our constituents will have cases of people wanting to access this money. Therefore, we will not want a situation where the statutory instrument has contradicted anything that we have discussed or raised. That is where my concern is. 

The clarification I am seeking, Minister, through the Chairman, is that I want you to assure me that this statutory instrument, or whatever regulatory system the minister wants to bring, should not have any contradictory clause that will make our work difficult. If it does, what would be the mechanism of rescuing our people? (Hon. Basalirwa rose_)

MR OBOTH: Do you want to give information before I respond? I have never declined information from my former Guild President in Makerere. The answer to honourable Cecilia Ogwal is in the negative; there will be no contradiction.

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, Chairperson. The information I want to give my former chairman of University Hall – who actually did not support me at Makerere – is why we have statutory instruments. Statutory instruments are a form of delegated legislation: You are basically saying that Parliament is so busy that it gives part of its law making authority to other entities and agencies. 

When you say you are bringing a statutory instrument for approval, you are basically engaging in another form of legislation. If we are uncomfortable with giving authority to a minister to make a statutory instrument, then let us say so in the Act and we legislate on every aspect. 

Otherwise, to say you are giving a minister this authority and then you are coming to Parliament to approve it again, will be double legislation. That will defeat the purpose of subsidiary legislation.

MR OBOTH: With that very eloquent information – and informed, I am reclining to my seat. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are discussing whether we should pass clause 12, which is about mid-term access; we should have a clawback on the authority of the Minister to make the instrument. We might say that it is okay to make the regulations, but before it comes into force, first bring it to us. That is what the proposal says; that first bring it to us and we approve it. 
 
Honourable members, the guiding principle for making this decision is; what power is being delegated? What is the substance of what is being delegated? Is it purely administrative or does it have legal parameters? If it has legal parameters, then there is a possibility that it will conflict with what we said in the principal legislation and so, there may be need for further scrutiny. 

But, if it is purely administrative - because the core principals have already been stated. One of the core principles is that you are 45 and two, you have saved for 10 years. Honourable members, we have adopted the key principle and we have now said “okay, to implement the details administratively, do it by instrument” Therefore, do we need to again prove whether they are going to need national IDs? Do we need to do that as Parliament? Do we need to review that? Otherwise, we have already decided the criteria that one, you must be 45 years and two, you must have saved for 10 years continuously. Whatever happens, thereafter, and whatever the minister will do cannot exceed this authority delegated under these two principals. 
Now, what form of instrument do we want? Do we want to bring these administrative procedures for information of Parliament to lay on the Table? Do we want to bring it so that Parliament can approve it or do we want to bring it so that it starts working until Parliament looks at it and then later say you made a mistake and we stop it? Which one are we proposing? Learned Attorney-General, guide us on this. 

MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA: Mr Chairperson, we are proposing that the instrument comes into force and is presented to Parliament for information. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. 

MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA: For the comfort of Members of Parliament, any statutory instrument, which is made and exceeds the power set in the principles or the sections of the law is null and void and shall not happen on my watch. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. That is a statement for the future. It has happened before, which is why these Members are very sensitive to some of these delegations. Sometime, in the past, people went and amended the law by the instrument we told them to make. They amended the actual law - they attempted. Of course, eventually it was reversed but they had done it. Therefore, it is from this background that Members are very sensitive to how we exercise delegated powers. Can we conclude this, honourable members, please. Okay. Procedure

MS OGWAL: Mr Chairperson, the principal law has already prescribed that. Therefore, I want the Attorney-General to guide us. We can proceed but the principal law we have already passed, which we are now trying to amend provides for that. Therefore, I would like the Attorney-General to guide on that before we proceed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there has been no provision in the principal Act about mid-term access. This is a new situation. It could not have been anticipated because there was no COVID-19; this is a new situation. We are trying to create regulation for a new situation; some animal called mid-term access is what we are trying to regulate. So, we cannot make reference to something that does not exist. Are we clear? [Honourable members: Yes] Okay, let us proceed. 

MR BASALIRWA: Clarification.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you seeking clarification from the Chairperson. I do not know which procedure we are using now. The Chairperson does not handle clarifications and does not debate. So, you do not want to force a debate out of me. Can we move on, please. (Laughter)
 
MR BASALIRWA: I disagree with what Mama Cecilia was saying. However, I think the issue she raises is that in the Bill, there is an aspect to the effect that the statutory instrument will be brought here for approval. That is the point she was raising.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, it is not there. It is section 24A. If you look at the proposed new sub-clause (3) it states “The minister shall, in consultation with the board, prescribed by statutory instrument, the terms and conditions and procedures for accessing the accrued benefits.” This section is about mid-term access. There is nothing about Parliament in it, please.

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. Can I propose a third idea so that the Attorney-General guides again.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, please, do not complicate things for us. We have moved away from there. Now, we are making a decision. 

We have agreed that the document will be laid here and we will receive it. If we look at it and we find a problem, then we cause - Is that what we have agreed? [Honourable members: “Yes”] Is that what the committee has proposed? 

Honourable members, in clause 1, the amendment that has caused this long debate was to the effect on the commencement. Clause 1 (2) states “The minister shall, in consultation with the board, by statutory instrument, commence section 24A within sixty days from the date of publication of this Act in the Gazette”. So, the committee is proposing to amend what is in the Bill by inserting a timeline of 60 days, which the minister has agreed to.

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, it is supposed to be 24A (1) and (2), because (3) is operationalising the statutory instrument by the minister. If you just put commence section 24A, it covers (1), (2) and (3) yet, (3), is where the power given to the minister and the board is. Therefore, it should read “The minister shall, in consultation with the board, by statutory instrument commence section 24A (1) and (2) within sixty days from the date of publication of this Act in the Gazette.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear honourable members? That is clear and that is the final proposal in the amendment of clause 1. I will put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2
MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairperson, clause 2 is on the amendment of section 1 of the National Social Security Fund Act.
Clause 2 is amended to the effect that-
(a) In paragraph (c), by inserting a new definition immediately before the proposed paragraph (a) as follows:
 “Corruption has the meaning assigned to it in the Anti-Corruption Act No.6 of 2009.”
(b) In paragraph (e), by substituting for the proposed paragraph (u), the following:
 “(u) the ‘minister’ to mean the minister responsible for Social Security.”
(c) By inserting a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (e) as follows:
 “(f) by inserting immediately after paragraph (v), the following:
 “’persons with disabilities’ has the meaning assigned to it in the Persons with Disabilities Act, No. 3 of 2020.”

The justification is - 
    1. The insertion of new definitions is to provide for terms used in the Act.
    2. Placing the Fund under the Ministry of Finance would alienate the Ministry of Gender from the overall management of NSSF, whereas the object of the Bill is social security, and the subject is the management of the fund. It is pertinent that priority in consideration of the regulation and management is put on the workers whose money it is that NSSF keeps. It is for this very purpose that the Bill was introduced to Parliament by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.
3. There is need to comply with the International Labour Organisation standards to which Uganda is both a signatory and a member state since 1963 and under whose Constitution is the obligation on member states to report on measures which it has taken to give effect to the provisions of the Conventions, to which it is a party. This obligation, in practice, is with the Ministry of Labour and not the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

4. Further, there is need to implement the obligations in the National Tripartite Charter on Labour Relations signed between the Government of Uganda and the Federation of Uganda Employers, NOTU and COFTU, which obligates the state to, among others, create a vibrant social sector that provides for the welfare of workers, retired persons, the unemployed, orphans, the sick, persons with disabilities, youth and other disadvantaged, and to promote good governance and compliance with the national laws and ratified regional and international treaties such as the ILO. 

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is directly responsible for the creation of a vibrant social sector, as well as securing workers’ retirement through their contributions in NSSF.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, is the proposal for amendment clear, as proposed by the committee?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. This is an interpretation section. Supposing we pass it now, go forward and discover there is something that we need to attach meaning to - wouldn’t it be better for us to maybe stay this?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. Since we have already spent time on it, we will adopt this one. If another comes, we will come back to it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Can we open it up?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, we will still be at Committee Stage, if the need arises, because we have already spent time on it. You should have raised it at the beginning.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So then, after that, can I raise my amendments for interpretation here?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Right now? [Hon. Nandala-Mafabi: “Yes”] Can we deal with this first, okay? 

That is the proposal for interpretation of several words; the word “corruption”, “people with disabilities”, “minister” - Those are the words that are being given interpretations to in this proposal. If they make sense, I put the question for adoption to this amendment that is proposed by the committee. I put the question to this amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Any further matter on the interpretation? [Hon. Nandala-Mafabi rose_] Have you shared your amendment with the committee, Members and the Speaker?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, the reason I am raising this follows from what the chairperson has raised. He is talking about the Minister responsible for Finance, where they are deleting.

Mr Chairperson, you will recall that a few moments ago, either the minister or the chairperson said this Bill will be managed by two ministers; the one of Gender and the one of Finance. What I am trying to say is that we should put the interpretation for both ministers here to clearly state what the other one is supposed to do.

A brief background, Mr Chairperson - You recall why the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development took over this. I recall we were here and the current Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development was here. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development took over this because they were looking for money and when they took over, they had no law. We contested and now they are trying to bring the law.

You will recall the then Minister of General Duties was hon. Rukutana. He was the one who fought and took it to the finance ministry. As soon as they transferred him to Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, he came here and wanted to take it quickly. (Laughter) You know all this.

We must be very clear so that we avoid where one grabs it using power and eventually when he changes, he changes it. I want to move the amendment that we have the two ministers defined here and what roles they are supposed to play – (Interjection) - You can say that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, chairperson, Attorney-General, what is the situation here?

MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA: Mr Chairperson, it is a matter of style. We had proposed to make amendments to Sections 31, 32, 33, 34 and 35 to make specific provisions in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. However, to accommodate this situation, we could actually add a proviso to this provision to read, “Minister means Minister responsible for social security, except the Minister referred to in Sections 30, 31, 32, 33, 35 and 36, which shall be the Minister responsible for Finance.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I agree with the Attorney-General. That is why the problem will come if we change those sections ahead. If we put them here now, can we state that supposing the sections which we are referring to change, they will be accommodated here because this is an interpretation section?

MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA: Mr Chairperson, we could try and let that lie for now because this is what we have now. When we come to amend the changes at that time, we will make specific reference to those sections. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in this case, is only going to be dealing with those sections that I have enumerated. Everything else is going to be handled by the Minister responsible for social security. Thank you.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I heard the chairperson of the committee and thought we were moving well until hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for some reason, introduced a subject alien to what I was listening to. I need to understand the source of that; I do not see it anywhere in the report. If, say, there is a new development in the Bill, let us clearly understand. 

The learned Attorney-General is suggesting the proviso. For the record, can we understand the essence of his introduction, vide the proviso? What will be the net effect of those amendments and the intent of those sections for which the finance ministry should be responsible to avoid legislating officially for chaos?

MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Like the minister reported, after this Bill had been here and after the committee had made its report, further consultations were made between the committee and all the different stakeholders. The issue that we were trying to resolve was which minister would be responsible for this Act. 

It was then agreed that the Minister responsible for Finance should deal with the matters that address investment in Section 30, power to borrow in Section 31, accounts and audit in Section 32, annual reports in Section 33, members’ accounts in Section 34, interests on account in Section 35 and reserve account hence, the amendment that is being proposed because there are going to be two ministers handling that. 

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I rose inter alia because I was at cross purposes with the submissions and I thought something was amiss. While I smelt a rat, I have actually seen and touched it. 

First of all, the learned Attorney-General has been very decent and said that after a report had been brought to Parliament and submitted on the Floor, there were further consultations that are not part of the report to Parliament. They are now being vested on Parliament as agreed upon. Through you, Mr Chair, are we able to understand the essence, from the chairperson of the committee, the scope and nature of this consultation so that we can lessen the debate? Because these are new introductions. I have not read them.

They were pre-consultation and post report consultations. This is a new development. I seek your indulgence. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you will recall that in the beginning, before I started calling out the clauses, I informed the House that after we met, there was a call for further consultations. Those consultations revealed some disagreements on points that had been agreed upon many times. Of essence, if I can give one example, is the issue of supervisory mandate. You will recall that the Parliament that passed the initial legislation said it should – I think they passed it with the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development only. The Bill went to the President and he sent it back, saying it should be the Minister of Finance. That is what was brought in the Bill.

After the consultations and involvement of the workers, their representatives, the ministry and everybody else, it was finally agreed that there should be a dual mandate; one, to deal with issues of money, investment and borrowing. However, the key policy issues relating to management of workers and their welfare and social security must reside with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. This is where they agreed on this dual mandate, which had been a very contentious issue. So, it has now been agreed upon and harmonised that this should be the position.

That is the background I can give. That is how I asked the minister to update the House on what transpired that led to the position that we are trying to take now. So, can we proceed, Members? What clause are we on?

MR NSEREKO: On that matter, Chairperson, you have given very good guidance. I definitely have a view on this matter. Not to create crossing paths, both ministers are appointed by the President. In their dockets, I have no doubt that NSSF would have a board that would be in charge of investment. The parent ministry can have auditors and supervisors. What is the problem and where is the problem? What are we trying to cure in this matter by mixing ministries? In any case, who will present the regulations that touch matters of finance and policies?

THE CHAIRPERSON: That will be guided by the law. 

MR NSEREKO: Mr Chairperson, the issue we would like to vote on in this matter and our proposal is that let the mandate of supervision lie in one ministry. We can vote as to whether it should lie in the Ministry of Finance or the Ministry of Gender. Then we can restructure the rest. If the President wants to propose that there can be some officers from the Ministry of Finance with expertise in investment to move to the Ministry of Gender, that lies within the executive authority. After all, it is the same executive authority that appoints the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Gender.

Therefore, this cross battle for who owns the docket or who should reserve what can be resolved by deployment and administrative measures. For us, the vote here should be on where the mandate lies. If the President so wishes, in his wisdom, that this is the best minister to handle matters of gender and investment, then they can deploy that person who best suits the portfolio. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I guided before and let me try again. This issue caused a stalemate. The past Parliament passed it and said it is the Ministry of Gender. The President sent it back and said it is the Ministry of Finance. Discussions were held and an agreement was reached that, “Okay, let somebody handle the issue of specific investment but the mandate on social security lies with the Minister of Gender”. 

You know sometimes, in drafting laws, we say, “Laws are made to pass like razors are made to sell”. Sometimes, you serve the bigger purpose by making compromises of this nature. What is the essence of this Bill? What are we trying to do to workers in this Bill? We are trying to give them midterm access. Along with it, it has these issues that are causing problems. Can we stop the issues from causing problems and deal with the substance of what we need to do with the workers of this country? 

That is how these compromises were made. I think it was done in good spirit. Everybody was consulted and the agreement was reached that there should be a dual mandate. The Ministry of Finance takes investment and borrowing decisions and the rest of the policy issues including the International Labour Organisation (ILO) Statute – those social security mandates - must rest with the Ministry of Gender. That is why this matter has come up again and we are adopting it.

It might be good for us to let this now pass the way it had been agreed because consultations were held with the workers and their Members of Parliament. So, the point we are discussing now – because sometimes, we discuss and move away from the point of discussion. What we are discussing now is an amendment to a definition. What are we defining? We are defining “minister”. “Minister” is being defined as the one responsible for social security. 

Under the clauses mentioned by the learned Attorney-General, the mandate for those particular sections have been given to the Minister of Finance. So, hon. Nandala-Mafabi said, “Since you are defining the minister responsible for social security, you might also now need to define who the other minister is.” That is how the discussions have started on the definition of the minister responsible for social security. Then they asked, “Why don’t you add -?” That is how the Attorney General said, “We will define it to mean the minister responsible for social security, except those under the following clauses, which shall be the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.” This is to accommodate this agreed position of a dual mandate. 

That is where we are. So, can we proceed, honourable chairperson?

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. As the committee and as per the agreement, the definition in the interpretation of the minister remains the minister in charge of social security. The other minister who is going to take the specific roles or activities is the Minister of Finance, which is in section definition that should be supervised, over all, by this Minister of Gender to ensure that the Minister of Finance supervises investment and audit accounts, but the Minister of Gender does the checks and balances. 

MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA: Mr Chairperson, I think we all agreed on the principles. It is now a question of drafting. I am very happy to leave it the way it is or to change it. I propose that we proceed with the way the committee had proposed. Let us leave it as the Minister of Gender and we leave the other definition in the section. Thank you. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that that okay, honourable members? 


HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: If it is okay, can I put the question? I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3
MS KABAHENDA: Clause 3 is on the amendment of section 3 of the principal Act. Clause 3 is amended in the proposed section 3:
(a) By numbering the first provision of the proposed section 3 as subsection 1;
(b) In subsection 1(f) by substituting for the word “with”, the word, “without”;
(c) In subsection 2, by substituting for the word “five”, the word “three”;
(d) In subsection 3:
(i) By substituting for the word “and” appearing at the end of the paragraph (f), the word “or”;
(ii) By inserting immediately after paragraph (g), the following:
 “(h) Failure to declare any conflict of interest in the execution of a member's mandate as a member of the board.”

(e) By substituting for subsection 6(b) the following:
 “(b) There is consideration of persons with disabilities, balance of gender skills and experience among the members of the board.” 

The justification is:
    1. The numbering of the first provision under the proposed section 3 as subsection (1) is to ensure chronological order and to ease reference.
    2. Removal of the voting rights of the managing director is to avoid conflict of interest for the managing director on the board, which recommends him or her for appointment, appraises him and to which he or she accounts as the chief executive officer of the Fund.
    3. Further, the board should be independent from any possibility of influence of the managing director in decision-making.
    4. To deter any board member from engaging in activities that could be in conflict with the objectives of the Fund.
    5. To ensure that there is consideration of persons with disabilities on the board, in line with the 1995 constitutional obligation of affirmative action.
    6. The substitution of the word “and” with “or” under subsection 3(f) is to ensure that each of the grounds for removal of a member of the board is applied independently.

I submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is the amendment proposed by the committee to Clause 3. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I want to ask the Attorney-General to assist me. We have seen that ex-officio members do not have voting rights. Attorney-General, since you are the one who drafted this, why did you give this one voting rights? (Laughter)

MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA: Mr Chairman, at the time, there was a thought that it could help. Now, there is a thought that it does not. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: They have become wiser. (Laughter) Is that clear, honourable members, so that I put the question to this? 

MR JOHN OKOT: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I would like to move an amendment about the board of directors.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Have you shared the amendment?

MR JOHN OKOT: The committee was working on behalf of the whole House. Now that they – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable member. The risk that we have with proposals that come like that is that they are not properly ventilated; so, it can cause us problems. That is why I am asking, “Have you shared your proposal with Members?”

MR JOHN OKOT: Mr Chairman –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Have you shared your proposal with the Members?

MR JOHN OKOT: No. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. So, we will not take it, as a principle. 

MR ODUR: Mr Chairperson, I have a concern on clause 3(3)(g). It reads that – I will keep it short – “Conviction for an offence involving dishonesty, fraud or moral turpitude.” 

I am concerned on the way it is framed here because it can also lead to contestation on what - because these offences are not known in our system, as it is. This word “dishonesty” - somebody cannot be convicted of dishonesty. There must be a specific, either criminal - so that everything here comes under. I want the Attorney-General to clarify here. 

MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA: I am very happy that the honourable member does not know the definition of these words. However, these words have been defined; so, you have not been afoul of the law. They have been defined in decided cases; we have enough jurisprudence on what amounts to moral turpitude, what happens to dishonesty or what is fraud. They are not easy to define; they are circumstantial in many instances. 

If you do not know about them, then that is a very good thing. Please, do not get to know about the definition – (Laughter) - Mr Chairperson, I am saying it in a nice way that if he does not know, it is a good thing. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We do not want you to start teasing your brains here; we want to pass a law. (Laughter)

MR ODUR: Mr Chairperson, I am very respectful of the learned Attorney-General but I think the point I am raising here is much more serious. We are importing the interpretation of court and you know that courts can actually interpret differently. Therefore, which case - tell us - interpreted this dishonesty and fraud and it is now universal? Can you tell us here?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think the bigger point is this: This phrase or phrases - I do not know how many they are - have been used almost in all legislations, including in the Constitution of this country. So, it is a very familiar term. I am sure those who crafted it in the Constitution - and we have passed them so many times in this Parliament; those same words when we are trying to define people who can be disqualified on the grounds of those things. 
Therefore, it is not a strange animal we are introducing. Can we proceed? 

MS OGWAL: Mr Chairperson, before we proceed, I would like the Attorney-General also to clarify to me - because this is a contributory and also voluntary Fund - I was of the view that we should take the interest of the contributors to account when it comes to constituting the board.

Already on the board, we have Permanent Secretaries representing the relevant ministries that are going to supervise the Fund. I would have felt that the members of the board should have been appointed by the stakeholders at the AGM. 

If we allow the Minister to appoint, we will not want a situation where they would say that the interests of the beneficiaries are not taken care of squarely. I am just imploring the Attorney-General to allay my fears. 

Secondly, you are talking of declaring any element of conflict of interest. Already, if you are a Permanent Secretary representing a ministry, definitely you have an interest. How can you now - if I am a Permanent Secretary and I am going to explain how my ministry or my sector – to be involved in the Fund, you may interpret that as being a conflict of interest, when I am actually stating the role that the ministry has to play in that particular issue being debated. Attorney-General, please, allay my fears. 

In terms of corporate governance, we have to be very careful on how we are going to constitute the board in terms of the role of the permanent secretaries and the role of the minister in the appointment of the board. We know these ministers come from one party. Other people may come and say “the Opposition are not involved”, and yet, our Members are - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can the Attorney-General respond now.

MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The board is representative; all the stakeholders have been represented. There are four people representing the employees; you have people representing the employers but the Government and Parliament – that is why we are discussing this here. The Government and Parliament are major stakeholders in NSSF, whether we contribute or not. We are the guarantors. The Government is the guarantor of this fund. This is why we are here. 

Secondly, with this kind of fund, it is impossible to have an Annual General Meeting (AGM) because every single member and stakeholder will be called to the AGM. I think this is very representative. It has worked for many years. We came here to change something but we are now going into another. It has worked and continues to work well. I pray that Members be pleased to allow this amendment as it is.

MS OGWAL: Then involve the informal sector by appointing on the board someone to represent the informal sector.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, in the Bill, in clause 3 on the Constitution of the board -
“d) Four representatives of employees, nominated by the Federation of Labour Unions;
e) Two representatives of employers nominated by the Federation of Uganda Employers…” 

I think that was the question from the Member for Dokolo. She was referring to the stakeholders. Why are the workers not represented yet, in the Bill, workers have four representatives on this board? Are we clear? 

Honourable members, conflict of interest is a personal interest. It is not an official interest. That is the clarification. What amounts to conflict of interest is also defined in our Rules of Procedure. 

MR JOHN OKOT: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am rising under Rule 132 (2) of our Rules of Procedure, which states “the Committee of the Whole House or the Select Committee may propose and accept the proposed amendments to the Bill as it considers fit…” I do not want to read everything but it provides “… are relevant to the Subject matter of the Bill”. 

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi tried to bring an amendment and then, you asked if he had circulated it? When I stood up again, you said “did you do it?” It has confused me. Are we proceeding well?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please, do not get confused. 

MR JOHN OKOT: This is the Committee of the Whole House. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: A Member is not allowed to be confused. 
MR JOHN OKOT: This is the Committee of the Whole House. If there is a relevant clause to be amended, as the Whole House, I think you should allow the Whole House to bring amendments - much as they could not have been circulated or brought before the committee. 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I agree with you entirely. We have made mistakes using that procedure. The purpose of legislation is not as simple as we seem to treat it; it is regulating lives and affects certain things. We have to be clear about what we are saying, as Parliament. We can only be clear, if proposals are looked at before. 

I will give you an example of a mistake we made in the Seventh Parliament. We were doing constitutional amendments here. One of the Members shot up to introduce Article 8A, and the “A” was a mistake. The Member said “Let us now make the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy to become part of the Constitution.” The drafting of those principles is not a constitutional drafting. It was never anticipated to be part of the Constitution but to be a guiding principle. It became part of the Constitution. It has gone to the courts of law and people do not know what to do with them. However, a very eloquent Member got up here and proposed it. It was so popular and we adopted it. In fact, I was the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and I strongly objected this but I was overruled by the majority of all Members of Parliament. It was a mistake. 

Therefore, we try to exercise caution when we are doing legislation. Knee-jerk proposals for amendment can cause us problems. If you thought about this yesterday, you would have shared it but you have just thought about it now. You have not even thought about it properly but now, you are asking us to make it part of the law. That is where the risk is, honourable. It is not in bad faith. We just want to be very clear about what goes into legislation. It should be interrogated and confirmed that it is okay and then we move. 

In some circumstances, where it relates to an extension of what is already there - that one can be considered. If it is something completely new, we are shy to try and accommodate such amendments. It is not because you are from Agago. We try to use this to guide so that we encourage Members to share amendments – (A member rose_) Please, I am speaking. Can I finish.
It is better, if these proposals are shared in advance so that the ministers look at them, we look at them more properly, our legal team looks at them and their implication on the Bill such that we are comfortable. That is the purpose. It is not that you are not making a good proposal. No.

MR JOHN OKOT: Mr Chairperson, the convenience you are trying to create in this matter sounds good – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Would you like to propose your amendment now? 

MR JOHN OKOT: Oh, yes. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. I am raising a procedural issue because my name was mentioned.

Mr Chairperson, when you started at the Committee Stage, you asked the minister and the chairperson to talk about the agreed position. We had not initially considered what they talked about. That is why I stood up because I am always attentive. Is the Honourable Member from Agago in order to use me as a reference?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I thought you rose on procedure. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much -
THE CHAIRPERSON: I actually thought you had risen on procedure.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, that is very good. I have discovered that we are awake. Is the Member from Agago proceeding well, to use me as a reference point, yet, I meant good to raise that point at that particular time because it never existed at the beginning?

THE CHAIRPERSON: The honourable member just likes you. So, take it as a point of gratitude that the Member likes you and each time you speak, he is listening. 

MR JOHN AMOS OKOT: Mr Chairperson, in Clause 3, board of directors, the proposal was saying, “The fund shall be governed by a stakeholder board of directors appointed by the minister and consisting of...” and then other things A, B, C which I do not want to read. 

I want to bring in an amendment in regard to vetting and this is vetting by Parliament. If the minister appoints the board, let it be vetted. The justification - (Interjection) - well, if you are going to amend it to be by approval of Parliament, that also sounds better. 

However, let me give the justification. Over this period of time when the committee was considering this Bill, many things were in the public domain and most were pointing fingers at the board members and the directors who are governing and managing the fund. To cure that mistrust, Parliament should come in so that it is not under a single hand of the minister appointing somebody and after that, the person starts doing work. [Hon. Werikhe rose_]

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Werikhe, please do not access the microphone before you are allowed; it affects the recordings. We do not know what is going on anymore when they transcribe because they are just hearing voices. It is better to attract the attention of the Member off record. When the Member allows you then you access the microphone. It is smarter for us. Yes, you have been allowed.

MR WERIKHE: For the record, I am Werikhe Peter Christopher representing people of Bubulo West Constituency but I am also the Secretary General of the National Organisation of Trade Unions. 

I would like to inform my colleague that the NSSF is guided by Convention 102 of ILO. We are a member organisation in ILO. Therefore, whatever we do, we do it as tripartite; Government, employer, and the worker. That is how the scheme comes in and it is the reason we are saying that the board will be brought from constituencies, not from Members of Parliament who lost to be given positions to run. 

This is how this board is strengthened; it is not just a normal board where they will meet and just appoint you from the street; it is a constituent board.

MR AMOS OKOT: I appreciate your information. However, I think you will not cure the mistrust that is in the public domain. What we are after - (Interruption) 

MR BAKKABULINDI: I see where you are going and it is a good idea for the Appointments Committee of Parliament for approval. However, board members of the NSSF are not political. The Appointments Committee of Parliament deals with political positions. I thank you. 

MR AMOS OKOT: Mr Chairman, when we were dealing with the commencement of the Bill, in the discussions, you asked if the guiding principle that the minister is going to write will be administrative or will need approval of the House. We have accepted that it is going to be brought to Parliament. 

Now, if we are saying a member has been appointed to be on the board, what is wrong if we bring that member so that Parliament approves him/her? This is Uganda and what we are doing is to cure issues that are in Uganda not to import something from outside. [Several Members rose]

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. Honourable members, please, the records of this House are clear; there was no such decision. The decision that was made was that the instrument would be brought to Parliament for information not for approval. So please, when we are quoting the records, let us stick to what the records say as it is helpful. [Hon. Ekanya rose_]

Honourable members, the proposal - No, I do not remember that. I cannot give you information because I am not debating. Hon. Amos Okot is the one holding the Floor. Please, okay.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, I would like to thank the Member of Parliament for Agago. My brother, you have been in Parliament for quite some time. You only missed recently, like some of us. 

I want to tell you that we need to reflect on the history of the National Social Security Fund of Uganda and how it has gone through management challenges. If we create a board with the same executive powers and you have ministers with the executive power and you have the ED, you are going to create serious conflict. 

I want you to reflect from the time of Onegi Obel when the Fund almost went under. We thank God that we got Dr Byarugaba, Ayota and the current team that has pushed this fund for quite some time without conflict because the Minister of Finance and the workers are firm. 

We are past giving powers to the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. I was totally against but it has gone. Let me tell you, people have proposed that it should have reflected the history of this Fund and the challenges it has. If we propose that again, we shall kill this fund. I have attended several international meetings and it is even against the ILO Convention. When you create three power centres, who will take a decision on financial matters?

MR AMOS OKOT: The information that hon. Ekanya has just given cannot cure what is happening. The point here is, Parliament will not act as a power centre. It is just to approve whoever will be appointed by the minister. Suppose the minister has appointed you and you are her brother, who is going to approve that?

MR EKENYA: Let me just clarify that. If you have a board that is vetted, the minister cannot suspend that board because it would require the same committee of Parliament that vetted the board to disapprove that board. It creates serious administrative challenges.

MS AMONGI: Honourable Chairperson, we already have Cabinet guidance that all boards that are not constitutional - because boards that are constitutional have a constitutional provision that Parliament vets them. Outside that, all boards are appointed by the minister and approved by Cabinet. Therefore, it will be difficult to depart from that in this particular circumstance. 

Let us leave it with the fact that when the constituent college brings and appoints their members, the minister congregates, appoints the chairperson, takes it to Cabinet and Cabinets approves. If they find that any of the constituent members do not qualify, it is deferred and they are requested to bring new members until Cabinet is satisfied. We cannot bring on board Parliament when Cabinet is already approving. Thank you.

MR AMOS OKOT: Mr Chairperson, I think we are now coming to where I wanted to go. The point here is for somebody to be there to approve the person who has been nominated or appointed by the minister. If it is going to be before Cabinet, at least there, we have to include it in our laws as well, so that it reads thus: “… appointed by the minister but approved by Cabinet.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, are we clear on the proposals? 
HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes. 
THE CHAIRPERSON: The proposal and debate that has ensued from it - the amendment that has been proposed by the honourable member for Agago, hon. John Amos Okot, is that the constituent Board of NSSF must be appointed with the approval of Parliament. That is his proposal for amendment.

I will put a question for the adoption of the amendment as proposed by the hon. John Amos Okot.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can I now put the question to clause 3 - have we adopted clause 3; the proposal for amendment? Can I now put the – just for clarity, I will put the question to the amendment to clause 3, as proposed by the committee. I put the question.
(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I am faced with a situation on guests. Our respected, gallant players, the She Cranes, are here. There is a motion in their favour but I also have this Bill. 

I propose that – I am sure the She Cranes might also be interested in following what is going on in this debate. If you allow, we could see how to finish this and given the nature of the time - it is already a half past five – we might have to deal with this motion tomorrow. 

It is our honour to host you today, but you have seen the circumstances of how we have proceeded. Can we have the motion for the She Cranes when we are fresh tomorrow, so that we can have a debate? So, you can sit and follow the debate but substantially, we will be handling your matter tomorrow. Thank you.

Clause 4
THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 4 stands part of this Bill.
(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 4, agreed to.
Clause 5, agreed to.
Clause 6, agreed to.
Clause 7
MS KABAHENDA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Clause 7 is on the insertion of section 3A in the principal Act.
Clause 7 is amended in the proposed section 13A as follows:
    i. By substituting the proposed sub-section (6) with the following:
“(6) An employer who deducts a voluntary contribution under sub-section (2) and fails to remit the contribution to the Fund commits an offence and is liable, on conviction to:
    a. Remit to the Fund any outstanding contribution due to the employee; and 
    b. Pay a fine not exceeding one thousand currency points or imprisonment not exceeding three years or both.”
    ii. By substituting sub-section (7) with the following:
“(7) The minister shall, in consultation with the board, by regulations, prescribe the procedure for making voluntary contributions and benefits.”

The justifications are:
    1. The employee should be in position to recover, from the employer, any monies, which the employer illegally failed to transmit to the Fund as contributions; and 
    2. The redraft is to ensure chronology in the Bill with regard to the powers of the minister.”
I submit, Mr Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, honourable members? That is a proposal from the committee. Yes, Leader of Opposition?

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I thank the chairperson for that. The amendment Bill introduced a fresh line of stakeholders and for the informal sector, they are layers and levels. So, a uniform provision to take care of issues to do with failure to remit and penalties may be a bit problematic. 

I do not know what the Attorney-General thinks because there are levels of employment. If you are going to attract the informal sector to participate, a person employing two or three people – the last time I checked, a currency point was Shs 20,000 and a uniform provision sounds problematic. 
May we hear from the Attorney-General whether he thinks we can leverage and create layers because the employers are not uniform? Therefore, a uniform penalty is a bit problematic. Can we move to the centre and provide for layers?

MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. The Leader of Opposition makes an important point. It is a neat balance we need to strike but I think we also need to understand that for the “informals” who are voluntary, it is a choice. The moment you choose to join the Fund, you must play by those rules.

If you separate these rules, you are likely to create lacunas, which will create abuse. So, once a person says “You have deducted”, you have no justification whatsoever not to remit. Once you have deducted – because that is what we are dealing with here – you must remit because then, you will allow employers to deduct money from employees, then use them for other business and then remit at a later point.

I propose, Mr Chairperson, that we agree that if a person deducts, they must remit and if they do not, they commit an offence.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you. My issue on that penalty is the mismatch between the monetary fine proposed and the years. One thousand currency points would come to about Shs 20 million, if the higher is taken. So, Shs 20 million with the three years is a mismatch, according to our – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the match?

MR JONATHAN ODUR: It could be harmonised.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the match?

MR JONATHAN ODUR: I have not computed but I will be able to, if –

MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA: With legislation of this nature, you want to encourage compliance and therefore, it is supposed to be deterrent. Three years, you are hoping that they will pay the money so it can go to the Fund and make it grow bigger or you are hoping that they will comply. 

So, the mismatch is actually purposeful because we do not want you to deduct money and not remit it. If you do not remit it, you are either going to pay Shs 20 million or go to prison.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, no. Attorney-General, the point raised by the Member is that by the laws and penalties we have been passing, these do not match. One thousand currency points is not the equivalent of three years imprisonment; that is the point. Can you harmonise it, based on what we have done before?

MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA: We are in agreement, both ourselves and the committee, to pay a fine. There is no mismatch; that is what it is, not exceeding. That is the maximum penalty; there is no mismatch.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Learned Attorney-General, what I am saying is that let us have, in the past here, equated one currency point to either two months of imprisonment. So, whenever we are passing a monetary sentence, we harmonise it to match the time. That is what I am raising here. 

It is not about the quantum but to make it commensurate in terms of monetary. So, that is what I am referring and I can consult, then get the actual equivalent and come back. However, if you agree to the principle, then it can pass.

MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA: Mr Chairperson, we take the guidance and the committee and ourselves were mindful of that. However, this particular legislation also has its specialty in it. It is more of a deterrent –

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is not the issue, learned Attorney-General. The issue is, is 1,000 currency points equivalent to three years’ imprisonment? That is his point.

MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA: I can confirm that; I do not have any specific legislation on that. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is because he has given guidance that – Can you give us information on this, the Member for Bugiri Municipality, if you have? 

MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA: Mr Chairman, can I consult? We can skip that and then I can come back to it. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please do that while the honourable member for Bugiri Municipality gives us information. 

MR BASALIRWA: Mr Chairman, this Parliament has passed a law that seeks to create convergence between fines and prison sentences. I think what my honourable colleague is alluding to is whether this particular clause in the NSSF (Amendment) Bill, 2021 - the proposal it is making on the fines – made reference to that law and whether they are in tandem. I think that is where the Attorney-General needs to guide. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member for Bugiri Municipality, I thought you were going to give us the information. (Laughter) 

MR BASALIRWA: That is the information that I am giving. The learned Attorney-General said he was not aware of a law in that direction. I am saying that Parliament has made a law in that direction. 

MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA: Mr Chairman, I just need to do some calculation here. We can stand this over for a minute. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Chairman. While we stand over that one, we are making the law here for the corporates. We need justice. What do I mean? The fine being proposed for the employer is okay, but when the employer is Government, then we need to define it. I have been a chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts where we had queries because Government officials deliberately withhold –

In the recent reforms, we have decentralised that. In the Human Rights Act, police officers who violate people’s rights are penalised as individuals. In this case, can we define, when it comes to Government, that either the Attorney-General or the Permanent Secretary will be held personally liable so that it is not vague?

Recently, we were handling the supplementary budget, there were Government-related services where the NSSF contributions were not remitted. I am urging the Attorney-General to come out clearly. Let us not make laws for the private sector and yet Government commits crime and then it goes to the Government or the Attorney-General. We want to have specific individuals to be penalised. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The law he is proposing says, “the employer”. That employer may be Government or anybody. I think it is all inclusive. Anybody who deducts must remit. So, if it is Government that has deducted, it should remit. If Government does not remit, he is proposing that if hon. Nandala-Mafabi is the Attorney-General, he should be held personally liable. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. That proposal is a bit interesting. The employer will be Government or a company. Of course there are those who are individual employers like you and I who have people who clean our compounds. That one is direct. 

So, can you get a company and take it to prison? What hon. Ekanya raised urges us to specify who. I think in most cases they say that the principal officers responsible in that entity are the ones to be held liable. 

For purposes of a company; if you take the currency points, they will deduct and charge it as a profit and loss accounts. If it comes to imprisonment, however, who goes? I think that is what we should deal with, Mr Chairman.

MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA: Mr Chairman, I have consulted the Law Revisions (Fines and other Financial Accounts in Criminal Matters) Act, and this provision is in line with that Act. It is actually relating to the first provision and it is perfectly in line. There is no contradiction.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Mr Chairman, that law says and I am going to read Subsection (3)(ii);
“In any written law to which this Act applies and in force immediately before the commencement of this Act, where a fine prescribed in relation to a term of imprisonment, the ratio of the fine to imprisonment shall be two currency points to each month of imprisonment.”

What it means, in this circumstance, is that 1,000 currency points means you serve 500 months’ imprisonment, which comes to 41 years. That is what you should harmonise - if that is the intention because it has to match. That is what I wanted - 

MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA: Thank you for the guidance. I think this Act is relating to laws that were in force at the time this Act was passed. It says, “In any written law to which this Act applies and in force immediately before the coming to force of this Act.” This Act is not yet in force. Therefore, it is not applicable.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what rules govern the Act that is going to come into force?

MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA: We do not have – Mr Chairman, fines and penalties are determined by the Legislature depending on the circumstances that exist at the time. The purpose of – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But the same Legislature – I think it is a simple point. The same Legislature has given a correlation. For a currency point, there is an equivalent jail sentence. That is the point being made here. For each currency point, there is an equivalent jail term. That is what they are saying. The guidance he is giving is that every two currency points are equivalent to a month’s imprisonment. 

To calculate now – because that is the guidance given by the law – you have 1,000 currency points, what would that mean in relation to jail terms using this formula? 

MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA: Mr Chairman, using the formula set out in this law, it would mean 72 currency points for the three years’ equivalent in jail term. We would be pleased to take that amendment if Parliament so pleases. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, three years would be equivalent to 72 currency points? Is that the position? (Interjection) It is because you are saying 1,000 points was way beyond three years. So now, the harmonisation is 72 currency points, which is the equivalent of three years’ imprisonment. Is that okay, Members? Can we now move there? 

So, the amendment is, instead of “1,000 currency points”, it is “72 currency points”. Is that correct? Can you now propose it formally please? You calculate, Members. To get the answer, multiply 72 currency points by 20,000.

MS OPENDI: That is very little money to charge. That is about Shs 1,440,000. I think what we should do is to convert the 1,000 currency points into the years. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: And it becomes how many years? 

MS OPENDI: If the Attorney-General said it must be deterrent, but here you are giving 72 currency points. I think that would be – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it comes to 41 years’ imprisonment. So, what is reasonable?


MS OPENDI: We can propose 300 currency points.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the equivalent of 300 currency points to years of imprisonment? What is the guidance? I need someone who has done the calculation, not one who is going to give me a lot of words. I need numbers. Hon. Ekanya, I want numbers, not words.

MR EKANYA: I beg you to allow me to say some words. Mr Chairperson, the other proposal that URA is using is to have a garnish on the account. It makes things easy because –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, you are introducing something completely complicated.

MR BASALIRWA: Mr Chairperson, I must confess my figures are not very good –
THE CHAIRPERSON: Then, you can as well go back.

MR BASALIRWA: But on this specific aspect, there is a mischief that I think the Bill is overlooking. If I am an employer and I default or I am an ordinary person with a maid, I am being subjected to the same consequence with a big employer like MTN, which could default.

When you use the system of currency points and imprisonment, you are going to disadvantage these small employers and create an advantage to the big ones. In fact, the big employers will find no problem –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, they are not fixing the term. They are giving an upper limit. In other words, whoever will be taking that decision will base it on the facts of the case. It is not exceeding that number of currency points. So, it is not the same for each case.

MR BASALIRWA: Mr Chairperson, I had a proposal that perhaps, we could think about percentages over and above what you are supposed to remit. You put a percentage on the money that you have defaulted. If, for example, I have failed to remit Shs 100 million, one of the consequences should be that I should pay 20 or 30 per cent of the amount I have not remitted. In that regard, you will be able to enforce compliance but also standardise the punishment across the players. Otherwise, if you insist on currency points and imprisonment, you are going to create a mismatch. I beg to submit.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, I think the penalty we are looking for - the Member of Parliament for Tororo proposed 300 currency points, which means she will need 12 years. That is okay.

However, what I want to put across to assist the Attorney-General is: if you want to penalise, assuming someone was supposed to remit Shs 100,000 and he or she has taken six months without paying, it means that he or she has borrowed money for six months. What would be most important is to charge an interest. Maybe, here we can say you will be penalised: One, is the interest at commercial rate and two, the penalty for default will be 300 currency points or 12 years. That is if we take the proposal from the Member for Tororo.

The justification for this is to prevent someone from keeping money for five years and then he or she remits the exact amount without paying even interest. Otherwise, the employee would have lost his earnings on his/her savings.
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have spent quite some time on this issue of sanctions for breach. I have been thinking: if a corporation has not remitted a lot of money, would you need to send them to jail or would you want them to pay? In terms of these contributions that people withhold, would you want to put a jail term or a real fine that makes money get back to the Fund?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Both.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want people to go to jail? If they go to jail, what happens to the Fund? Or do we just focus on the fine? Anyway, we need to interrogate this further so that we have a proper position since there are too many proposals coming up. We may not come to a meaningful conclusion, if we force down this matter. Therefore, I am asking that we stand over this clause, specifically on this issue of sanctions for people who default, so that when we come back tomorrow, we have a clear guide on what decision we will take on this matter.

Honourable members, that was clause 7 and we have stood over it.  

Clause 8
THE CHAIRPERSON: If there are further amendments to clause 8, I am proposing that we pause it here and we proceed tomorrow.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.51
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the Whole House to report.

(Question put and agreed to.)
(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
5.52
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2021” and passed with the amendments clauses 1,2,3 and passed without amendments clauses 4,5,6 and stood over clause 7. I beg to report.
MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.53
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the Report of the Committee of the Whole House. I put a question to that motion.
(Question put and agreed to.)
Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will proceed with this as priority tomorrow. I am hoping that there will be no significant preliminaries. There are urgent matters that I want to have raised first thing before we start tomorrow. There will be no substantial communication tomorrow so that we can deal with it.

Honourable members, I am going to propose that we start in the morning tomorrow? Is that okay?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Eleven o’clock? House adjourned to tomorrow at 11.00 o’clock.

(The House rose at 5.53 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 24 November 2021 at 11.00 a.m.)






