Tuesday, 6 November 2012

Parliament met at 2.36 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called top order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, welcome to this sitting. There is a lot of work to do; we are going to see how to manage the time properly. 

I wish to welcome and congratulate the chairpersons and vice-chairpersons of committees from the training workshop which they attended during the past two days. I hope the training was beneficial to them and will enhance efficiency and effectiveness in committees and Parliament in general. I wish to call on all the chairpersons to translate the knowledge and skills acquired to expedite work and to manage their committees.

We have a lot of business in various forms. We need to devise strategies of ensuring that we handle as much as possible in a systematic and efficient manner, bearing the time constraints in mind. One of the strategies I wish to employ this afternoon is to assign a timeframe for the consideration of each item of business. Once that time elapses, we will proceed to the next item. 

Each of you has got instances you have spoken in the House on particular debates. Due to availability of these records, my office will always ensure that there is fairness and opportunity given for all the honourable members to speak. I wish to therefore call for your understanding that in the interim, we fix a timeframe for the consideration of each business in the House so as to clear more work. This is the only way in which we may be able to reduce on the workload of this House.

Honourable members, it has been brought to my attention that some petitions which were received by this House some time back have not been acted on by the committees. A particular case is the petition from Kawempe on the issue of the Kenya-Uganda pipeline. It has not been brought back to the House. It was received in this House about four months ago. Chairpersons, this is part of the work that we need to deal with. 

If we allow members of the public to bring petitions to the House and then we take a lot of time without responding to them, those issues still remain biting to them and it may start to hurt us in the long run. So, chairpersons of these committees, there are many petitions before the committees; please, come with them and let us take decisions on those particular petitions.

I will alter the Order Paper to allow one item, the laying of papers, and also allow a short motion on behalf of the Parliamentary Commission. It is a short motion and it does not require any debate. It is a requirement of the law that we deal with it. I will be dealing with those appropriately. The first alteration will be laying of papers.

In the VIP gallery we have Prof. Isaiah Ndiege Omolo, the Vice-Chancellor of Kyambogo University. He is here to listen to the debate on the report on Kyambogo University.

2.44
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, woman representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the delegation of Parliament to the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly meeting held in September 2012, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Parliamentary delegation to the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly held in Brazil.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. We will find an appropriate time to deal with that subject. There are matters raised in those reports that are important for the House to know and some decisions that need to be taken by the House.

MOTION FOR LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BILL

2.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY (Mr Hamson Obua): Mr Speaker, in conformity with rules 112 and 147 of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament, I rise to move a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a private members’ Bill entitled “The National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill, 2012”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, it is seconded. Honourable members, that is a straightforward motion and I will put the question to this and we continue. The motion is that the member be granted leave of the House to introduce a private member’s Bill on the subject covered by the honourable member. If there are no issues, I will put the question to this motion.

2.49
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to seek your interpretation of Article 93; I would like to know whether it is relevant now that Government comes in to accept this Bill such that we do not have to revisit this question when the Bill is actually presented. If this Bill has got financial implications, then it can only be brought with support of Government under Article 93. May the relevant minister, therefore, tell us whether this draft Bill has the support of Government in accordance with Article 93 such that it does not become an issue later when actually the member goes ahead to present the real Bill. I thank you.

2.50
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This motion is to seek the permission of this House to go and begin figuring out what the Bill will be. I was the chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources in the previous Parliament and I know that the issue of biotechnology and biosafety has been a recurrent issue on this Floor. The Government has incessantly promised that it will bring the Bill. 

At a time when the population is expanding, we need biotechnology for us to enhance production. At a time when neighbours are using biotechnology and for us we do not have enough safeguards on biotechnology, it becomes imperative on us as Members of Parliament, if the Government is not moving, to give direction. So, I stand here to support the honourable member that we give the committee the support. If Government considers it fit at a later stage to take over the process, then they can go ahead and do that but for us we continue and exercise our rights. I stand to support the motion, I thank you.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, as if what has been articulated is not enough, I have been in this Parliament for over 10 years; when we talk about a motion being moved on the Floor of the House, there is an inevitable instance of response in terms of secondment. I have not seen any motion come up and nobody seconds it. How do we determine that what has been moved is of any substance to stand by? So, the guidance I am asking for, Mr Speaker, is whether we would not be creating a precedent that may not be defended in years to come.

MR NIWAGABA: I would like clarification from the minister; does this Bill require a financial certificate and if it is not required, should members move without obtaining a certificate of financial implication? I am seeking guidance from you about that interpretation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is a requirement for any Bill that is brought in this House to have a certificate of financial implications.

MR  HAMSON OBUA: The docket of science and technology falls under the Ministry Finance, Planning and Economic Development and I feel so sad that at such a point, the ministry is quite and yet the ministers from that ministry are here in this Parliament. Mr Speaker, the certificate will equally be determined by the same Ministry of Finance. Can we get the position of the Ministry of Finance on this particular Bill that has been in their docket since April 2008 to date? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have moved a motion that this House gives you leave to present a private member’s Bill; now you are inviting the minister to stop you from doing the same. You have sought the authority of this House to bring a private member’s Bill. That means that the background and everything has forced or compelled the committee to actually move this Bill as a private member’s Bill. That is how far you have come and now you are asking the House to give you that leave. That is the motion that is before the House. 

Whether there are financial implications or not, that will come when the Bill comes. Right now, we do not have a Bill and we cannot talk about financial implications. Silence, Mr Minister -Like they say, if you do not speak now, keep your peace in future. I put the question to the motion.

2.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Ms Okao Caroline): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Bill that is being proposed to this House is very important of course. I know very well that it falls under the docket of the Ministry of Finance. However, what I want to say here is that the ministry has not been consulted. Since the Bill has also not been presented, we are not aware whether it has a certificate of financial implications. So, it is up to the mover of the motion to present the Bill to the House. When that occurs, if there is a need for a certificate of financial implications, definitely we shall consult and come back to the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, have you been in touch with the Minister of Finance on this matter of biotechnology and biosafety?

MR HAMSON OBUA: Mr Speaker, I have in my possession three letters. One is dated 19 March 2012 and signed by Obua Denis Hamson, MP and Chairperson Committee on Science and Technology. It was addressed to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the subject matter is “The National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill”. I beg to lay this letter on the Table.

On 19 June 2012, another letter from Chairperson Committee on Science and Technology was addressed to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The subject is “A reminder on the National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill”. I beg to lay it on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR HAMSON OBUA: The third letter is a response from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development signed by Maria Kiwanuka. It is dated 26 June 2012, addressed to hon. Obua Denis Hamson, MP, Chairperson Committee on Science and Technology, Parliament of Uganda. The subject matter was “The National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill”. It is copied to the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament; the Rt. Hon Prime Minister; the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; all ministers of State, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, including the Minister who has just spoken; Executive Secretary, National Council of Science and Technology; the Executive Director Uganda National Academy of Sciences; the Chairperson Uganda Biotechnology and Biosafety Consortium. The letter is here. 

Mr Speaker, with your permission let me read the contents of the letter. In our letter of June, we had written reminding the minister about the Bill and we threatened as a committee that we were giving the ministry two months; upon the expiry of two months, should they fail to table this Bill, we would move ahead and table it as a private member’s Bill. The minister wrote:

“Your letter of 19 June 2012 on the above subject refers. 
This ministry shares your concern about the delay in tabling the National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill and is keen to expedite the process of tabling the Bill before Parliament. The revised draft Bill was received from the Solicitor-General on 6 June 2012 and the ministry is in the process of submitting it to Cabinet. I am, therefore, hopeful that the Bill shall be tabled before Parliament as soon as possible.” 

Our letter had given them two months from June; our two months elapsed in August and that is why we are proceeding as a committee. However, for a minister from the ministry to deny the fact that they are not in the know, yet it is on record - and I beg to lay this for the record of Parliament -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, I put the question-

MS OKAO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As I stated at first, the presenter is seeking to be given permission. The issuance of the certificate of financial implications depends on the budgetary provisions. We are not saying anything far from that as a ministry but we are saying we are in consultation and that is it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me put the question to this. Honourable member from Kinkizi -

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am from Kinkizi East; you know the Bible says that wise men came from the East. (Laughter) 

I am rising on a point of procedure in relation to what the minister was submitting on the Floor. Our rules are very clear and the relevant provisions in the Budget Act, which you quoted, are also very clear. They are derived from Article 93 of the Constitution that guides us on how to introduce private members’ Bills in this House. 

It is not a requirement to attach a certificate of financial implications at the stage when you are moving a motion seeking leave of the House. It is only at the stage when you bring a Bill for first reading. So, is the minister procedurally correct to imply that the hon. Obua required a certificate from her ministry when actually we have not reached a stage where a certificate is required at first reading? Is she proceeding the right way or she is just ignorant? Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we do not go that far.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Our rules do not provide for not telling the truth to this House. The honourable minister, a few minutes ago, said the ministry is not aware of anything concerning the issues raised by hon. Obua but hon. Obua has just laid documents and a response from the ministry. So, is it procedurally right for the minister just to go away without apologising to this House after she said that she was not aware? Is it procedurally right for her to just go away like that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have stated that there will be a time when a certificate of financial implications will be required. That is what I stated, honourable member for Kinkizi East.

Honourable members, any person once faced with facts has the right to change their minds and when they do, we should accept them as such, instead of pushing into the far end which may not be necessary. The rules provide for that. Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have the authority of the House to present a private member’s Bill. We had amended the Order Paper to allow the other motion.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. Article 94 of the Constitution allows Parliament to make rules to regulate its own procedure. Article 94(1) states as follows: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may make rules to regulate its own procedure, including the procedure of its committees.” 

The point I am rising on is in relation to rule 158 of our Rules of Procedure. If I may read it verbatim: “The Chairperson of the Committee shall report to the House any appointment approved by the Committee and the report shall not be subject to debate.”

Mr Speaker, the procedural concern I am rising to seek your guidance on concerns the Committee on Appointments, which sat and approved some new ministers. In line with rule 158, no formal report has been made to this House that delegated its job to the committee. In the circumstances, we see some ministers already sitting on the front bench and yet we are waiting for the report of the Committee on Appointments to come to the whole House because we have substantial issues to raise.

I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker, if in the circumstances some ministers should be sitting on the front bench and when will the committee report to us because time is of essence. Some of us are challenging the legality of some nominations and we cannot keep waiting for six, seven or eight months for the report from your office yet some of the ministers have seemingly started to assume responsibility. I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall my communication to the House the last time I chaired the House. I said I would report to the House on the appointments made under the rule cited by the honourable member, rule 158. When I came back, I said I would not be able to report because the Speaker had just come back and we needed to consult and then come back and report to the House. 

Some of the issues arising from this meeting of the Committee on Appointments have been in the press which has required some responses. However, yesterday, 5 November 2012, in the early hours of the morning, I received a copy of a letter addressed to the Clerk to Parliament. The subject is “Constitutional Petition No.47 of 2012, Kibirango Peter v. the Attorney-General & hon. Nantaba Idah Erios.” The subject matter of the petition was the subject matter on which the committee was supposed to report. It would now be in defiance of our own Rules of Procedure to raise this subject in the House when the same subject matter is directly before a court of law. 

The rule of sub judice bars the Speaker from making such attempts because that would be very disrespectful to our own procedure. I made the undertaking myself that I would come and report but yesterday I received this constitutional petition on that very subject, so my hands are tied.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The subject matter in contention in that constitutional petition is the appointment of hon. Nantaba. In the circumstances, would it be prudent for her to continue sitting on the front bench yet her being there is a subject of determination before court? My interpretation as an advocate is that her continued sitting on the front bench is even sub judice. (Laughter)

MR SSEGONNA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling, as usual. My reading and understanding of rule 64(2) is that a matter is only sub judice if its discussion is likely to prejudice its fair determination. In our Rules of Procedure, it appears that the role of Parliament is only to receive a report and that report is not subject to discussion. May I seek your guidance whether presentation of a report and discussion of a report are entirely two different things. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules you are citing are to the attention of the presiding officer, the Speaker, right now. The issue of reporting on what transpired in the committee is what is in court. How do you report to the House on what is in court, stating the facts of what transpired in the committee which is in contestation in the court? That is the matter that the petitioner here has referred to the Constitutional Court. It is what I am supposed to report on, on the facts of what happened in the committee. That is what is in court and the rules allow the Speaker to gauge whether the matter is sub judice or not. 

I do not know whether in the opinion of any person in this House, this matter, which is the subject - The issue is: 

“The above constitutional petition has been filed by Peter Kibirango in which he would like court to declare and order that,

1. The approval of hon. Nantaba by the Appointments Committee of Parliament to the position of State Minister for Lands was in contravention of both the Constitution and the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure”. These are the same rules you now want me to report on.

“2. The decision of the Parliamentary Appointments Committee that cleared the second respondent be set aside because it is inconsistent with or in contravention of both the Constitution and the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure and is, therefore, null and void. 

Attached hereto is a copy of the said constitutional petition and Peter Kibirango’s affidavit in support.” This affidavit is a swearing of what they know of what happened in the committee. So, my report would be dealing with these issues substantially and yet the matter is substantially before court.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is quite unfortunate that a debate of this nature is dragging in the names of our colleagues. I can appreciate the discomfort of the House. 

Why did Parliament, in its opinion, enact rule 158, which requires, and is mandatory upon the chairperson of the committee, a report to the House of any appointment approved? My own view and interpretation of this rule is that at this point Parliament will actually take cognisance of any appointments that have been made by the Committee on Appointments. Without Parliament taking cognisance of those appointments, then it puts us in an awkward position on how we relate with our colleagues who have been appointed. I think that was the intention behind the enactment of rule 158. 

Without going into the controversies, whether there is a petition or not it is incumbent upon the chairperson of the committee to inform this House that so and so were appointed. This is because at the end of the day, the decisions of the Committee on Appointments are defended by the entire Parliament. It cannot be left only to the members of the Appointments Committee. It is us who are being asked, “Was so and so approved” and we must explain because that appointment by the Appointments Committee is done for and on behalf of the entire Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. 

Having said that, maybe, Mr Speaker, this is the time to revisit this particular rule, and on two grounds: whether the report should actually not be subject to debate and secondly, whether the Appointments Committee should not be opened up to the entire public so that everybody knows what has transpired in that committee like any other committee of Parliament. (Applause) It seems there is some sort of protection that we give to the people appearing before the Committee on Appointments, obviously without reference to the minister now under controversy. 

The reason why we have these controversies, in my view, is because the committee is closed and for no reason; absolutely no reason! The committee does work on behalf of this Parliament and indeed, the entire country. How, when and why would the approval or the appointment become confidential for somebody who is supposed to hold a public office? It does not have to be about ministers; I am talking about any of those offices that require, constitutionally, approval by Parliament.

As I conclude, my view is, and this goes to the chairperson of the committee, this House needs to revisit what we legislated upon in this particular section of our Rules of Procedure. The Committee on Appointments should be public and the report that comes from the committee should be subject to debate like any other committee report; actually, when you look at the Constitution, the powers are given to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was sitting as chair of the Committee of the Whole House and I was almost forced to debate on that matter as to whether the Committee on Appointments should be open. I am on record on this. My view is known by the House; the Hansard can bear me out on this. 

It is because of this that possibly, the Committee on Appointments put itself in a position that it should not even have on some occasions. That report is going to be incomplete unless you dealt with the final issue of why this matter is being raised even in the first place. 

This would be the first time that the report of the Committee on Appointments is made to the House. That rule has been there for a long time but this would be the first time the chair would be reporting on the appointments approved by the committee, for obvious reasons really. The things we have seen in the press are the things we are talking about, and that is what is drawing this debate. 

For the purposes of the presiding officer who was part of some of the approvals in the Committee on Appointments, I even made a statement personally that I would be reporting to the House on the details of what transpired in the committee and brief Parliament on those issues. I said this myself. But then yesterday I find this. 

I have just sent them to bring my notes. I will tell you the numbers and the people who were approved and we stop at that because that is what you want. When it comes, we will deal with it at that stage. To be more organised, can I then report on the numbers and names, because that is what I can do, of the people approved tomorrow at 2 O’clock. I will report on numbers and names because that is what the rules say.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, what took place in that committee meeting is not a new phenomenon. It is supposed to be reportable and reported. (Laughter) In light of that, I would like to invite you to cite Paul Ssemwogerere and Others v. the Attorney-General in 1999. The proceedings of Parliament on the referendum were reported in the Hansard and they were referred to in court. They did not prejudice the case of Paul Ssemwogerere and Others v the Attorney-General. Why do you think that the report of the Committee on Appointments, which is supposed to be reportable and reported, would influence court? I am seeking your guidance on that in terms of a standing court case, which is on record.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Rubaga South, the issue in the Ssemwogerere case was whether the record and proceedings of Parliament should not be looked at by the court; that was the issue. That is not the issue here. The issue here is the contents of the report when it is presented to the House. 
The fear of the Speaker is that those very issues are already substantially before court, including the correspondences from the Committee on Appointments to the President; they are all attached onto the affidavits in court. All letters from the Speaker and the President - the correspondences and all the details of what happened - are in there. That is what is in court. That is what I said is sub judice for us to proceed with any of the issues that would explain the anxiety of the members. 

On this particular matter, I know where all the members are coming from and certainly they need some explanation on what happened in the committee. However, I am constrained to give that kind of information, which would have been okay if there was no such court petition. In my opinion, there is nothing to hide but I will be able to proceed under rule 158, which states thus: “The Chairperson of the Committee shall report to the House any appointment approved by the Committee and the report shall not be subject to debate.”  That is all I can do if that is what you want. But my understanding was that members wanted to know some things about what happened, which led to the controversy. I cannot go into that because of this matter. 

You may think I am just trying to speak like this because of something else, but let me show you. (Laughter) This is the communication I had prepared for the House; it is here. It has full details of everything. But now the subject of what I should have reported to brief the House, - because the image of the House has been portrayed in a wrong way and I owed it to the House to do it - these same matters contained in a 3-page report, cannot come because of this petition. It would be sub judice. Therefore, the only thing that the Speaker can do now is to report on these issues as rule 158 requires but not to go into explaining the details of the things that members are interested in knowing. That is the distinction. 

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Arising from your explanation, particularly in respect of rule 158, would I be right to state that the Committee on Appointments is also governed by rule 182 and therefore the report of the Committee on Appointments cannot be orally presented and must be in writing as envisaged in rule 193? Would I be right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are talking about rule 182?

MR NIWAGABA: Yes, rules 182 (1) and 193 (1) read jointly with rule 158 on the Committee on Appointments. Would it be in order to give that report orally or it must be writing?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the second rule you talked about?

MR NIWAGABA: Rule 193 (1). I asked whether those rules actually apply to the report made by the Appointments Committee of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rule 182 applies to committees generally. I would like to say that the rules relating to appointments are very specific rules. So, they cannot apply generally. That is why they do not apply to other committees. That is the distinction. 

The rules relating to the Committee on Appointments are set up differently and specifically in a series of rules. That is what makes it different from other committees; for example, the rule that the report shall not be debated. It is different, so we cannot take it within the general provisions of other rules. This is specific to the Committee on Appointments. Are we clear on that? 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we approve the Vice-President and the Prime Minister, I think this House sits as an appointments committee. So, I do not know whether those exceptions will now also apply to those two because we usually debate when approving the Prime Minister and the Vice-President. I will need some clarification on that.

Two, I think it is high time, Mr Speaker, that you directed the chairperson of the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges to bring an amendment. Some of us are very uncomfortable with the comments that were made against the chairperson of the Appointments Committee. I think making this committee open will protect the chairperson of this committee.

Three, if the appointing authority was aware of rule 158, he would not have hurried to swear in those ministers. It should have been done after the report was laid on the Table and adopted by the House without debate. It is then that he would have gone ahead to swear in the ministers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The report of that committee does not even require adoption. It does not require any action from the House. Members, let us be realistic. Laws are supposed to be applied as they are and not as they ought to be. This is the law we are using now. I remember I was at pains at the committee stage during the consideration of amendments on these rules, saying that let us make this matter open, but the House rejected that idea. So, honourable members, I think let us close this matter. I will come here tomorrow and report as required by rule 158 thus: “The Chairperson of the Committee shall report to the House any appointment approved by the Committee and the report shall not be subject to debate.” 

I will come and read the names of those who were approved and that will be it. That matter is not subject to debate under the rules. If you raise issues of guidance on details, that will be a challenge. I am the one who has volunteered this information. Can we deal with it tomorrow after I have reported because we have a lot of business to do? That is when we can handle it comprehensively. 

MR SSEGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I insisted on bringing this matter up because I think we are falling into a trap. You have guided us well and I appreciate that. You see, this report within the meaning of our rules is either a report or nothing at all. You cannot talk of reading out numbers and names. If in the unchallengeable wisdom of the Speaker you cannot bring the report in its entirety, reading names and numbers is not a report. For the record, some of us have no problems with a particular individual who we have even taken steps to congratulate, anyway. The point is one of principle and our procedure that you either bring a report or you do not. That can be point No. 1.

Two, I rose to seek your guidance in light of the rules because going by them, you realise that they even specify a time limit within which the chairperson would give us this report. It is up to the Speaker to make a ruling and either say, “in light of the sub judice rule, I cannot tender this report” or say, “in light of this rule, the 15 days will start running from the time it is no longer sub judice.” But when you bring the names and list tomorrow, it will contravene the rules because it will not be a report; and two, you would be seen to act out of panic. (Laughter) I beg, Mr Speaker, and in good faith, that you stick to a particular ruling and we shall accept that ruling. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if anybody required proof of a standing human being who does not act under any panic, the person presiding over this House at this moment would be a very good example. (Laughter)  That is why I said I was the one who had volunteered to report even details beyond what the rules say, but I was confronted with a constitutional petition yesterday. This makes the details of what I should have briefed the House about – which have been issues in the press - matters for litigation. That is my problem. It is not that I have anything to hide, honourable members. It is not that I am panicking. So, can we move on, honourable members? 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Finally, from me, - (Laughter) - Mr Speaker, as we wind up this point there are salient issues we should understand; the Committee on Appointments represents the entire Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, we had that debate here when we were amending the rules. Please, do not take us through it again. We had that debate here and I was chairing. Please, do not.
 
MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, the subject that we are discussing now does not appear anywhere on the Order Paper and yet it is touching on the Constitution and also on our Rules of Procedure. Rule 144 (2) states: “For the avoidance of doubt, these Rules of Procedure shall prescribe the powers, composition and functions of Committees.” The subject matter now is about the Committee on Appointments, which was debated here and its powers were given by this Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, I would like guidance from you since in this same House we have Members of Parliament who are challenging our Rules of Procedure. They seem to point out that there are gaps in our rules which were made and approved in this House by Members of Parliament. There are clear procedures of amending our Rules of Procedure. If Members are talking about amending them because they have seen gaps in them, then there are clear ways provided for doing that. I am, therefore, wondering as to why the same Members of Parliament who made these rules provided for the powers of the Committee on Appointments and also, by the way, that the Committee on Appointments be chaired by the Speaker. 

In that case, the Members are even challenging the Speaker. According to our Rules of Procedure, if you are challenging the performance of the Speaker, you have to move a substantive motion. Therefore, I would like guidance from you, Mr Speaker that since we are challenging the functions and powers of the Committee on Appointments, which is chaired by the Speaker, and actually its performance, is it right for Members of Parliament to casually discuss the performance of the Speaker in this House? (Laughter)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. My good friend, hon. Okot Ogong, has just alluded to the fact that we are casually discussing the performance of the Speaker. I am not in any way casual. You can see it from my appearance.  (Laughter) The subject matter we are handling is actually the biggest national concern in this country at the moment. Is the member in order to brand a very serious issue of national importance, which has generated debate in the media for three weeks, as a casual issue and yet the security of the country may be at stake? Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If my hearing still serves me right as it usually does, the honourable member said these matters are important and they should be substantially debated; can they be debated out of context, can you just show up and start debating without it appearing on the Order Paper, in which case it becomes as if you are handling it in a casual manner? I think in that case, the observation is correct because the matter was brought up on a point of procedure and they cited rule 158, which states that the chairperson of the Committee on Appointments is enjoined to report to the House on appointments made. That is what the rule says and that is how this debate went that way. So, honourable members, can we proceed with other business on the Order Paper, please? 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION OF A STATEMENT BY THE PENSIONS TRUST

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we do that, let me recognise our visitors. In the gallery this afternoon we have students of St Theresa Girls School Nyamigisa represented in Parliament by hon. Ernest Kiiza, Member of Parliament Masindi Municipality, and hon. Bintu Jalia, Member of Parliament for Masindi District. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them.  (Applause) 

We also have students of Mulama Junior School represented in Parliament by hon. Florence Mutyabule and hon. Isiko Mpongo. They have also come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have students of Mbarara University. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have a group of stakeholders from National Agricultural Research Organisation Council and Council for Science and Technology, and Science Foundation for Development. They have come to witness the presentation of a motion of the proposed Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill, 2012, which motion we have already adopted. They have also come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

3.46
THE CHAIRPERSON, PARLIAMENTARY PENSION TRUST (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In accordance with our Rules of Procedure, I beg to present a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pronounce itself on the Parliamentary Pensions Regulations, 2012  

“WHEREAS Section 24(1) of the Parliamentary Pensions Act, 2007 mandates the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme Board of Trustees, in consultation with the Parliamentary Commission, to make regulations for the effective implementation of the provisions of the Parliamentary Pensions Act; 

AND WHEREAS the Board of Trustees has, in accordance with Section 24 of the Act, made the Parliamentary Pensions Regulations, 2012;

AWARE that a Statutory Instrument on the Parliamentary Pensions Regulations, 2012 was laid before Parliament on 4 September 2012;

NOTING that in accordance with Section 24(3) of the Parliamentary Pensions Act, 2007, Parliament must pronounce itself on the Statutory Instrument by way of a resolution within 21 days from the above date;

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that Parliament approves the Parliamentary Pensions Regulations, 2012.”

I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? (Mr Dombo and Mr Kakooza rose_) Honourable members, this particular Statutory Instrument on the Parliamentary Pensions Regulations, 2012 was laid before Parliament on 4 September, 2012. It was laid before the House in accordance with the Act, and the purpose of this motion is to make it operational so that the members’ issues with pensions are governable under the regulations so presented to the House.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On a point of procedure, I would like to ask whether the Clerk distributed copies to the members when it was laid on the Table because I did not see any in my pigeonhole. This is a very important matter to do with my pension that I want to read it before I approve this motion. Was it distributed? Since it was laid on the Table, it should have been distributed to our pigeonholes. Did the committee have a look at it, because it is a very vital matter to do with our money? Can you, procedurally, guide whether we can go ahead to approve this in the event that we do not have much information on the Statutory Instrument itself, which is very important and it was not distributed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I rule that since it seems that members have not seen this particular regulation, the Clerk circulates copies this evening so that we can proceed with this business on Thursday, provided it is still within the period of time stated in the law?

MR ABDU KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It sort of reminded me of an issue in this country concerning a Constitution where those who wanted to check out its details checked their pigeonholes.

I think we need to set a precedent because this is going to come up sometime in future again. My view is that if these regulations are ready, then they should be brought here for debate. We should go through them after we have had our relevant committee of Parliament examine these regulations in detail. They can come with a report, we go through it, debate it, and then pass these resolutions. But for you to lay the regulations on the Table and come and say, “let us pass them” will be procedurally wrong.

We really want to debate each and every regulation and have our relevant committee of Parliament – because they have the time - scrutinise it so that we know it is within the interests of all the Members of Parliament. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, ordinarily it is standard procedure that when an Instrument of this nature that requires parliamentary approval is laid on the Table, it is referred to the committee and the committee comes back with a report on the subject. The evidence in the motion is that it was laid before this House on 4th September this year but as to what happened to it, whether it was committed to the committee, I do not have any information to that effect. I do not remember presiding at that time.

So, the directive is that copies of this Instrument should be made available to members by close of business today and we see if we can deal with it on Thursday. The committee accordingly can have a quick look at it and see if we can debate on Thursday afternoon and pass it. Is that okay? Let it be like that.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You have noted that when the Statutory Instrument was laid on the Table, you do not know what happened to it. I also do not know. However, one of the challenges I wanted to seek your guidance about is that at the formative stages when the pensions’ scheme was initiated and formed, it was deliberately put under the Committee on National Economy. The chairperson of this committee at that time was also the chairperson of the pensions’ board. 

Tomorrow when a copy of the regulations is circulated to this House and they must be considered by a committee of Parliament, I just wanted to seek clarification under which committee this matter should be referred to. I just want to seek this clarification so that it is expeditiously handled to enable the pension scheme to function with the legalities that must be. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the  chairperson Pensions Board and Commissioner Dombo for raising that concern. It is true that when the pensions’ scheme was formed in the Seventh Parliament, the chairman of the Committee on National Economy was naturally the chairman. However, in the last Parliament, under my chairmanship we moved an amendment here and that status no longer holds. We reconstituted the board and provided for an electoral process to elect the chairperson of the board whom we have now.

However, the pensions scheme, in liaison with the Commission, falls under the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs because we are also subject to the Act that governs this. So, there is no debate about it. It is the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and has nothing to do with the Committee on National Economy. I thank you.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification especially from the Clerk’s office in regard to this very document. I was wondering why this document was not circulated earlier to Members. 

Secondly, several times very important documents are laid on the Table and they have not been circulated to Members. That is why Members raise issues at the last minute and at the end of the day, they will not have the opportunity to get to understand the gist of the issues in such documents. Therefore, I request that, Mr Speaker, you guide that future papers that will be laid on the Table, especially concerning key issues, should be put in Members’ pigeonholes so that they can scrutinise them early enough. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the papers laid on the Table are for the records of Parliament; it is not automatic that they should be circulated to all the Members. It is for the Members to seek out any document that was laid on the Table and get a copy. Otherwise, many of the documents laid here are bulky and many of them may not even require circulation to all the Members because it could be an expensive venture for Parliament to make 300 copies to circulate to all the Members. However, once they are laid here, any Member interested in them can access them. 

The only difference between that and this one is that this one was supposed to have gone to the committee and the committee should have reported. I think that is why we have a gap, which we should try and cure. The challenge I have is that the committee that is supposed to be handling this may not be properly constituted as of now. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to comment on the issue raised by hon. Akello. As you have rightly said, there are two types of documents; there are those for record and those that need to be distributed. The Clerk’s office should be able to separate the two. Those meant for circulation should be circulated and those meant to be kept in the library, like the agreements on oil, can be accessed by Members who are interested in them. So, let the Clerk be alert and be able to separate the two. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Can I have an indication from a member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs as to whether they will be able to look at this document and be ready to report by Thursday?

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, unfortunately, I am neither the chairman nor vice-chairman. Although, I am a member I do not know the schedule of business of the committee, but what I am sure of is that the committee does not have business tomorrow and on Thursday. So, in liaison with the Clerk’s office, the Members can be summoned to look at it tomorrow and Thursday morning and maybe come up with a report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. It is so ordered. (Laughter) Let it go to the committee. The Clerk is directed to circulate copies of this. Let the committee handle it tomorrow and Thursday morning and report to the House on Thursday afternoon. I am only praying that by that time, the requirement of 21 days will not have been exceeded. 

RESPONSE BY THE LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS ON MATTERS OF NATIONAL IMPORTANCE RAISED BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION DURING THE SITTING OF 30TH OCTOBER, 2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me just make an announcement. In the gallery we have Rev. Kristin Molander and Mr Stig Lundberg from Church of Sweden. They are accompanied by Ms Rachel Nyakecho from Uganda Joint Christian Council. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are welcome.

4.01
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 30th October, hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi, the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, raised a number of issues he considered of national importance that required urgent response from Government. The following is a response of Government to the matters raised: 

One, he claimed that a number of prominent people who included, among others, Muslim clerics, have been murdered in cold blood but Police has not arrested those perpetuating these crimes. “What steps is Government taking to arrest this situation?” 

It is true that a number of people have been murdered – (interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I suppose the document that is being circulated is the statement being read by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister but the copy that I have starts on page 3. He is reading point No. 1 but my copy starts with point No. 2. I do not know whether it is intentional that some of us were given copies that are incomplete. Secondly, this copy is not signed and I am not sure if it is really from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the copy I have starts from page 2, meaning that the cover page is page 1, and I have what looks like a signature on all the pages. That is what I have. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker – (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, as if that was not enough, I am standing on the point of order, pursuant to the words the Prime Minister has uttered in response to the remarks made by the Leader of the Opposition, to the effect that “he raised a number of issues he considered of public importance”. 

The Prime Minister knows that the matters raised by the Leader of the Opposition carry gravity and necessitate answering. It should not have been the Prime Minister to be judgemental in using these words. So, is he in order to begin his response on a faulty note and in un-parliamentary language? This is a whole Leader of Government business and Prime Minister; shouldn’t we abandon and ignore what he is about to say as a result of that negligence?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: These matters were raised by the Leader of the Opposition and with the authority of the Speaker to qualify them as matters of public importance. So, there is no further value judgement as to whether they are of public importance or not because even the Speaker was involved in that decision that these were matters that required some response. 

Can I just announce this? In the public gallery this afternoon, we have students of the Islamic University in Uganda. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Please proceed.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I offer my most profound apologies for the errors here. I started last week on Thursday in responding to the statements by the Leader of the Opposition. I gave the first part on Congo- (interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable colleague has raised concern about the authenticity of this document. What we have is not signed but I can see the Rt Hon. Prime Minister proceeding without owning up to this document and telling us whether it is from his office, from him or not. Would it be procedurally right, Mr Speaker, for the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to proceed without owning this document?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, honourable member, I have a difficulty because the copy I have is signed, as you can see. So, are there two sets of copies? 

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, that is what makes matters a little bit complicated, because the Speaker has a copy that is signed while Members do not have signed copies. 

Two, Members are alluding to the fact that the cover page indicates the office of the Prime Minister and his name, and  the statement that the Prime Minister referred to, the one he made on Thursday regarding our stand and involvement in the Congo crisis, had the same kind of design but he saw it very necessary to go ahead and sign each and every page of it. Does it mean that the current one he has circulated is not as important as the first one he circulated? Can he be kind enough to tell us whether the document before us is actually a document from his office?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, is this your document? Is it from your office? Do you own it? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I rise to confirm - that is why I started with an apology because I wanted to confirm that the statement you have is not signed. There must have been an error of not printing the signed copy. Mr Speaker, I am glad yours is signed and I want to confirm that what you have is the true copy of the statement I am about to give. Since I am here presenting it myself, I invite my honourable colleagues to listen to what I am saying and see if there is any material difference between what I present and what you have. Thank you for your understanding.

It is true, as I was saying, that a number of people have been murdered. These, however, have not been limited to only prominent people but also others from all walks of life. For instance, we have received reports from Mukono and other places about ordinary citizens, including students, who have been murdered either by gunshots or clobbered by iron bars. 

The Police have continued to investigate all the reported murders and suspects have been arrested and taken to court. A case in point is in Central Police Station Kampala, CRB 290/12, where one Hajji Abubaker Kiwewa was shot dead at Kyanja Prime Petrol Station. Investigations were done and one Luke Balaba of Kyanja was arrested and arraigned in court for murder. He is currently in Luzira Prison on remand. 

Another prominent case is that of Yunus Abubakari Madongo of Bugiri Town who was shot dead when he was coming out of a mosque. Investigations were done, vide Bugiri CRB 1531/12, and four suspects were arrested. The file was submitted to the DPP for advice on the charges to prefer. The file was returned later advising that all the four should be charged with murder. Subsequently, the suspects were arraigned in court. 

Community policing activities as well as foot patrols have been beefed up in these areas and already the efforts have gained dividends. In the last few weeks, fewer murders have been committed.

Two, it was also claimed that, “The arrest and detention of the Opposition politicians in Police and safe houses without charges and sometimes with trumped-up charges such as murder, terrorism, simple robbery is on the increase. Can Government assure us of our safety to participate in the political activities of Uganda?” 

It is true that the Uganda Police has arrested and detained wrongdoers, law breakers and disrupters of social peace. It is also true that some Opposition politicians have been found committing one or all of the above mentioned crimes. It is not only Opposition politicians who are arrested and detained. All people in Uganda, citizens and non-citizens, who come into conflict with the law or who are alleged to have committed offences are arrested and detained in compliance with the laws of Uganda.  The same standard applies to all. When an offence is committed or is alleged to have been committed, investigations are done and when the evidence assembled is clearly capable of sustaining a criminal charge, the suspects are produced in court. If not, the suspects are released or given police bond as inquiries continue. 

It would be going against the law if the Opposition politicians who commit crime are to be treated differently on the basis that they are opposition politicians. There is no politician who has been charged with any offence on trumped-up charges. The charges against Ingrid Turinawe and other opposition politicians are cases in point. The investigations were handled, vide CTREF 1593/2011. The investigations gathered evidence of meetings held and the strategies devised to overthrow the Government of Uganda through unconstitutional means. The Director of Public Prosecutions perused the file and established that the evidence assembled is weighty enough to sustain the charges, otherwise the six suspects would not have been charged. The suspects appeared in court and were granted bail. 

Another typical case is where three young men were arrested in Kawempe; vide Kawempe CRB 3435/2012. The evidence gathered only implicated two of the suspects. The two were charged with the offence of terrorism having been found in possession of, among others, bomb making materials. 

Three, the Leader of the Opposition further alleged that, “Some Ugandans are being kidnapped on a daily basis and relatives are not sure of their whereabouts. Can Government assure Ugandans that we are not going back to the panda gari days?” 

Kidnap is the forceful or tactful removal of a person from his or her environment with the purpose of depriving the person of his or her liberty to freely move and associate. Most kidnaps are associated with blackmail, revenge, sacrifice and so on. 

It is true that kidnap cases have occurred and most have been reported, but it is outrageous for the Leader of the Opposition to say that these kidnaps are made on a daily basis. There are few kidnap cases that have been reported to Police. Investigations into kidnap cases are different from other common crimes. The life of the victims is on a thread and therefore the investigations cannot be publicly shared because the leads that Police follow must be taken with utmost caution. However, the Police appeals to anyone who has information on any person that has been kidnapped to forward the same for investigations.

Panda gari used to be state inspired, clandestine arrests and detention. The kidnap we are addressing is done by non-state actors, organisations or individuals with their own private motives. Therefore, for the Leader of the Opposition to refer to these kidnaps as a slide back to panda gari days is either talking with lack of information on what actually panda gari was or he intentionally intends to malign Government by linking it to private criminal acts of individuals.

It was further alleged that, “Police continue to use preventive arrests as a way of curtailing political opposition activities. Prominent among those include that of Dr Kiiza Besigye, Lord Mayor Lukwago Erias, hon. Semujju Nganda. Can we get assurance that we are free to carryout political activities in Uganda?” 

The Police have not curtailed any political opposition activity. The circumstances under which the Police used preventive arrest are justified and in compliance with the law. The circumstances are clearly spelt out in the Police Act and the Criminal Procedure Code. The purpose, for instance, has been, among others, to prevent the causing of unlawful destruction on a highway or commission of an offence against public decency in a public place, and for the purpose of preventing the commission of any cognizable offence. 

The Leader of the Opposition stated, “The IGP was invited by the Committee on Human Rights but he refused to attend. Can Government tell us whether he is above the law?” 

First of all, there is no one who is above the law. The only invitation the IGP received to appear before the Committee on Human Rights was of October 2012. It was the office of the IGP which was invited and not the person. Indeed, the IGP attended since the Deputy Inspector General of Police appeared before the committee with a big delegation of directors and heads of department. However, the IGP, Lt Gen. Kale Kayihura, was not able to appear in person because he received urgent summons requiring his presence at State House for the swearing-in of newly appointed ministers. 

Indeed, in readiness to attend, the IGP had already prepared the requisite report to be presented to the committee. When he could not attend at the last minute, the report was handed over to the DIGP who represented him at the meeting. When the meeting opened, the DIGP conveyed the apologies of Lt Gen. Kale Kayihura and explained the circumstances that regrettably rendered him unable to attend. In fact, the DIGP presented the letter of invitation to the swearing-in ceremony as evidence of Lt Gen. Kale Kayihura’s presence at another official function. 

“The Minister of Internal Affairs promised on 3 October 2012 to report to Parliament within three weeks about the killings but to date no response has been made”. In the period around September 2012, a number of gruesome murders nicknamed kinywamusaayi or vampire took place in the areas of Wakiso, Busunju, Mityana, Mpigi, Nakaseke, Kyankwanzi, Nansana, Kakiri, Ntwetwe to mention but a few. The gruesome nature of the murders alarmed the residents since something like this had never happened before. 

As soon as the pattern of the new murders was noticed, the Inspector General of Police sent a team of police officers who visited the areas affected, met the local leaders and gathered the necessary intelligence on the matter. Deployment and patrols were beefed up in the areas and confidence was restored. A number of suspects were arrested and inquiries continue. Community policing in the area was enhanced and the situation is progressively normalising.
 
The Leader of the Opposition further stated that the Minister of Internal Affairs further promised to give a response regarding the inhuman handling of Ms Ingrid Turinawe but to-date nothing has been done. 

The following is our response to the above:
On the 20 April 2012, Ms Turinawe Ingrid was arrested by Police in Nansana town. After the incident, the manner in which she was arrested was a subject of debate by this House. Rt Hon Speaker, you may recall that I, the Leader of Government Business and Prime Minister of Uganda, made a formal apology regarding the manner of the arrest. When the matter was raised in this House, the information available was still scanty and the Government promised to investigate the matter and report back to Parliament before the 18 May 2012.
 
I am glad to report that formal inquiries into the matter were conducted by the Professional Standards Unit (PSU) and the Special Investigations Unit (SIU) of the Uganda Police. One of the hot issues raised on this Floor was that it was a male Police officer who effected the arrest and not a female officer. This was after the Leader of Government Business mentioned that the information he had received from the Inspector General of Police was that the officer who arrested Ingrid was a female police officer. 

This was an easy matter to prove and indeed I am reporting that the officer who effected the arrest was and is a female officer. This revelation, however, is not intended to justify the manner in which the arrest was conducted but to respond to the query concerning the gender of the arresting officer.

I need to emphasise that the Uganda Police has clearly laid down procedures that govern the manner of effecting arrests. One of the requirements is that a female suspect should be arrested by a female officer. I recall that Parliament very much desired to know the name of the officer who effected the arrest. While the relevance of knowing the name is not clear other than giving a clue to the gender, the same can be given if required. The name of the officer is Woman Police Constable Irene Alinda.

PC Alinda is, I must inform you colleagues, very remorseful and regrets what she did. However, she still acted unprofessionally and out of tune with the standards of the Uganda Police in carrying out arrests or using force. Her action was unnecessary, improper, and unacceptable and she must be held to account. For that, we are deeply sorry to Ingrid Turinawe, her family, her friends and indeed all womenfolk and the country at large. In line with the recommendations of the investigating team, the IGP has ordered that PC Alinda Irene be tried before the Police Headquarters Disciplinary Court on charges of discreditable conduct and of behaving in a cruel, disgraceful and indecent manner under the Police Act.

Mr Speaker, having said all that, I wish to make some comments on the incident which led to the confrontation between Ingrid Turinawe and the Police, and indeed, which is what led to the incident under investigation. Some people, political leaders included, seem to think that they are not obliged to follow lawful instructions of a police officer. In fact, some have tended to act and behave as if they are above the law, and that is where the problem is.

From the findings of the inquiry on this occasion, Ms Ingrid Turinawe’s driver obeyed the instructions of the Police and refused Ingrid’s insistence that he ignores the Police. That is when the Police stopped them. In fact, she took over the wheel of the vehicle precisely because her driver refused to defy the Police instructions. Had she cooperated with the Police, as other political leaders did during the same occasion, the question of her arrest and the subsequent incident in question would not have arisen. 

Indeed, Ingrid Turinawe defied the direction of a police officer who was managing traffic. Not only did she refuse his instructions, she actually continued to drive her vehicle into him. This is very clear from video footage which, by the way, NTV conveniently left out. Here, Ms Turinawe drove into one of the police officers repeatedly. In fact, this was a serious assault and it was therefore appropriate that she be arrested.

It should be noted that the commander in charge on the scene ordered four female officers to make up the arrest team. Despite being correctly informed that she was being placed under arrest, Ms Turinawe again defied Police and resisted to leave the vehicle. Indeed, she struggled with them, grabbing the steering wheel and hitting and biting the officers. Therefore, while acknowledging that PC Alinda Irene acted unprofessionally, we must not lose sight of the genesis and background of the incident, especially the circumstances surrounding the incident and who had primary responsibility for its occurrence. 

Ingrid Turinawe sought to attend an illegal assembly organised by an unlawful society. When this assembly failed to take place, she refused to comply with the lawful instructions of the Police performing traffic management duties. She used a motor vehicle to physically strike at a police officer repeatedly. When informed that she was to be detained, she resisted arrest. She hit and bit police officers. This is all clear on the video footage for those of you who may have seen it. 

These are plain facts. Indeed, while they absolutely do not excuse the misconduct of one police officer, these facts are nonetheless relevant and material. While we hold the Police to high moral and professional standards, which we should, at the same time should we not expect our political leaders to hold themselves to equally or even higher standards? Ms Turinawe is an aspiring law maker. Imagine! It is expected that she should desist from her usual practice of being a law breaker.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I wish to assure the House and the country that the Uganda Police Force aspires to maintain the very highest professional, ethical and behavioural standards and to respect and uphold rights of individuals and groups. The Police continue to protect and serve all in Uganda, including those who criticise, insult, defy and assault them. It is obvious that police officers, in the course of carrying out their duty of protecting life and property, ensuring law and order and preventing and detecting crime, are usually compelled to deal with people who do not respect the law. However, because of their training, they always aspire to exercise professional restraint and act within the standard operating procedures in managing situations including using proportional force. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you. Honourable members, you will recall that the issues were raised by the Leader of the Opposition and they required some responses from the Government which have now been given by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Can we then move to other items? You want to debate this issue? Yes, hon. Katuntu.

4.35
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will just have a few concerns I will raise coming from this statement of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I will go to the last paragraph on page 3 where the Prime Minister said, “There is no politician who has been charged of any offence on trumped-up charges.”

I am on record on this Floor sometime back citing a notice on one of the court buildings in the United States, in a State called Oregon; it says, “Injustice to anybody can never be justice to anyone.” You may come up and make a political statement that there isn’t any politician who has been charged of any offence on trumped-up charges, but the one speaking to you now is an example. For the first time in my life, and I am coming to almost 50 years old now, I was dragged to court on a trumped-up charge of belonging to unlawful society because I was walking from my residence in Naguru to town! 

I had never appeared in the dock. The chief magistrate, whom I have appeared before as an advocate, looked at me and said, “Accused No.1, I am not used to seeing you that side.” Here I was in the dock, I, Abdu Katuntu, as a criminal! 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was it as a suspect or something?

MR KATUNTU: Well, as a suspect maybe. I was waiting for an opportunity for anybody who had dragged me to court to prove a criminal case against me. I appeared four times and nothing happened until they told me, “walk away.” 

It was not about me alone. Hon. Wafula Oguttu was bundled up like a chicken thief, thrown under the pickup where murderers and dead bodies are put. I was there and I saw it myself. Now here is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister saying it is not true when your own colleagues, the ones you work with daily for the good of this country, are being arrested and arraigned in court on trumped-up charges. 

It is not easy for any person who has got a decent family to imagine that you are appearing in the dock. You must explain to your little kids. The following day you are in the front pages of the newspapers; you are seeking for bail because somehow you have done something which does not appease the state. 

When we raise these issues, Mr Speaker, it is due to our concern for this country. Things have happened before. I was old enough when panda gari was happening. In the last Parliament, I am on record accusing the then minister of ethics and Member of Parliament from one of the constituencies in Kisoro, who was actually the district commissioner of Kampala during the time of panda gari. He was the overall commander of panda gari and here he was as minister of ethics in this regime.

Things have gone wrong in this country before; we do not want a repetition of the same. You become dishonest to us. Instead of acknowledging the mistake and saying, “Look here, mistakes have happened”, like indeed you somehow agreed with the Ingrid Turinawe case - I have to congratulate you for that because that is unusual of you. (Laughter) I really have to congratulate you.

If mistakes have taken place, let us be decent as leaders and work together to correct those mistakes. The only friend you can have, honourable colleagues, is a friend who tells you the truth. That is why I speak to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister quite openly and honestly. You will not hear me say behind your back what I cannot tell you now. 

Let us go to page 5, paragraph 2, after the verbatim quotation: “The circumstances under which the police used preventive arrest are justified and are in compliance with the law.” Actually, that is not correct. When Dr Kiiza Besigye was under what you called “preventive custody”, he went to court and court made a pronouncement that what the state was doing was against the law. However, despite that pronouncement, the state continues to do the same thing. These days we joke about it when we see Mr Omala coming; he is like the chief bodyguard of Dr Kiiza Besigye. He is his tormentor. 

Here is a gentleman who contributed to what you are proud of, the so-called stability. Just put yourself in the shoes of Dr Kiiza Besigye - what he thinks everyday when he is being incarcerated and brutalised. He says he left his medical practice in Nairobi at quite a tender age and went to the jungles of Luweero; what does he reap from that sacrifice? It is that torture. Injustice to anybody can never be justice even to the person meting out that unjustified torture. 

On page 6, “the Ministry of Internal Affairs promised on 3rd October to report to Parliament within three weeks about the killings but to-date, no response has been made.” The Rt Hon. Prime Minister then goes ahead to list places where murders have taken place - Busunju, Mityana, Mpigi, Nakaseke etc. I did expect, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that you would have given us the figures so that the country knows about this so-called vampire. How many lives have been lost according to police records? The country should know if 20, 30, 40 people have been lost. These Ugandans being killed by this vampire - whatever it is - we need to know. These are citizens of this country and this particular institution needs to know.

When you go to page 7, I want to thank you for giving the name of Alinda. Whether it is true or not, that is another debate but to me this thing about gender – The person who was affected most was a woman. To say, “after all it was a woman who arrested you” is double jeopardy to the womenfolk. Women are decent people. To say, “well, don’t ever imagine it is about men terrorising you after all it is a fellow woman terrorising you” - The issue of gender should not arise! 

Some of us always think that women are a fair people. We saw that footage ourselves. That is why I was saying whether it is true or not, the masculine hands can be seen. They are not these tender and loving hands of women – (Interjections) – Yes, and why has it taken a whole over six months to name this particular individual. Anyway, whatever it is, I will give the Rt Hon. Prime Minister the benefit of doubt.

Let us move to page 9, and I am about to conclude 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but I also take it that you are talking on behalf of your colleagues.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I have no mandate to speak on behalf of anybody except the people of Bugweri County. Anyway, why I am taking a little bit long is because of this portfolio I hold as the other Attorney-General – (Interjections) – Did you say “shadow”? Okay, we shall have a debate about that on another day.

Mr Speaker, on page 9, paragraph 1, he says, “...this is very clear on video footage which, by the way, NTV conveniently left out.” But NTV is not a state-owned television station! Do not start accusing the private media houses? If it was not played on NTV, there is a state-owned television station for which we are all responsible for paying the staff and buying the equipment. Why didn’t the state television play what exactly happened? (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere rose_) You are sure you want to engage me?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Yes. What I want to say is: Are you, honourable member, implying that if you are a private media house or station you can selectively report on events and that it is Government media that should correctly report on such events? I am asking this you say that NTV staff are not paid by Government - What we are talking about is the correct reporting of events for correct understanding of happenings. Do I understand you right?

MR KATUNTU: I do not know why the honourable minister really stood up. (Laughter) The point I was making is that, if the Rt Hon. Prime Minister realised that there was inaccurate reporting by NTV, then there is a state television station, which should have reported correctly. I think he would have said that whereas the video footage of NTV does not show the details, - (Interjections) – it is not said anywhere; read your own statement, Rt Hon. Prime Minister – the UBC showed those details. For us who watch both stations, there was no difference between both televisions’ footage. So, why would you accuse NTV, a private media house, and not your won Government-owned station?

I want to comment on the second last sentence on page 9. It says, “She used a motor vehicle to physically strike a police officer repeatedly.” Imagine that! Using a motor vehicle to physically strike a police officer repeatedly! That police officer should be dead. (Laughter) There are things that we need to say in public to earn respect, but there are also things we say in public and lose respect. You strike repeatedly - not once or twice - and that person walked away! What is interesting is that actually, the so-called officer is anonymous. He is not named anywhere in this statement. So, you can see some sort of fiction because one wants to justify the wrong or illegal actions of a police officer. You do not have to justify a wrong because the Rt Hon. Prime Minister wants to portray Ms Ingrid Turinawe as a devil who gets into a vehicle and starts to knock people plus biting off their ears – in fact, I read that somewhere in this report as well.

This lady whom the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is demonising is, by the way, from the greater Rukungiri where the Prime Minister comes from – (Interjections) – from Kanungu. This sister of the Prime Minister – (Laughter) – made in Kanungu I think is not as bad as you want to portray her. So, this is not correct. Ms Ingrid Turinawe is a political leader. The only thing that is evidenced by footage is all about her fighting for what she thinks are rights and there is nothing wrong with it.

I read somewhere that one day H.E the President together with his lovely wife, in 1979 or 1980 or thereabouts, while travelling on Jinja Road were intercepted by some rogue elements within the UNLA who got them out of the car and made them sit, torturing them yet they were leaders. The writer said that it took Gen. Salim Saleh to come and rescue them from these rogue officers. I know this is something that haunts the country and the first family. Why? It is because what the rogue officers were doing was not correct.

The difference between this regime and the army of that time is that those things should not happen again. So, if you do what they did to the President and his lovely wife to Ms Ingrid Turinawe, then you remind me of Animal Farm. The animals looked from man to pig; they looked from pig to man; and they looked from man to pig again; they found no difference. (Laughter) I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition in Parliament raised many issues and among them was the issue of DRC. The Prime Minister responded last week and we were supposed to debate all these issues together. So, are we also allowed to debate DRC? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If the report was made, then I suppose it would be acceptable to do that. However, we might have to be careful about the issue of the Congo as a Parliament.  You all know the issues involved. It is not that it is prejudice but the issues involved raise – Just two days ago, I received two Members of Parliament from the DRC in my office. So, that is why I am saying that we might not need to go into so much detail because people are still talking at that level. However, I suppose there will be no problem raising issues that do not go too much into those details.

4.58
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two matters, which I would like to raise from the Prime Minister’s statement. The first is that I do not think the Prime Minister was being fair on bringing up the issue of panda gari in his statement. First of all, I do not want to justify, and I will take what my elder brother, hon. Katuntu, raised on panda gari. 

Panda gali happened in a situation where there was an armed opposition. The beginning of that war was an attack on a military training wing filled with recruits, young Ugandans, who had volunteered to serve in the Army. My friend, Kyaligonza, run a unit called Black Bomber, which today would be called “urban terrorism.” That is a very different circumstance. I do not think the politicians who are being arrested have declared an armed opposition against the government. If so, Government should actually deal with it legally. When the Prime Minister takes us back to the early 80s, he seems to be forgetting –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the issue of panda gari was raised by the Leader of the Opposition.
 
MR AKENA: True, but I am discussing what the Prime Minister said, and the Prime Minister being a key actor in that period can understand where exactly I am coming from. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, why I am drawing your attention to it is because you said he was not fair in raising the issue of panda gari but the issue was originally raised by the Leader of the Opposition. 

MR AKENA: I am aware but I am saying the Prime Minister is not being honest in using it to justify what he is trying to put in his statement. I would also like to remind the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that at the beginning of the NRM rule when armed opposition started, Luzira Prison was parked with people called “lodgers”. Thousands upon thousands of people were arrested and dumped in Luzira with no charge. Many never returned. We had situations of people being loaded in containers and transported from the North and brought as prisoners. Many of them died. So, I am not comfortable with the Prime Minister bringing up this issue of panda gari.
 
The Prime Minister should be aware and sensitive that, not until about 2007, there was effectively a curfew in the North. You could not cross Karuma after 6.00 p.m. Now, in that context under armed opposition, millions of people under Operation Iron Fist were kraaled into IDP camps. The Office of the Prime Minister is handling the effects of that operation up to now and part of the process of dealing with that armed opposition led to disaster situation. Right now, the Office of the Prime Minister is under scrutiny for resources, which should have been relieving the suffering of the people over a period of years. (Laughter) 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, if you want to open up a Pandora’s Box, we can also raise issues which put the conduct of the government in the dock.  We are supposed to be moving on in a democracy and when colleagues have issues and try through peaceful methods to address those issues, the best you can bring is panda gari! I am extremely disappointed with that issue. If they had gone to the bush, I think it would have been different. 

The second point I wish to raise is that very recently I ended up being detained for three hours by the security forces but this particular incidence was not by the Police. This was by the Special Forces Group. One thing I can tell the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is that the language used by these officers was so unpalatable. There are matters which I cannot say here on the Floor, but it was thoroughly disgusting to the extent that I almost reached a decision that in Kiswahili you would say, “kama mbaya mbaya.” A young man, young enough to be my son, said he could do something to my mother. It was only after a colleague, a woman Member of Parliament, said, “I am here; do it to me” that he shied away. Now, in those circumstances if you see an honourable member losing their head, surely this is something which we need to look into. 

You are just talking about the pictures but there are certain insults which are given. In that particular instance, I was deeply hurt that somebody could say such a thing to an honourable member he knows.  When I asked the officer why I was being detained, he said: “You people enacted the law; why don’t you obey?” I asked him which law I was breaking. I was detained for over three hours and I was dragged by somebody who should not have acted in such a way. 
 
Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you may wish to blame colleagues in politics but often the officers’ conduct and words can provoke even  the mildest person into doing things which are not normal. I did not raise this matter earlier but I was so hurt that these were people supposed to be guarding the presidency, the fountain of honour, but could utter such abusive language not only to me whom they were dealing with but to bring in my mother in such circumstances! It took the greatest level of restraint not to react. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I thank you for your statement but a lot needs to be done. It is true that there are difficult paths in our past. If you want to end at panda gari, I can tell you that there has been a lot of difficulty after that and the North is still trying to get out of that difficulty. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.07
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for his response. I have risen to give a comment from page 6 when the Rt Hon. Prime Minister was responding to the period around September 2012 on the issue of the kanywamusaayi.

Mr Speaker, this happened in my constituency and during that week, I could not settle in Parliament. It happened not only in my constituency but also in areas around Buganda. It was too much! We expected the Prime Minister to give us a better response than this. First of all, we need to find out whether the kanywamusaayis were really on the ground. This is what we used to tell our people; we do not know. We thought that the government had used its machinery and come up with an answer. If the Prime Minister says that there were vampires in Wakiso, Busunju and Mityana, what is this? Were the vampires really there? When you go to the Police, they say that was just talk.

Mr Prime Minister, we also need to know what causes all this. How do we avoid this in the future? There was a lot of mob justice. For example, over six people were killed in my constituency by the local vigilantes as a result of mob justice, and the country is on tension. We expected something bigger than this. Because when something small happens, people just take up pangas and spears and they turn to killing others. What is this? We cannot run a country like this. (Interruption)

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. The information I am giving is that some residents are saying that what is going on around many parts of this country, especially here in Buganda, is that there is a group of foreigners from neighbouring countries who are committing these crimes. When these people are being killed, they take blood from them. That is the information I wanted to give. 

The situation is very serious and dangerous, and in fact, the Prime Minister should have come out and informed us that yes, we have carried out investigations and the rumours that are circulating are not true or they are true, and then we find a solution.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, honourable, for giving way. The information I wanted to give is that the vampires are not only in Buganda, and they are still killing our people.

Last month, in my constituency of Igara West, a deputy headmaster of one of our secondary schools – a young man - was killed as he was entering his house. This was in a place called Swazi in Kyamuhunga sub-county. This was hardly three weeks after another one was slaughtered with a panga again in his house. Within the same period in the same sub-county, two people were killed and thrown in a fish pond.

Mr Speaker, within a period of about six or seven months - I have the report, and I can lay it on Table when I bring it - about ten people have died in one sub-county in my constituency. 

So, Mr Prime Minister, we have a serious problem on our hands, to explain to the nation what our Government can do and is doing to stop this ‘vampiring’. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR KIWANDA: Thank you very much. When the incident happened in my constituency, it was on the 4th, but it took Police over five days to come and take charge on the ground. That is why you see residents trying to defend themselves. Even to-date, I have been going to my constituency to try and tell them to go back to their houses, because people do not see the Police on the ground. It took so long for the Police to react to the situation.

And, when some people were killed by mob justice, some of them were identified with foreign documents, some Kenyan. We needed to have all this. Do we have any problem with our neighbours? Is it because our borders are not properly guarded? What about the issue of identification? We have a very big problem; because the ID funds also vanished and that is why our people do not have identification.

Last time two people were killed in Busunju because they had no documentation at all. So, the problem is bigger than what is in this statement. We needed this to be investigated more - (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: I am sorry, hon. Kiwanda, for interrupting. I did not mean to interrupt you, but I rise on a serious point of order. Is it in order for a whole Prime Minister and his deputy, and the Minister of Defence, to come here in this multi-party Parliament when dressed in the official colours of FDC and moreover when responding to the Leader of the Opposition’s issues and statement? Is it really in order, Mr Speaker? What are they up to?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Rules of Procedure prescribe what amounts to decent dressing in this House. I have not received any formal gazettement of colours for specific people, and even if they were there, I have not received any prohibition that other people cannot wear any other colours except some colours. The order is misplaced and the honourable member who raised the point of order is completely out of order.

MR KIWANDA: Mr Speaker, my concern is,  we need a deeper investigation into these murders. It is more than this. What is the cause and how do you avoid whatever is in the villages? We have been attacked as Members of Parliament whenever we go to the villages as they ask about this.

The Prime Minister was also very careful here when he said that this has ever happened here from 1980 to 1986. Things begun the way they are today and eventually things turned the way they did. I, therefore, request that Government should help us and give us a clear position so that we can have an explanation for our people. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On this particular issue of the killings, I think these matters are serious, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. They have been raised here a few times. You might need to adopt a better mechanism of finding a proper response and then come back to this House with better information on what is actually happening. 

Hon. Gilbert Bukenya raised about many people who have died; they dig holes in the walls and kill people; they go around countrywide. It might require a deeper focus than the kind of debate we are engaging in now. Honourable members have raised serious issues on the killings and would like to give more information. Therefore, don’t you think it would serve this House better if you got better information so that the House can be better guided?

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before the Rt Hon. Prime Minister responds to the issue of killings, I wish that he bears in mind that some concerned citizens of Kasese District have petitioned the office of the RDC over some murders that have gone unexplained. And in their petition, Mr Speaker, which I wish, with your permission to lay on Table, they have listed about 18 – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What petition is that and to who?

MRS WINIFRED KIIZA: It is a petition to the RDC Kasese, but they have given copies to the Members of Parliament. I have my copy here and with your permission, I can lay it on Table so that the Prime Minister can possibly make a decision.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who is it addressed to?

MRS WINIFRED KIIZA: It is the petition of the concerned citizens of Kasese District to the Resident District Commissioner of Kasese District – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And you want to lay it in this House?

MRS WINIFRED KIIZA: I said with your permission. It is concerning murders; maybe let me read the names of the persons who have been murdered and possibly as the Prime Minister charts a way forward, he can incorporate this matter in his submission. 

Mr Speaker, what is most important in this matter, is that the murders that have been highlighted here date as far back as 1988 to-date. What is surprising is that out of the few cases they have been reported, 18 persons who have been gunned down and murdered are named, but apparently they are not getting any reports. Moreover, seven of these were murdered this year, indicating that the situation is out of control. The following are the names of those murdered: Michael Kalyaki, Boniface Mbalibulha, Moses Ngulhube, Gideon Mwaka, Lameki Mupasula, Godwin Bwambale, Stephen Kule, one Kalyabolho, Sele Makario, Isaya Kirilhuhandi, Masereka Capacity Hannington, Amon Thembo Mupaghasya, Sunday Muhindo, Samson Sahambili, Muhindo Julius Baghendaye, Kule Eriab, Bwambale Heribe and a student called Masika Jacquelineine. All these were gunned down and are dead, but there are no reports nor were the culprits brought to book. 

Last month, a businesswoman was attacked at night, tortured and robbed of her Shs 5 million. When the Police dog was brought to the scene, it guided its handlers to the Army barracks and to some of the Army officers. What the in-charge of the barracks said was that the officers should ask the dog to make a statement –(Laughter)- because it had identified his officers as the suspects who tortured and robbed the woman. (Hon. Nebanda rose_) I will take the information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, but you were giving information.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: It is further information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he can give further information after you have finished.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I, therefore, wish to say that the matter has gone beyond what the residents of Kasese District can bear, and they are living under fear, because they do not know who will be the next victim. In a situation where no arrests are made and no reports are produced, they are appealing to the concerned leaders of this country to intervene in the matter. So, as the Rt Hon. Prime Minister considers the way forward on this matter, I would like him to have that at the back of his mind; that the Kasese people are crying out for help to this country and to the leadership of this nation. Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I just wanted to concede the point made by hon. Katuntu and emphasised by hon. Kiwanda, related to the killings that had been taking place in the areas listed. And it appears from colleagues who are rising to give points of information from Igara West and Kasese, and I presume even others in yellow -(Laughter)- I presume it is in the same spirit that they rise to give information. 

So, I wanted to concede that of course this response does not give details. What we thought we would present to Parliament is – you know, Mr Speaker, hon. Franca Akello is very selective in her choice of colours because right in front of her, hon. Mwiru is smartly dressed and of course the Opposition Chief Whip is predominantly in yellow and we welcome that; it is a good sign.

This response was a response to the point of these particular areas and as I said, the purpose of this response was to emphasise that the Police responded, arrested some people and engaged in community policing in the area, and that the situation was progressively normalising.

Now, what is coming out here – which is additional – is that there appears to be a problem beyond these areas. And, I will ask the Minister of Internal Affairs, who is the minister responsible, to come up with a comprehensive statement about these killings – what the state knows about them, the causes and what steps have been taken to take control of the situation.

I would like to assure you and the country that the state will do everything possible to prevent crime. All states are there to maintain law and order, and to enforce the rule of law. But in that statement there is a presumption that there will always be people who are in breach. So, what we need to be assured of is our capacity to prevent, and where it happens that crime has been committed, for us to act against those who have acted criminally and to impose punishment. 

So, we will come back to Parliament with a comprehensive statement about these particular areas and should any of you, honourable Members of Parliament, have information in line with what hon. Winifred Kiiza and others were saying, please feel free to pass this information to the Minister of Internal Affairs so that when we come we give a comprehensive picture on what is happening. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.                 

5.27
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Mr Speaker, sorry but I want to mention just one thing which is very important to me and to the whole country, I think. If you watched the news yesterday on NTV, where the Uganda Police was seen rescuing an infant from a pit latrine - I watched it myself and I was so moved, especially that I saw the Police officer exercising diligence and entering the pit latrine and rescuing that infant of about three months from the pit latrine.  

I felt it would be prudent to send compliments and appreciation to the officers who were involved in that rescue -(Applause)- and we would encourage the Police to keep showing such a civilian face. But it is worth it that they saved a life and I want to thank them on my behalf and on behalf of all those who believe in what I am saying. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can we conclude?

5.28
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and thank you colleagues for debating the Prime Minister’s statement. I have been listening to the responses, including hon. Katuntu’s submission on the current engagement between leaders and the Police. I come from a place which says that you do not keep a stick that beats your co-wife. And, yesterday and today in the press, we saw Police restraining themselves from spraying teargas on their wives who had serious issues. As an advocate of nation building, I have been at pain whenever I see leaders from whichever side on a confrontational path with the children of Uganda who are supposed to be serving this country. We have come from very far - when we lacked the personnel and the equipment. 

When we finally got the equipment and the personnel I now see a very uncomfortable scenario. I expected from either the side of the Opposition or from our side - I thought that the Opposition by now has issues to bring to the table - to Government - as to why there is that confrontation. For us to continue either defending the Police or the other side and justifying why they have the engagement, I think the Ninth Parliament is getting an indictment. 

We seem to be moving on a dangerous path. It may sound okay today, but as a nation builder, who is interested in seeing the Police of Uganda, really for the future - a lot of you seniors have enjoyed the greater part of your life and you are now enjoying part of your children’s life. I am more interested in a Police Force where my children - because even if I went now, I have no problem, God forbid; but for my children, we should be bringing on Table in this House, in an inter-parliamentary arrangement, a ceasefire. Whoever says what is happening between Police and the Opposition or the leaders is okay, is not sensitive and does not love this country.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, wouldn’t it be proper without just continuing to debate as if we are pro and against - because the Police are for Uganda. I have also been a victim of misguided policemen many times. I have been framed, I have been fought. These are innocent people being misused. I would want to see a Police Force serving this country.

 I would like to see that both the Leader of Government Business and the Leader of the Opposition helping this country, by coming up with dialogue between the leaders on either side. The role of the Police should not be what we are seeing today because very soon they will be painted to be one-sided. That is not their intention. They are not even enjoying - that is why their wives were complaining yesterday! We should not think that the policemen are enjoying what they are doing. They are shock absorbers right now. 

Can we provide leadership and value-for-money as Parliament and as Government and the Opposition; and look at this matter as a matter of the common good; as a matter of the security of the country and at the earliest? I have no problem if we see either Dr Kiiza Besigye - senior and retired - and others talking; or if it is between the Leader of the Opposition and the Leader of Government Business; but whatever is happening is ugly. It does not reflect well on our country. It does not give hope to my children and, Mr Speaker, can we do something immediately? Besides, when some of these policemen - as you have heard, the women are complaining; it shows there is a problem. I am saying it is not sustainable for us to continue using the methods we are using to do whatever we are doing and nobody should be providing for that.

Can I, therefore - and I thank in the interim, the Police for having given some temporary kind of peace. But it is not sustainable. So, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, can we get some sincere statements from the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition in the direction of harmony in this country? I am not comfortable. I feel cheated to be in this Parliament when teargas which was being used in South Africa during the Apartheid regime is being used against citizens! As leaders, we are paid in Parliament to dialogue.  We cannot be dialoguing when there are people on the street engaging with our own policemen. 

Mr Speaker, I would like a serious commitment from both the Leader of Government Business and the Leader of the Opposition, to tell us when and how we are going to initiate this dialogue on consensus building so that the money going into these expensive ventures without even paying for adequate welfare to the Police can be stopped and be addressed for the good of this country. I thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Constitution has a provision on a framework for consultation among and between political parties. That framework is there in the Constitution. Can we use this more protractedly to bring out all the unresolved issues on the table so that they can deal with them on that forum and agree on a way forward on how to handle the issues that seem to be outstanding, so that the rest of the innocent people do not get trapped into this kind of situation. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, would you like to explore that option? There is a provision, “National Conservative Forum for Political Parties” - I think it is under 74 – this might be a way of bringing people to talk at that level then an agreement can be reached on the way we are going to proceed from here.

5.37
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You rightly pointed out the issue of the consultative forum provided for under the Political Parties and Organisations Act. What is important to point out is that the political parties are enjoined to work under the consultative forum to raise issues that are sticky. 

Unfortunately, it is the ruling party that provides the leadership. I said it is unfortunate because since the time after election, the ruling party, apart from just giving names, has failed to convene any meeting and to demonstrate any commitment to the consultative forum. 

We in the FDC offered the vice-chair of this forum; the rest of the parties are very active members. But unfortunately, the NRM, the ruling party in this country, has sat and allowed the chair not to be functional. The forum exists only in name and it is not working. 

I also want to comment on the fears of hon. Biraahwa. First of all, we attempted to move in the direction of dialogue under an arrangement called the Inter-Party Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD). And it is the considered view of most of us in the Opposition political parties that we need a structured dialogue. I want to tell hon. Biraahwa that it is not enough to move into dialogue when you have not agreed on how the dialogue can take place. We have pleaded with the Executive and the NRM is going to be assuming chair of the IPOD – I think one week from now. What we would like them to do is to have a structured agenda for dialogue. It is not business as usual in a country where people are being sprayed with expired teargas; people are being shot anyhow; where we have all these fears and concerns; where party leaders cannot be allowed to go for a funeral; they are intercepted anywhere on the road – it is not business as usual!

So, we said let us sit down and agree on an agenda. But the NRM insists that we first go and enjoy a cup of tea – there are so many tears in this country that we cannot waste time enjoying a cup of tea and taking a photo opportunity. If the Prime Minister could commit himself so that we have an agreement that we will agree on the agenda, agree on a facilitator; I think all of us – I can speak authoritatively for us in the FDC - are committed to this dialogue; but it is Government that is shy and, therefore, precipitating what we see.

For hon. Biraahwa, some of us are sheer victims in this whole thing. If you cannot be allowed to leave your home when you want to go and bury an in-law of a colleague in Kasese, what else would you want that person to say? The last time Dr Besigye was intercepted, he was on his way to a funeral in Kasese. He was not even on his way to Kampala, because sometimes they argue here that if he comes to Kampala, the city will be in chaos; as if they are too weak to maintain this city. Why are you in Government after all if you cannot maintain the city; and you fear only one man walking from Kasangati to the city! 

Now the man was moving in the opposite direction; he was going to Kasese and you were following him. What type of regime is this that is so scared of its own people; so scared of shadows and everything? Why do you have the mandate over this city to begin with? So, if you are thinking about issues to discuss, do we even have to discuss basic freedoms like leaving your house and going for a funeral?

Lastly, Mr Speaker, may I ask the Prime Minister to account for the people that are being held without being produced in courts of law. They are held in the violent criminal place in Kireka. I read these names about a month ago to this Parliament, but these people are still there. They have been badly beaten; and they have been tortured. 

They were arrested on the 3rd October and they include the following people:

1.	Ndiwalana Fred
2.	Mawanda Samuel
3.	Nyombi Simon
4.	Kato Richard
5.	Kato Suleiman
6.	Muyanja Michael
7.	Kyeswa Ronald
8.	Sebuma Ramathan

These people were badly tortured and this Government continues to try to describe Panda Gari or whatever it is; whether you call it Panda Gari or any other name, it is evil; it is wicked; it is unlawful! How can you claim that you went to the bush to fight against such activities and you are doing the same things to Ugandans? You are torturing them. If they have broken the law, why don’t you take them to the arbiter; take them to the courts of law? Why do you keep them –(Interruption)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: In addition to the list you have read, I would like the Prime Minister also to account for the following people. I am a representative of Butambala which is the Mecca of Muslims. And, it is on record in earlier statements that a number of Muslims are being held and killed by state organs in cold blood. For example, a one, Saidi Lutaaya was a resident of Kitintale in Kawempe. He was arrested at the Old Taxi Park in 2007. He was – I do not know how to call it; but he was murdered. His body was deposited in Mulago by State JAT. The family has been able to obtain a death certificate, but the body and the burial site are nowhere to be seen. 

Another one is Isaac Kiggundu. This one was a resident of Wakiso. He was killed by state operatives – by the way, by that time you were the Minister for Security – on 18 October 2007. Another one was called Abdul Semugenyi. This one was arrested in Ntoroko – all these are Muslims! He was a business person from Kasese and was killed in July 2006. This was by state operatives and there is grave concern among the Muslim community – I can substantiate, and if you want a copy of the death certificate obtained by the family, I have it and can lay it on Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thought that we had agreed that if you have this list, it should be supplied and then a comprehensive statement is made. This is a new framework that we are trying to develop, and as the Rt Hon. Prime Minister said, let us have all the lists and then we have responses to every single matter that has been raised.  Can we leave it at this? Can the honourable member from Serere wind up, please? She stood down on information.

MS ALASO: I thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I hope and pray that there will be an answer that can at least provide relief to the families of the missing persons.

Mr Speaker, I was getting diverted by hon. Byabagambi and I do not know whether he can keep quiet a little so that we proceed. The other two issues that I would like to point out for the Prime Minister to comment on in relation to this is the issue that has been in the media. I think this is important. We are at pain and I believe Ugandans are.  About the case of this girl that was - and it seems to be true now because I hear there was some form of intervention – raped by 12 UPDF and has been taken back to die in Moroto [Hon. Members: “Shame!”] 

This country needs a statement. We need a level of accountability by Government on the life of this girl and as we investigate, the state should have the capacity. I hope she does not disappear like the other one who was being shaved by soldiers in Gulu and she died. We hope that you can retrieve this girl from where she has been condemned to die in Moroto and bring her back to the referral hospital so that she can be treated. (Applause)

My last thought, Mr Speaker, is that I want to caution Government; there are political issues that should be dealt with politically. When you make every issue an issue for the gun, an issue of teargas or treason, you lose the point. I think that, as a lay woman, I want to advise you that policing becomes difficult when you lose the point. 

I would like to tell Government that even now where I come from in Teso, the RDCs and the DISOs are masquerading that there are rebels and rebel groups being formed in Teso, Katakwi and wherever. We know that there are no rebels. We know that these are creations of the state living in panic to try and victimise some people. I think that this is wrong and you must stop it and deal with people the way the issues require to be dealt with. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I made reference to a constitutional provision and I was looking for it; it is actually Article 71(2): “Parliament shall by law prescribe a code of conduct for political organisations and political parties, and provide for the establishment of a National Consultative Forum for political parties and organisations with such functions as Parliament may prescribe.” And this law has been passed and so there is framework for this consultation. Can we use that framework? Yes, the honourable member for Ruhama.

MRS MUSEVENI: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to say that since the Prime Minister had pledged to go and work with the Ministry of Internal Affairs to try and get to the bottom of all these concerns that are being raised here today, I thought that that should be sufficient for now and he should be given the opportunity to do that so that he can come back to this House and give a sufficient report. But I do not know whether it is necessary for us to continue to read these lists because he is going to come to talk about this anyway. That is what I wanted to say. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are absolutely right, honourable minister. That is what I said; I said if there are those lists, let them be submitted so that in the response, all those matters are dealt with comprehensively and then you can have a debate. You can write to the Clerk and then they will be forwarded to Internal Affairs by the Clerk’s Office. 

I mean we are colleagues here; the minister sits here; and so, if there are documents, you just bring the matter to the attention of the minister. The Minister of State for Internal Affairs is here. So, can we wrap up this particular business and then we see how to move forward? 

5.52
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to also thank the Prime Minister for his response and in particular his qualified apology to the lady that was assaulted by the Police, but also briefly to state as follows: 

I appreciate where the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is coming from because perhaps, he has not walked this journey and so has no idea of its treacherous nature, which is why maybe, he at times trivialises rather serious matters of misrule and brutality against the people. 

The Prime Minister observed on page 5 that in some cases, the leadership of the Opposition behaves as though they are above the law, and he was justifying the house arrest of the leaders of the Opposition by Police. 

Mr Speaker, I was a victim of this for over five days; the Police sleeping and parking at my gate; checking the school bags of my children going to school as if I was hiding in one of the bags because they were allegedly looking for me; and as though my children were carrying weapons! For me, this is very serious. In fact, my children have a low opinion of the Police because they know that they are children.

On Christmas Day last year, I was driving from the constituency with my young family and I was intercepted at Lukaya by four patrol vehicles. We were held for over six hours with no explanation – on Christmas Day! So, somebody comes here as if these are ordinary things or matters because on Christmas Day, somebody perceives me to be carrying my family to the bush to fight Government, perhaps! 

Mr Speaker, I would like to invite the Prime Minister to appreciate what it means to offer leadership. For the government to hide under national security and to continue terrorising the Opposition and trying to fight the legitimate Opposition and to hide their unending appetite for power by hiding under security, is most unfortunate! 

I would like to invite the Prime Minister to come clean on these matters, but most importantly, to use these institutions like Police and the Army lawfully. . They have over the years abused Ugandans, but Ugandans are forgiving and patient. 

Just about last week on Friday, the Police Commander in charge of Kampala Metropolitan was all over the media passing out boda boda cyclists as security personnel. I actually sent him a text message and told him, “My brother, I think you are actually in the gutters now. You are calling these people security and informers; you are parading them in the media and saying, now you, you will be in charge of these people. Why do you endanger innocent Ugandans going about their business?”  

These are very serious matters, and like hon. Alice Alaso observed, we are willing to engage with the government on matters of dialogue; but principle dialogue and not because we are being “tear-gassed” into dialogue; that would never happen. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a legal framework which has nothing to do with teargas. There is a law. 

MR MPUUGA: Exactly. I am aware, Mr Speaker, and that is why I am saying we are willing to engage in dialogue that is structured, but not to engage in dialogue because we are so scared of a paranoid regime; because it is part of the law and we are willing to respect it, but we are inviting the state because the state is powerful; it would instead use its power to tame its appetite and speak to the people of Uganda. We shall be supportive, Mr Speaker. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Please comment very briefly and we conclude this matter.

5.58
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, I want to thank my colleagues for their response. I really want to comment on two things. First, I want to repeat what I said that –(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: I see the Rt Hon. Prime Minister trying to wind up as if we have handled these issues as we should. We have talked about many issues. Is he trying to wind up, and is it procedurally right, Mr Speaker. Could you please guide us?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is no doubt that the matter is important. But we have taken three hours on this subject and there has to be a way of moving forward –[HON. MEMEBER: “There was only one!”]- Yes, that means that very one item was very important. It couldn’t have taken three hours if it was not important and Members have been contributing on this. 

If there is need, we can continue with this debate another time. But for now, I think let the Prime Minister respond specifically on those issues and then we see how to move forward. It is 6 O’clock and we have not even touched anything on the Order Paper. 

MR SABIITI: Order!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order to the Speaker. 

MR SABIITI: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am the one who has just spoken.

MR SABIITI: Okay, procedure, if I can put it that way. (Laughter) The Leader of the Opposition listed a number of issues. There is the issue of the Democratic Republic of Congo. There is the issue of security, which we have touched. The other day we advised that the Prime Minister should go, prepare and come up with a detailed report on all issues, so that when he comes here, he gives a report and Parliament is given the opportunity to discuss all the issues. 

I am at pains to see the Speaker trying to limit the debate of such great importance. The issue of Congo is crucial to us, particularly for us who are at the border, and we would like to contribute. Could you please guide the House as to how we should move?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I was very clear on what I said. I said if it is necessary, we can continue with this debate tomorrow or even the next day. But we need to handle other business as well. First, we have agreed on two fundamental issues: The issue of the Constitutional provision and provisions of the Political Parties and Organisations Act. Secondly, we have also agreed on the issue of the killings and all these other mistreatment issues and people who are in detention. We have agreed that a comprehensive report would be presented to the House. 

There are certainly outstanding issues. But can we also conclude; we let the Prime Minister respond to this and if we continue with the outstanding issues, the debate is not going to be closed. But we need to also handle some other business. As Speaker, I know where the pressures are on the Order Paper, but we have spent over three hours on this particular item. I need to regulate and see how we deal with this business also; otherwise, it would now not look like I am helping the House to move in a proper way. 

I am now going to propose that you make some responses and then we move to the Order Paper. Tomorrow, this matter will come back and then you will proceed on the basis of that. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Some quick responses. I know that some of our colleagues here have been arrested and either not charged before court or when charged, the prosecution has been withdrawn. This is not the same as tramped up charges. Tramped up charges means where a case is fraudulently devised; where things are clearly fabricated; and it is he or she who claims that the charge was fabricated to prove it. 

In most of these cases, to the best of my knowledge, the Police have acted on suspicion that the individuals have acted contrary to the law. [Mr Odonga Otto: “Like in your bank.”] You know, this is the House for people with some brains in their heads; not like you. When -[Mr Mwiru: “Order.”]- I know someone who doesn’t have -

MR MWIRU: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. As Members of Parliament, we are supposed to use parliamentary language. Is it in order for the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to refer to statements made by one of our colleagues and say the House is only for Members with brains? Is he in order to make that reference when we know that whoever is in this House has brains and actually deserves to be in this House.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think the Rt Hon. Prime Minister was confirming that all of us here in the House have brains. And if there is a Member that has been pointed out that he does not have brains – are you the one so that I can make the order? What I heard was the presumption that all of us have brains. So, I am not aware of any Member who does not have brains here. But if it was used that some people do not have brains, that would be unparliamentary. But what I heard was that we are supposed to have brains. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Therefore, I responded in that sense. It is not true to conclude that each time the state withdraws a charge against an offender, it means that was a trumped up charge or that the charge had been fraudulently devised. It may be that indeed the state didn’t have enough information or came to a conclusion that there isn’t sufficient evidence against the individual. This does not only happen in our jurisdiction here; it happens all over the world as you know and of course especially hon. Abdu Katuntu knows that.

On the question of NTV, I would like to say that the duty of the media, whether public or private, is to present facts objectively. They may make comments and give their opinions, no problem. But when you are making a presentation of what happened, by all means, whether you are a private media or not, you have a duty, even to your listeners, to tell them objectively, the facts as they are.

In that regard, I would like to say how sorry I am to hear the story as told by hon. Jimmy Akena and others. But I would have been happier if he had given us this information. However, I am glad he has said it now, but I still encourage him to give us more details so that we can follow up this matter to its logical conclusion.

On the issue raised by hon. Alice Alaso, who unfortunately has gone away; I would like to say that I am afraid she got the point completely wrong. I am saying this because the facts are – of course as she said, there is a consultative forum established by law - the PPOA. This forum is fully constituted and it is chaired by Hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, and the vice-chairperson is Mr Amanya Mushega. All the parties are represented; they have held many meetings. I have received minutes of those meetings and I know that the consultative forum is fully constituted. [HON. MEMBERS: “Why the tension?”] 

Point number two -(Interjections)– no, she was saying that the ruling party has frustrated this effort. Anyway, my point number two is, hon. Alice Alaso and I are not only good friends; we are more than friends -(Laughter)– because we are partners in promoting dialogue across the political divide. She, I and others have signed; hon. Kyanjo signed; and I think because of that his immediate neighbour to his left was not happy.

Mr Speaker, we signed and established what is called the IPOD, which in full is: Interparty Organisation for Dialogue. The whole idea was that we should be in a forum with the mechanisms that promote dialogue.

I also want to inform the House that when it was the duty of NRM to chair this IPOD, because chairmanship is rotational; after every three months a party chairs. So, there are times when, for example, Jeema  or CP chairs. But when NRM chaired the IPOD, I did so on behalf of the party. During that time we agreed that we should organise a meeting of the political leaders of members of IPOD.

I requested the President to put aside a whole day for this meeting, and he did so. But on the eve of that meeting, the FDC announced that they would not sit with a ‘killer’; and that they will never sit with President Museveni. And this was not the first time the FDC did this –(Interjections)– let me finish; I will give way to. (Interjection) Mr Speaker, I happen to be in the full know of what happened because I was the chairman that time. Anyway, what I am saying is that this was not the first time FDC acted that way.

In July 2006, immediately after elections, the President convened a meeting of all the political party leaders who had presented candidates, and all the parties – DP came and was led by the Party President; UPC came, also led by the Party President. CP, JEEMA and FDC objected to this arrangement. They made a public statement that they did not want to share any platform or dialogue with us. So, I am surprised that hon. Mathias Mpuuga says that I have not crossed.  Now –(Interruptions)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, thank you so much. I would also like to thank the Prime Minister for giving way. The information I would like to give to this country through this House is that for both meetings, we asked the NRM and President Museveni who convened the first one, to give us an agenda. But to date, they have never given the agenda for that meeting.

So, is it the view of the Prime Minister that we are too unserious that we should be running to a meeting even when we don’t know its agenda? Is it your view, Mr Prime Minister?

What agenda did we have for the second meeting? We proposed to you an agenda, but to which you did not respond. So, how would you expect us to come and discuss without an agenda? I want to put it to you that you have not been very serious on this issue of dialogue.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, for the benefit of members who were not there because she knows better, this agenda was drawn. You see, in IPOD, we have various levels. There is what we call the Secretary Generals’ Forum –(Interjections)– just a second. Then we have what we call the summit of the leaders.  I can tell you that I did chair the Secretary Generals’ Council and all parties including FDC, were present. In that meeting we drew up an agenda for that meeting; it was drawn. If you want, I will bring the minutes of that meeting and lay before this House; that is a fact and I am going to do so.

So, when we are speaking in Parliament we are responsible people - Members of Parliament, national leaders; we must speak the truth and for someone to stand here and say I trivialise things because I have no experience! Hon. Mpuuga must have been born when I was already experienced; obviously. 

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, you clearly cited the article in this Constitution, and Hon Alaso referred to the section in the party law. What the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is talking about is an arrangement outside the law. It is not in conformity with the law. They have never called such a meeting in accordance with the law passed by this Parliament. Should the Rt Hon. Minister, therefore, continue misleading this House that we had a well structured meeting in accordance with the law of this country, and that other parties or FDC have refused? This is contrary to what you are actually guiding and could you guide us, Mr Speaker

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we were suggesting a way forward. I have not refreshed my memory on what we passed in the Political Parties and Organisations Act; I do not recall the actual provisions relating to this. I am sure there are provisions for other mechanisms that can be adopted to deal with situations that may arise. Anything that could bring leadership of political parties together, I think it would be a positive thing. The one within the framework of the law was supposed to be chaired by the Chairman of the Electoral Commission - I do not recall very well. I am sure there are some frameworks that can derive from that. What works is what counts; if it doesn’t work it will never count in the end. 

So, we need to begin thinking ingeniously to create avenues where all these matters can be brought to the table. So, there was a framework and a signed agreement to which signatures were appended; that could also be a meaningful framework within which to operate if it was signed by the parties, as I am being informed now. I do not know the full details so I am not able to give full guidance on this. But if there is a framework within the law that has created another framework for dialogue I would not see a problem. But the spirit that we should encourage is that spirit which takes any opportunity to get people to talk because this is Uganda at jubilee! The steps we take in the next 50 years must decisively harmonise our focus on how we are going to proceed in the next 50 years.  

So, I think mutual respect and tolerance must come to play so that we move forward together as a people who have a common destiny. There is no way we can change a lot of things here. For example, we cannot change our being Ugandans. We are here and we shall die here as Ugandans. 

Somebody was telling me the other day that, the day you were born, the only thing you wait for is death. So, it is in your interest to prepare on how you wait for that death to come. That is why we go to school and engage in other activities in preparation, knowing that at least you are comfortable when you wait for that event to come and also the life thereafter.  

So, let us use any opportunity to get this country and its leaders talking; let us not ignore any opportunity that is made available to us. That would be my statement on what you have raised, honourable member. Let us take any opportunities, as long as they can move us forward, and embrace them with open hands. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you Mr Speaker. I would like to assure colleagues in the Opposition – and especially hon. Odonga, because he was not born then - that the NRM Government’s hallmark of managing political contradictions is through dialogue. Dialogue, dialogue, dialogue! That’s what we do.

MR WAFULA: Thank you Mr Speaker and Rt Hon. Prime Minister for giving way. Outside this House I speak for FDC, and that’s why I am allowed to sit on all organs of the party. Sorry, I will get the guidance and I speak sensibly. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister has said that FDC issued a statement that they do not want dialogue and they cannot talk to the “killers” – NRM. He said we stated that twice; when they called us for tea at Nakasero, and when they were supposed to organise a meeting – an IPOD - chaired by the Chairman of NRM.

What I know is that FDC is open for dialogue and it was a decision taken by the National Delegates’ Conference in 2005, and by NEC; and all organs of the party are for a national dialogue; but a structured national dialogue; not only for parties, but for all stakeholders including NGOs, religious leaders and professionals. That is what is standing.   

I would like, therefore, for the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to substantiate his statement that FDC issued a statement that it cannot talk to “killers”. If he cannot, I ask him to withdraw that statement, because it is not true. 
 
MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, everybody knows, because this was in the public domain. First, that this meeting did not take place; that’s a fact and you confirmed it yourself; hon. Alaso confirmed it. And, she said the reason was because there was no agenda. But that the meeting did not take place is acknowledged. Secondly, this was public and FDC issued a statement that it was not coming and gave its reasons, and one of the reasons was precisely that. So, when we talk about dialogue, therefore, and FDC -(Interruption)- no, no, I am responding to what he raised, and an order can only come after one order has been responded to. No, let me finish this.

So, what I am saying is consistent with the FDC position. I am surprised that hon. Mpuuga can say the kind of things he says in light of the public statements he has been making -(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand on a point of procedure. As Parliament of Uganda, we have our Rules of Procedure, and we conduct our business in that respect. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister was put on a point of order and he refuted it. As far as I am concerned, it is you, Mr Speaker, to guide on that issue rather than the honourable member who has been put on the point of order. 

Is it procedurally right that the Prime Minister surpasses your powers as the Speaker of this House to guide us whether to take the point of order or not, so that we are aware that he is not abiding by our Rules of Procedure? Is he procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When a Member stands to raise a point of order, the Speaker looks for confirmation that it is indeed a point of order because sometimes we raise these points when we just want to make a statement. So, I looked at the honourable member to confirm that she was actually rising on a point of order, but she did not repeat.

The authority to allow or disallow a point of order - I cannot even disallow a point of order, and nobody else can. If a matter has been raised as a point of order, I can only allow it. I don’t have a choice to reject it or not.

So, if the honourable member had confirmed that she was rising on a point of order, she would have raised that order. It would not matter what the Rt Hon. Prime Minister would have said thereafter. Please close.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the Prime Minister of Uganda, Rt Hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi, to allege statements on the Forum for Democratic Change, and to even say that we in the FDC said that the reason we did not meet with the NRM was because they are “killers” yet if we want to say that the NRM has some killers, we can say that without mincing words because we will be able to say it when we want to say it?

The truth is that for that particular meeting, we did not refuse to go for the meeting because of the killer issues. We would be looking for another forum to sort out when we think the NRM are killers or has killed people. Is he, therefore, in order to import another reason, which we did not use for that particular meeting, when we actually told him we needed an agenda? Is he in order, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the difficulty I have is I don’t know what the truth is. So, I cannot rule on these basically factual matters that happened in the absence of the Speaker. That is exactly what he has said. He said it was in the public media and it was one of the reasons stated. He has stated that, but now, whether he is lying or not, is a matter I cannot rule over for sure. Hon. Alaso, that was a ruling. Do you want to comment on the ruling?

MS ALASO: No, I appreciate your guidance Mr Speaker and I would, therefore, like to put the record correct. The record for posterity is that we said and we continue to say that if there is going to be any dialogue in this country, it must be structured. The agenda must be agreed upon before we sit down and dialogue, and then we should have a facilitator and a mechanism. 

You see, I also want to be on record and tell the NRM that they have been talking to killers. Yes, there are people in this country who have been on record to have killed. You have even talked to some people from the LRA. The other time you paraded somebody in court called Kamdulu. So, you have been talking to killers. So for us, whether they are killers or not in the NRM, we are willing to talk to them as long as the agenda is known. Thank you.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, it is abundantly clear that both sides, Government and the Opposition are not dialoguing. Not by the constitutional instruction on which you guided, not by the political parties instruction, and not even by the other innovation of the IPOD. Actually, what they are doing currently is what they are supposed to discuss there, but they are now taking the time on the Order Paper. 

Can I request, Mr Speaker, that as you guided, we give the two sides time to report back to this House that they are going to follow the instruction of the Constitution, have a structured dialogue and come and report back so that we save our policemen from doing political work because that is where we are going if we don’t address this problem.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, arising out of the debate concerning the lynching and mob justice, just last week I saved innocent people around Kalinabiri from lynching. The same panga group had stopped some women crossing between Kalinabiri and going down to Kigoowa. The public wanted to lynch a man who came from a construction site as they thought he had the equivalent of a panga when actually, I had earlier met the other ones running. 

How do we avoid mob justice? How can the country be put on alert that even in this panic, people should not kill their debtors, their co-wives and their neighbours in land conflicts under the guise of ‘wuuyo’? You remember the Amin time of ‘omuyaaye wuuyo’ and you were killed. How can we put the country on alert because we are about to lose innocent citizens under the guise of that panic? 

Mr Speaker, I seek that the Prime Minister clarifies that as we hope that there will be maximum restraint. Even in that panic, people should not seek out somebody with their money and come and say, ‘omubbi wuuyo’ because that is what is about to happen. The boda bodas are ready to do that kind of mob justice.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Just to respond to hon. Mukitale, of course we who are speaking here are part of that entity he is referring to because the parties, and the political divides in the country are very well represented here, and what you are seeing here is what is in the country.

What we have tried to do, as a party and as Government, is to try as hard as we can to promote dialogue. I am surprised that my friends are not able to stand and defend the position, which they have taken. Hon. Alaso has not only taken a position, but she actually wrote to me and I have her nice handwriting with me. It is a fact that –(Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter being discussed is certainly important – there is no doubt about it. However, you guided earlier that the Prime Minister should make brief responses and we go back to the Order Paper. Instead we have now opened up the inter-party dialogue here. Mr Speaker, shouldn’t we now bring this matter to a close and we proceed with the Order Paper? I seek your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we need to move on to the Order Paper now. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I will not respond – you know, Mr Speaker, sometimes I find it difficult for people to make allegations and they reamain unresponded to because they remain on record. And when you do not respond it is assumed that you are in agreement. I appreciate the point made by hon. Magyezi, but there are accusations that have been made to the effect that the security forces of Uganda are killing people. Hon. Alaso talked of a case of an unnamed girl who was raped by 12 UPDF soldiers; these are serious accusations, incredibly serious. So, you cannot say that I should not respond to them. Maybe for today, to go by your guidance, I can stop here then we come later because I certainly must respond to these things. And it is neither fair nor right that anyone should say that serious and grave allegations against the state should be made in this House and they go unresponded to on account that allegations were given time to be made but there was no time for response. That is not proper. I just want to say that, Mr Speaker, I will come back - maybe tomorrow or next week - and I will certainly make a response because I think we have a right of response. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Prime Minister. That is exactly what I said; deal with preliminary issues and then respond to other issues substantially when the opportunity is accorded to you in a more structured way. 

Honourable members, we have two more items on a subject related to Kyambogo; two petitions were presented to the House. The committee sat and made some determinations on some of the issues. 

MRS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I thank you for guiding us appropriately so far. You have requested the Prime Minister together with the Minister of Internal Affairs to begin receiving communications from Members on the persons who have been murdered in their areas. But you have not told us the limit within which this should be done and possibly when we should next expect the Minister of Internal Affairs to comprehensively report back to the House on the findings. How should we take it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How much time will be required for this in order for us to get a comprehensive statement on the subject raised? This will avoid us coming back here and then have outstanding issues again.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, obviously, Mr Speaker, it all depends on what we get on our plate. If we get reports from every constituency where these killings are happening - it will depend on when we shall get them. Unless we set a time limit, for example, that we should get the reports in the next one week, then we will respond in the next one month. (Hon. Kiwanda rose_) Just a second, please. So, what we will do is – I had already asked the Minister of Internal Affairs to give us greater details on the matters I made mention of in the statement - Mityana and Wakiso districts, and in other places -   there Police has already acted;  and we can do this in a reasonable time of say one month.. Then for those reports which will come later, it will depend on their magnitude and when they come. But I just want to assure colleagues that we will give them maximum attention and we will handle them with the urgency they require because this is life.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we say that all those Members with issues of this nature should file them with the Internal Affairs minister by the end of the week?  Please, we are trying to make a way forward here. And in what I am proposing, I am trying to deal with all the guidance issues that will arise out of this matter so that we find way forward. What timeframe would you need for Members to submit these details to the Minister of Internal Affairs? 

MR BWAMBALE-BIHANDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to be guided: Is the Minister of Internal Affairs – after we have given him information of the names of people who have been murdered in cold blood – is he going to investigate and prosecute these murderers? What exactly is he going to do with the information we are going to give him? I thought it would be simpler and easier for us, through you, Mr Speaker, to direct the Minister of Internal Affairs, to select a special team of criminal investigators who will go to the field and carry out investigations about the people who were killed. Because, in some murder cases, investigations started but some files were stolen from the Police purportedly being brought to the headquarters here and nothing took place thereafter.

Mr Speaker, this is a very serious matter. In Kasese, this year alone, through coldblooded murders, we have lost about 12 innocent people and the Police are not serious about investigations. And yet these murders have been carried out by serial killers. The way the murders were carried out is the same; they call you by phone and when you get out of your house, they shoot you. The following day they call another person and when he gets out of his house they shoot him. People report to Police and they do not take any action at all. So, I want to be guided, is the Minister of Internal Affairs going to investigate and prosecute these murderers after listing them? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is exactly what I have just said. You said there are twelve people, and I am sure they have names? Can you start with those particular ones, so that we see what timeframe to give to the honourable minister to respond to those pathetic issues. If there are other matters we will handle them as they come. Otherwise, what are we supposed to do with this now?

MR KIWANDA: Mr Speaker, my fear is one. We are likely to turn all Members of Parliament into Police officers, to go into the villages, investigate and bring the information, which will brings us a lot of problems. Government has its machinery. Ours is that we have got a concern. It is now upon Government to go on the ground, with the Ministry of internal Affairs, using the Police and the GISOs. But now you want Members of Parliament to go and we write the report and bring it here. We brought this to the attention of Government, and now it is upon Government - we are not part of the Executive; we are the Legislature. We cannot say we are -(Interruption)   

MR ODONGA OTTO: Actually, I would not advise any Member of Parliament to write to the Minister of Internal Affairs because it is already case law as noted in the case of Ibin Mohammed v the Republic. You have to go and give evidence, because some of the issues you are raising would be new to the Police. Yes. Yesterday, we failed to bury somebody in Pader because there was no post-mortem report. The Police refused until a doctor came, which means all over the country the cause of death has to be established before burial. 

So, the information I am giving is that let the Ministry of Internal Affairs just go back to their records and establish all such kinds of death, because they have been blocking burials without post-mortem reports, and then you come and report to the state. Because the fact of even merely reporting about someone’s death as a Member of Parliament, you are actually endangering yourself because you do not know the person you are talking about. So, the minister should rather do his job using the records available other than putting MPs in such a situation. 

MR KIWANDA: Yes, Mr Speaker, that is the only fear I have. If I bring names here and you do not know the cause or whose relative they are, and all that. And I know Government has its machinery; it has the Police and all these organs up to the village level. So, I would request Government - (Interjections)- no! What we are demanding for is, when you look at the statement which was given, there is some information which is still lacking; because even for the Prime Minister to come on the Floor and admit that there is what we call karyamusayi which we are not sure of. It may not be there. It could be just a gimmick. What we want Government to say is, “These are just rumours; these are probably wrangles within the family; probably it is caused by the land issues in the villages.” Something like that. It should come out clearly from Government, but it should not be Members of Parliament, because if some of them are our campaigners, then how? We cannot do that. It should be done by Government and not by Members of Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, there are cases, for example, the ones listed by the honourable Member for Kasese District that those people were killed and the files have disappeared. Where do they start from if they do not even have a name? Where do they start from? They just go and say, “Oh, in Kasese, there was a file that disappeared here; can someone volunteer to give us the file?” There has to be something to link. That is what we are saying. 

The point is, give some clues, which you have, We are not saying everybody should go to Internal Affairs - like the honourable Member for Kasese has given names here. She has given names here and the honourable member has said there are 12 people. Those ones, please, so that they start with those ones and then they go on with their own other investigations. What is really wrong with this one? Hon. Gilbert Bukenya the other day listed names. They can start with those ones. 

The deploying of a special investigation unit is administrative for the Ministry of Internal Affairs to handle. But can we get something on which we can ask the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Leader of Government Business to start preparing the report and report back to the House on this? Basically that is what I am saying because names have been read. 

The honourable member for Butambala was reading names and post-mortem reports. You do not know who has them. Can we, at this level of Parliament and at the level of the minister, give those names that we know and then let them start with those ones and we move forward? Can we deal with this, honourable Members? That is why I was suggesting that can we give up to the end of the week for those who have specific cases to bring then to the attention of the minister? It will not be required. For example, you go to the constituency then they tell you, “These people are dead; we do not know why they died.” Then that is all you do. It is up to them now to go and find out the causes and things like that, but at least they will have some information. 

The Speaker is speaking, honourable Member for Busongora North. So, this will help us move to the next - Please! That is exactly what I am trying to do now. Can I finish? If you are not satisfied then you can rise, but not in the middle of my statement?

Honourable members, it looks like the rules are now not being applied very well because if it is arising from the matter that it is 10 minutes to 7 o’clock we can understand that. But I want to have a way of concluding this matter that gives us a way forward. That is what I am proposing. 

I am now proposing that by the end of the week we should have these matters done with, the information exchanged with the Prime Minister or Internal Affairs, and then by Thursday of next week we expect a report. Yes? We expect a report. Whether the report is going to say, “We have gathered this and there is still this to do,” a report should be brought substantially to the House so that we can move forward from there. Is that fair? 

HON. MEMBERS: Aye. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is so ordered. 

Now there are these two items. They are two lengthy petitions. I received them myself and forwarded them to the relevant committee. They are on Kyambogo. The committee has handled them and the committee has prepared a report. In view of the time now, can we just receive the report of the committee from the chairperson and then we shall move on to the discussions tomorrow? Is the Chairperson ready? Okay, next item.     

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT BY THE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS ON A PETITION BY STAFF OF KYAMBOGO UNIVERSITY ON THE ALLEGED MISMANAGEMENT OF UNIVERSITY AFFAIRS BY THE VICE-CHANCELLOR
AND
 PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT BY THE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS ON A PETITION BY STUDENTS OF KYAMBOGO UNIVERSITY ON THE RE-OPENING,    STUDENTS’ WELFARE AND MISMANAGEMENT OF KYAMBOGO UNIVERSITY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Chairperson, you can focus on the executive summary and just the recommendations so that Members have time to go through the report and we can start tomorrow.  Thank you.

For the record I think you should lay a copy of the full report on the Table before you proceed and then go on and read the executive summary, if you can, so that we can move properly.

6.54
THE CHAIRPERSON, THE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Sylvia Ssinabulya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to lay on Table, a report of the Committee on Education and Sports on a petition by staff of Kyambogo University on the mismanagement of the university affairs by the Vice-Chancellor, which was tabled on 4 September 2012 by hon. Yona Musinguzi, MP Ntungamo District, and consequently referred to the committee for consideration. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the full text of that report and they should be reflected in the records of Parliament. Proceed.

MS SSINABULYA: Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on Table a report of the Committee on Education and Sports on a petition by the students of Kyambogo University, which was tabled by hon. Joseph Ssewungu on 5 September 2012, and consequently referred to the Committee on Education and Sports for consideration. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and the full text should be reflected in the record of Parliament. That is the second report. Are you going to handle them – because it is the same subject basically; one coming from the students and one coming from the staff of Kyambogo University. 

MS SSINABULYA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee considered the petition according to Article 90 of the Constitution, and Rules 147 and 177 of the Parliament Rules of Procedure, and now begs to report. 

Methodology 

We interfaced with: Members of the University Council; the staff association of Kyambogo University; and with the administrative staff of Kyambogo University, led by the University Secretary. We also conducted an in-depth review of the petition, submissions by various stakeholders and previous reports. Most notably, a report of the Cabinet committee on the unrest and strike of Kyambogo University dated 5 March 2007, and a report on investigation into corruption and mismanagement of Kyambogo University, PS 123207 by the Inspectorate of Government, June 2009.

Mr Speaker, all the information we received plus the minutes of the committee and all the submissions of the witnesses are hereby laid on Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It will be difficult for us to capture them; maybe you need to read one by one for us to capture them properly.

MS SSINABULYA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the minutes of the Committee on Education and Sports. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes.

MS SSINABULYA: Mr Speaker, I also beg to lay on Table the response by the Vice-Chancellor of Kyambogo University, Prof. Isaiah Omolo Ndiege on submission of the documents that had been requested for by the committee. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS SSINABULYA: Mr Speaker, I also beg to lay on Table a response to Kyambogo University Staff Petition to Parliament by the Vice-Chancellor Prof. Isaiah Omolo Ndiege. I beg to lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that a second one? Let the records capture that.

MS SSINABULYA: Mr Speaker, I also beg to lay on Table minutes of the special meeting of Council held on 26 August 2012 at Hotel Africana. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS SSINABULYA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the response to the petition by the association union on the Kyambogo University strike. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS SSINABULYA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a copy of the letter from the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education and Sports, to the Secretary Uganda Land Commission titled, “Your request for a no objection to allocate industrial land on Kyambogo Road, Kyambogo Industrial Area”. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who is the recipient of that letter?

MS SSENABULYA: It is addressed to the Secretary Uganda Land Commission from the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education and Sports. It was written on 14th June 2012, and it is titled, “Your request for a no objection to allocate industrial land on Kyambogo Road, Kyambogo Industrial Area” I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that letter.

MS SSINABULYA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a copy of the letter from the University Secretary to the Chairman, Kyambogo University Council, tabled 21 March 2012, and titled, “Signing of the staff tribunal regulations”. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that letter.

MS SSINABULYA: Mr Speaker, I also beg to lay on Table a document from the Office of the Chairperson of Council titled, “The situation at Kyambogo University in the last three weeks” dated 6 September 2012. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS SSINABULYA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a copy of the Kyambogo University Staff petition. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The staff petition was already laid before the House; by the time it was sent to the committee, it was already laid. 

MS SSINABULYA: Mr Speaker, I also beg to lay on Table a document addressed to the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament of Uganda and sent to the Committee on Education and Sports by the Speaker titled, “The untold ugly side of the Kyambogo situation” dated, 5 September 2012. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was that a letter? 

MS SSINABULYA: It was a letter to the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament of Uganda. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who signed it?

MS SSINABULYA: It was signed by a one Ojangole Maxwell from Kyambogo University. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS SSINABULYA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a response from the University Secretary, Kyambogo University, Mr Sam S. Akorimo addressed to the Clerk to Parliament: “Attention to Ms Judith Taaka, the Clerk to the Committee on Education and Sports. It is in response to the documents that had been requested for by the committee. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS SSINABULYA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a number of annexes that accompanied the petition -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If they accompanied the petition then they were already received in the House. They were already received so you do not have to lay a second time.

MS SSINABULYA: Mr Speaker, the rest of the documents were accompaniments – what I need to establish is – because when the petition was presented here, not all the information was brought to the House. But as the committee interfaced with various organs of the university and different stakeholders, we requested that we receive information. So, all the documents here are part of the information brought to the committee by different witnesses.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, do those form part of the attachments to your minutes? 

MS SSINABULYA: Yes sir.

 THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then we can receive them with the minutes. We have already received the minutes and if they form part of the minutes, it means that they are recorded in your minutes. So, we can take them from there as already laid. Thank you.

MS SSINABULYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On page 4 of the report - the first report on the staff petition - I will give a background; I am not going to read all the details, but it gives the chronology of events that led to the strike at Kyambogo University and the subsequent petitions to Parliament.

On page 6, Mr Speaker, the committee looked at the petition and the issues that were raised within the petition that included: 

Usurping the powers of the University Secretary and other officers by the Vice-Chancellor. The committee made observations and also recommendations on pages 7 and 8. 

The second allegation, Mr Speaker, was that the Vice-Chancellor treats his staff and colleagues in a dehumanising manner and takes issues personal whenever they are brought to his attention. The committee made observations on page 8 and recommendations on page 9. 

There was also an allegation that the Vice-Chancellor had established an Intelligence Desk under a one Samuel Oryem, who draws colossal amounts of money which he does not account for. 

The committee made observations that the Intelligence Desk was formed by Council and not by the Vice-Chancellor, and also made a recommendation that the University Council should create awareness among the university staff on the existing university structures, and also use its disciplinary mechanism to deal with any cases of misuse of office.

The other allegation in the petition, is that the Vice-Chancellor interferes with the procurement process and is involved in influence peddling. The petition stated that the Vice-Chancellor insists on what must be bought as an individual, including making specifications. 

The committee observed that except in the case of the purchase of a TV and an IPAD, in which the Vice-Chancellor acted outside the law, in the other allegations the Vice-Chancellor was emphasising adherence to the law and guidelines, for instance, his advice on the specifications for the motor vehicles was as per the Public Service Guidelines.

The committee made a recommendation for strict adherence to the laid down procedures and guidelines, as directed from time to time. 

There was an allegation of lack of respect for the Governing Council. From the interactions we had with the petitioners and other stakeholders, including the Council Chairperson, who  denied any such instance of disrespect by the Vice-Chancellor. 

The committee reiterated its earlier recommendation on team building and mutual respect for each other for a harmonious relationship.

There was an allegation of compromising academic standards in the university by, for example, reducing on the period of field practice, internship and practicum supervision, and giving excuses of limited funds, which has greatly affected standards at the university.

The committee observed that there has been inadequate Government funding of the university for both its operational budget, including internship, supervision and infrastructure development programmes.

However, on the issue of compromising on the academic standards, during its interactions with other stakeholders, the committee was informed of:

1.	Parallel, fraudulent and irregular admission of students who do not meet the minimum requirements;
2.	Students who graduate before doing retakes;
3.	Leakage and selling of examination papers; and
4.	Altering of results where those who have failed are given better grades.

The committee, therefore, recommends a more detailed investigation into these allegations and anybody found culpable should be brought to book. 

The committee also recommends that anybody who is found to have graduated through fraudulent means should be stripped of the certificate and prosecuted accordingly. 

The committee recommends that an in-depth investigation in the Office of the Deputy Vice-Chancellor, Academic Affairs and the Academic Registrar on issues of academic malpractice at the university be instituted.

Another allegation, Mr Speaker, was that the Vice-Chancellor works through cliquism, favouritism and nepotism. 

The committee observed that almost the entire staff of Kyambogo University from top management staff to the lower level staff are involved in some sort of cliques.  

The committee recommends that the Vice-Chancellor and top management should distinguish themselves by exhibiting a strong sense of team work among themselves and also cascade it downwards to the lower staff. 

Another allegation is the failure to prioritise student welfare and teaching facilities. The petition stated that the Vice-Chancellor had failed to improve the university infrastructure and teaching facilities.

There was also a complaint about the sub-standard buses where the Vice-Chancellor was reported to have had an influence in the procurement.

The committee has already observed, above, the poor funding by Government to Kyambogo University, and notes that the three motor vehicles that were procured were official entitlements and were allocated to the Deputy Vice-Chancellor, Academic Affairs and the Deputy Vice-Chancellor, Finance and Administration and one pool vehicle, a pickup by make.

The committee recommends that the procurement office be investigated on the procurement of buses, water bower and other items.

The committee also recommends that Parliament urges Government to enhance its funding to Kyambogo University in order to bolster its infrastructural development and curb unrests associated with poor infrastructure.

On the allegation of causing financial loss to the university, the petition stated that the Vice-Chancellor had installed a biometric system that has never been used, CCTV cameras that are not functional, cancellation of a farewell party of the former librarian, irregular payments to Samuel Oryem for the so-called Intelligence Desk, etcetera.

The committee observes that the allegation on non-functionality of CCTV camera does not hold as references were made to footages to CCTV cameras after the theft of 200 computers from one of the university laboratories and evidence was adduced to the committee.

The legal firm had been engaged by the university since 2006, and efforts in 2009 to advertise for fresh pre-qualification did not yield useful results, and so, it was not the Vice-Chancellor who had contracted the legal firm.

Payments to, Mr Samuel Oryem, was for routine facilitation during investigations on theft of university property, as is the case with other staff on assignment. 

The committee also noted that the current Vice-Chancellor took over office after the University Council had already concluded on their decision to lay off some staff and whom to lay off. However, he did not implement this decision immediately he took over office, but instead did it at the end of the academic year.

On financial loss at the university, the committee was further informed that there were activities that caused financial loss that included:

a)	Fraudulent payment of fees where students pay less to the university account, but are receipted to have paid more and the bank slips are altered. This is done in connivance with staff in the bursar’s office and the bank.  For example, receipts for admission fees payable to the university are pre-stamped and issued by a cashier in Stanbic Bank, Kyambogo Branch;

b)	The mechanical workshop is being used by one of the staff for personal gain, who gets contracts from outsiders and employs outsiders who are non-staff, thus depriving students of ample opportunity for practice.
 
The committee took note of the rampant theft of computers and accessories, foodstuffs and other properties at the university, despite the university having a presence of three security agencies that include the Uganda Police, A1 Security Services and the University security staff. 

The committee recommends further investigation by an independent body to ascertain the financial loss incurred and those involved be brought to book.

The petition talked about the Vice-Chancellor’s management style that has led to a high staff turnover due to fear, apathy and uncertainty among staff. 

However, the committee also observed that the Vice-Chancellor is a strict administrator, but also needs to improve on his management style to build a credible and cohesive team to run the University. 

The committee recommends re-establishment of communication channels by management for purposes of diffusing conflict before it takes root.

The committee further recommends that management utilises the existing staff tribunal in order to resolve on issues affecting staff before they cause unrest.

General observations and recommendations

Understaffing 

The university operates at 30 percent of the establishment. This has led the university to employ part-time staff, thus compromising standards of teaching at the university. 

So, while the committee appreciates the need for salary enhancement, it recommends urgent recruitment of staff to at least 50 percent of the establishment. 

Promotion of staff

The staff accused the vice-chancellor of blocking staff promotions. 

However, the committee noted that merging of the three institutions that make-up Kyambogo University, that is: UNISE, UPK and ITEK into a University, was done haphazardly, without paying due regard to the different primary functions performed by each of these institutions. This has caused a lot of conflicts given that they all had to be incorporated to fit into a University structure with a different culture, qualifications and relevance notwithstanding.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports urgently reviews the structure and staffing of Kyambogo University to assess their relevance to the operational structure. Where staff are found to be of no relevance, the committee recommends that they be re-deployed in other appropriate Government institutions. 

The committee further recommends that the University Council considers promotion of staff with requisite qualifications as mandated in Section 50(3), of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001.

The committee also had reservations about the ad hoc committee investigating the vice-chancellor

The committee was informed that the Council constituted an ad hoc committee to investigate the allegations labelled against the vice-chancellor. 

The committee also observed that the problems of the university have been in existence well before the current vice-chancellor joined the University and are probably caused by other factors, including the haphazard merger of the three institutions with totally different primary mandates and cultures. 

The committee further noted that there is  absence of relevant statutes and policies as mandated by the the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001, which has greatly caused a breakdown in management systems, hence the prevailing conflicts. 

That notwithstanding, the committee notes that the composition of the ad hoc committee raised questions as some of its members exhibited biased views and impartiality at various fora. 
For example, the Chairperson of the University Council wrote to the vice-chancellor a letter of notice of intention to sue over statements the vice-chancellor made to the Committee on Education and Sports.

Mr Bruhan Byaruhanga, a Council Member, representing the KCCA, has continuously appeared on various media stations threatening to write a minority report if the ad hoc committee exonerates the vice-chancellor. 

While Mr Patrick Madaya, who is the Deputy University Secretary, was on several occasions reprimanded by the vice-chancellor and consequently issued with three warning letters over issues ranging from neglect of duty, poor performance to unethical and unprofessional conduct.

The committee was, therefore, of the view that some members of the ad hoc committee were not in position to give a fair opinion on the issues at Kyambogo University because they were concerned members.

The committee had, therefore, recommended that the ad hoc committee be bolstered. However, we have been informed that the ad hoc committee completed its work and gave its report to Council. So, this recommendation no longer stands.

The committee further recommended that a comprehensive research be carried out to ascertain how the three institutions that were previously merged to form Kyambogo University can be realistically integrated with an applicable organisational structure that is all encompassing to avoid future conflicts.

On compromising of academic standards by the vice-chancellor, the committee noted that these allegations were not true, but noted that the vice-chancellor had attempted to curb examination leakages and malpractices through instituting an investigation into the malpractices, which led to the apprehension of one Mr Sembule Abu, who was at the time deployed at the Examination Division. Below the committee lists the leaked examination papers that were cancelled. Some of these people who have been apprehended were part of the team of the petitioners who petitioned this Parliament. 

The committee also took note of the fact that despite the fact that council is mandated to put in place statutes to guide the administration and management of Kyambogo University, a number of statutes and policies as elaborated on page 21 have not been put into effect despite the fact that money had been released to develop these policies and statutes. 

The committee recommends that council urgently makes good of its obligation and puts in place a relevant statute and policies. 

The committee further recommends that investigations be done and in case of wrongdoing, disciplinary action be taken against the culpable officers to whom funds have been advanced for this purpose. 

The committee also looked at the issue of causing financial loss to the university on pages 22 and 23. The committee observes that that though the vice-chancellor communicated to the bursar, Mr Ham Mungyereza, to provide financial statements for the three faculties noted above, the request was never complied with. This is tantamount to insubordination and impunity.

The committee recommends that relevant Government bodies, for instance, Office of the Auditor-General, IGG and CID carry out investigations to establish the loss incurred from the irregularities over actual payments of fees vis-a-vis the receipts issued.

The committee further looked into the issue of establishment and operations of a university staff tribunal according to section 56 of the University and other Tertiary Institutions Act 2001. 

The committee took note that this tribunal had been formed, but it had no functional secretariat. The committee, therefore, notes that whereas some of the problems that led to the strike could have been handled by the university staff tribunal, it is not being utilised as should be and neither does it have a secretariat as provided by law.

The committee recommended that a secretariat be established for the tribunal, and the Ministry of Education and Sports be urged to strengthen its roles and responsibilities towards educational institutions in the country both at higher and lower levels as mandated by law.

The issue of irregular land allocations also came up during the interface with various stakeholders, and even within the petition. On page 24, we talk in detail about the issues of Kyambogo land and how the Minister of Education requested the council to allocate it five acres of land for establishment of its headquarters, which was granted by council. But when the land title was given to Uganda Land Commission to subdivide it, when it was returned, the university learnt that the Uganda Land Commission went ahead to make more subdivisions that the ministry had requested for.

The university secretary wrote to the Secretary, Uganda Land Commission, demanding for an explanation and the university after that was considering legal action. 

The committee recommends an in-depth investigation by a relevant Government body into irregular allocations and demarcations of university land without the approval of Kyambogo University Council. 

There was also an issue of allocation of land to Megha Industries. Megha Industries also did make a request to receive parts of Kyambogo University and the committee learnt that the Minister of Education and Sports had written to the chairperson of council consulting on any possibility to allocate land to Megha Industries. The chairperson requested the ministry to engage and facilitate a government valuer to value the land before any discussion could commence as the university engaged a private firm. 

The committee was also informed that Megha Industries was offering a wetland to the university in exchange for this rather prime land. The committee raised concern as to why the Minister of Education and Sports is embarking on this considering that the vice-chancellor had given an objection and the council only asked for valuation before anything could be done. 

The university council should protect all land of Kyambogo University and resist any attempt to re-allocate it; and the committee made recommendations as seen on page 26.

Under 5.9, the committee also did take note when we visited Kyambogo University and from the documents presented here, that despite the alleged poor management style of the vice-chancellor, there is also apparent hostility by the university towards the vice-chancellor due to his nationality. 

The committee recommended that the university council and staff stick to more objective issues and desist from undermining the spirit of the East African Community.

The committee did observe that the academic and staff associations of Kyambogo University, much as they are in existence and did petition Parliament, they are not duly registered and this has a potential of bringing problems when resolving conflicts with such associations. 

The committee recommends that the unregistered staff associations work closely with the Ministry of Public Service and that of Education and Sports to formalise their existence, and sign the collective bargaining and dispute resolution agreement.

Finally, Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee made comments on the specific prayers of the petitioners:

One, that the vice-chancellor, Prof Isaiah Omollo Ndiege steps aside to allow investigations into the alleged mismanagement and loss of Government funds by a competent and independent body.

The committee learnt that the university council successfully convinced the vice-chancellor to take his accumulated annual leave of 50 days.

The second prayer was that Parliament urges Government to intervene and prevail over the university council to re-open the university immediately to save the students, parents and other stakeholders and general reputation of Kyambogo University.

The committee learnt that the university council re-opened the university and students resumed studies.

The committee commends the university council for having expeditiously re-opened the university and the staff too, for having resumed work.

The committee strongly recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports urgently works with the university council, the vice-chancellor and other top management staff to amicably resolve any outstanding issues that may affect the smooth-running of Kyambogo University.

In conclusion, the committee notes that the problems of Kyambogo University are beyond mismanagement of the university by the vice-chancellor as alleged in the petition, but reveals deep-rooted rot by way of:

•	Corruption,
•	Irregular admissions and awarding of marks;
•	Irregular appointments, hence incompetent staff;
•	Irregular procurement practices;
•	Nepotism;
•	Indiscipline and poor or lack of action of indiscipline cases;
•	Financial mismanagement;
•	Fraudulent fees payment;
•	Weak administration/lack of cohesion;
•	Outright theft of university properties;
•	Irregular allocation of university land;
•	Examination leakages/selling of exams;
•	Altering examination results; and
•	Use of university facilities for personal gain.

The committee, therefore, re-emphasises its earlier recommendation that an in-depth investigation by competent bodies, for instance, Office of the Auditor-General, IGG and CID, be urgently instituted on the above listed and any other areas of concern, and in case of any wrongdoing, the culprits be brought to book.

On the reported and unresolved cases of indiscipline, the committee strongly recommends that the university council urgently expedites the process of dealing with them to conclusion. It is only then that sanity will be restored in Kyambogo University. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the Committee on Education and Sports recommends that the House adopts its report on the petition of the staff of Kyambogo University on the alleged mismanagement of the university by the vice-chancellor, Prof. Isaiah Omolo Ndiege. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I see that the recommendations on the second report are very similar with the first one. Is that the position, so that we can proceed at the earliest opportunity to deal with them together? 

MS SSINABULYA: Mr Speaker, most of the issues are similar. In both petitions, the students’ concerns were mainly that the university be opened and that the welfare of students be looked into. 

The university was re-opened, and the recommendation of the committee on what should be done by the Ministry of Education and Sports and the University Council is entailed in the report, which has been laid on Table. I think after that, the House will be in position to debate the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. As you said, the issues are similar and we will get an opportunity to deal with them comprehensively.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek your guidance on whether the chairperson could also give us – she indicated the issue of the ad hoc committee. Can we know the status of the report of the ad hoc committee? 

Secondly, if it is there, she could also lay it on Table because it would form part of the debate. And also, to give us a status report on the fate of the vice-chancellor because we read in the newspapers that the council sat and removed the vice-chancellor.

So, can we get to know whether the committee is aware of this? Is the vice-chancellor still serving? Because, if I read correctly, in most of the issues here, he is exonerated? Can we know the status in response to what we have read in the papers about the decision of the council?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are we debating this matter now?

MS SSINABULYA: Mr Speaker, I think the issues to do with the university council and the ad hoc committee should be answered by – much as I have the final draft report of the ad hoc committee, I believe the Ministry of Education and Sports is best placed to respond to that and tell us the status as it is right now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I said, we have received a report from the committee. We should now be prepared to debate it at the earliest convenient time so that we can conclude this matter and move on with the rest of the business.

This House is adjourned to tomorrow 3 o’clock.
 
 (The House rose at 7.32 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 7 November 2012 at 3.00 p.m.)
