PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - SECOND MEETINGWEDNESDAY , 9 NOVEMBER 2022PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6142MINISTERIAL STATEMENTWednesday, 9 November, 2022I am aware that the chairperson of the Committee on Health, Dr Ayume, has concluded a study on the magnitude of the traffic injuries reported in Mulago and is ready to present his report so that Parliament sees what to do. So, we are going to give Dr Ayume an opportunity to present. Honourable members, the Ministry of Education and Sports issued a directive shortening the term of public schools by two weeks, especially because of the Ebola outbreak. At the same time, I am also aware that our Primary Seven, Senior Four and Senior Six candidates are almost finalising their examinations.  So, the shortening of the term is not going to have an effect on the candidate classes. It is basically to ensure that we see how to reduce the Ebola spread and in effect, they will have reduced the term by two weeks. When the students are released from school, the responsibility is now on us. I urge the parents to exercise their responsibility in parenting. We are going into a festive season, there is Ebola, and all other kinds of diseases. We need to parent our children, now that the teachers have finished their part; it is now our responsibility as parents. Honourable members, I have also been following the re-organisation of markets in the city by the Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA). However, I note that the management of some markets in other parts of the country require the same re-organisation. As we reorganise Kampala, we also need to re-organise other parts of the country. IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 5TH SITTING - SECOND MEETINGParliament met at 2.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, welcome to this session. Following my communication last week regarding the need to strengthen road safety interventions, I have followed the on-going operation by Uganda Police to improve road safety in Kampala. I commend the job that is being done under the Uganda Police; that is a very good job and we wish you could extend it all over the country. It is not only in Kampala that we have accidents. As I said last week, these accidents cause a lot of problems including deaths. There are very many incidences that happen during accidents and we as Parliament need to advocate for good driving, especially the boda boda riders. One of the things that police say is that the boda boda riders must wear jackets. It is not only jackets; people need to be very careful. You can wear a jacket, but it is not the jacket that determines recklessness. PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6143THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 9 NOVEMBER 2022I am happy to see the Prime Minister here. This House passed   The Markets Bill, 2022 on 15 February 2022. Honourable Leader of Government Business, to-date, we have not received a response. Can we assume that the Bill was passed, now that we have not received a response? That Bill would help us in the re-organisation of all the markets in the country.Honourable members, it has also come to my knowledge that some Members have got involved or engaged themselves in leaking committee reports to the media before they are presented to the House. The report of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprise (COSASE) on Uganda Airlines has been leaked to the media and we are investigating who leaked that report to the media. I have had a meeting with the Leader of the Opposition on that matter because that is a committee of the Opposition. We want to know who leaked the report and we want a report from the Leader of the Opposition because we are not going to entertain that. How do you leak a report before it is discussed? Why should we discuss what has already gone out? Honourable members, Rule 216(1) of the Rules of Procedure prohibits the publishing of a report or any evidence in a committee before it is tabled in the House. Leader of the Opposition, I am speaking to you. I am referring to rule 216(1), which prohibits us from releasing a report before it is discussed in the House. How do we release a report, which has not been discussed? Let us be ethical. I mean, I do not see why you should give out a report before it comes to the House. I am cautioning Members on this matter, but I want a report from the Leader of the Opposition as we make our own investigation. Once more, I would like to thank you for coming to the House and I wish you nice deliberations. Madam Prime Minister, would you like to speak about the report.2.09THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Good afternoon. Madam Speaker, as I was entering, I found you commenting on the markets in the city and other municipalities across the country. I was directed by the President of the Republic of Uganda to help do a number of interventions. First, he talked about Wandegeya Market. In Wandegeya Market, we discovered that when they were giving out that market and handing it over to KCCA in 2013, there are people who gave themselves over 20, 10 or eight stalls per person and they became landlords.I want to inform colleagues that this denied the local poor entrance into that market. When these people got the market stalls, they started charging these local poor Shs 300,000, which they could not afford. Therefore, the President directed me to remove all the landlords - I do not know whether he is also a landlord because they said some people are landlords. (Laughter) That is why he is panicking.Madam Speaker, we have removed the landlords, as I speak and poor people are entering into that market. No amount of threats will stop me from doing this. THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I am happy with the statement. We were actually appreciating that we are happy with the re-organisation of the markets. You got it wrong. We said we are happy with the re-organisation that is happening in Kampala. However, we want this to go even outside Kampala and we re-organise other parts as well. (Applause)We want you to go to Soroti, Kakumiro, Bududa, Mbale; go to all those areas because Madam Prime Minister, truth be told, what you are doing is a good job; let it not stop in metropolitan Kampala. We need a law in place. This House made a law that we need in place. When we made the law, but we do not know what happened to it because it has never been returned. We do not know. That is what we want to know from Government.6144MINISTERIAL STATEMENTMS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I would to inform you that we had a meeting with the President last week and he is aware that we badly need this law in order to implement what we are doing. We are still waiting. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. However, I want it on record that the House was not condemning what is happening; the House was actually appreciating. (Applause) Because we are appreciating, we are telling Government and the Prime Minister to get out of Kampala and go to all other areas. People should leave the markets. The rich people like Hon. Asuman Basalirwa should leave the markets. Yes, Hon. Basalirwa, do you have a procedural matter? (Hon. Asuman: “Yes, Madam Speaker.”) I am saying the rich men like Asuman, not Basalirwa.MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, I have a rich heart; maybe that is the context in which you are putting it.Madam Speaker, I thank the Prime Minister for the work she is doing. However, the issue that is being raised by the Speaker is constitutional and we have raised it before.I would like to remind you about what our Constitution says in Article 91. Once this Parliament passes a Bill, Article 91 gives the President 30 days to act on it. Anything outside 30 days, with due respect, is a contravention of the Constitution. That is why it is a serious issue. Madam Speaker, I have said it before on this Floor that, please, those with the responsibility of transmitting the Bills to the President should remind him about the constitutional duty; he has only 30 days. I know he is very busy. I am a president and I know how busy we can be - (Laughter)- but you see, when it comes to matters of the Constitution, unfortunately, you have no choice, but to follow the law. What will happen if somebody challenges the outcome of this law on account of inaction? Madam Prime Minister, this is the concern you should be taking to the President; that he has a constitutional duty under Article 91. I thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Madam, it is a constitutional matter and you need to bring it up with the boss.MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I believe you know, like I know, that the President, His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, has all the knowledge that he is talking about. He is an experienced President. Your Excellency the President will assent to the law, but sometimes, he also has to consult. I believe he is still within the mandated days.THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we are all mindful of how busy the President is and we are all happy with the work he is doing. However, I am making a kind reminder to you that this Bill was passed on 15 February 2022. Kindly, tell the legal team to make a follow up. 2.18MR GEOFFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I thank you for your very wise communication today. Your communication is very accurate and timely because firstly, organisation of the boda boda transport sector in this country has been lacking.We see it taking place, but as Government, the boda boda riders are requesting the Ministry of Works to streamline their ministry on how they issue licences to them. It is very difficult and the process is not achievable by them. With the cost of living that people are experiencing in Uganda, for a boda boda rider to put Megabytes (Mbs) on a phone to access an online application is a cost of a meal in his home. Therefore, Madam Speaker, the Minister of Works should find a way to simplify the process of the boda boda sector acquiring driving licences. COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6145THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 9 NOVEMBER 2022Secondly, you talked about streamlining the markets in this country. Since Busia Market was opened two years ago, it is not operational because the Ministry of Trade has not given guiding regulations on how to run this market. I have talked to the minister concerned, but up to now, the story is: “wait for tomorrow”. (Interruption) MR TEBANDEKE: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, we appreciate the initiatives put forward by Government on boda boda riders. However, the information I would like to give to the honourable colleague is that Government should investigate the Uganda Driver Standard Agency (UDSA) that has registered boda boda cyclists, charged them Shs 60,000 with a lot of other requirements. Madam Speaker, after payment of this money, there is no accountability. In fact, since then, boda boda cyclists do not know why they attended the training and paid for that fund. That is the information I want to give. Thank you.MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, my prayer is that the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should lay on Table the operational guidelines of markets in this country so that leaders are helped to carry out their oversight role. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we passed a rule in this House. We are going to be sitting strictly for three hours. I gave information and my communication was informative. I am telling you to go - Nobody is talking about parenting. Go and do parenting. The issue of the markets has been handled. I have told you it is not for debate. Go and do parenting. Students are going to be sent back home and you should do your work as parents. Honourable members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have staff from the National Assembly of Kenya on a benchmarking visit to our Parliament. We have:1. Ms Grace Mwakio - Principal Librarian; 2. Ms Rebecca Musungu - Senior Librarian; 3. Ms Daisy Rotich - Librarian; and 4. Ms Jacinta Mwangi - Machine Operator Supervisor. You are most welcome to the Parliament of Uganda. Karibu Sana.2.23MS FLA VIA NABAGABE (NUP, Woman Representative, Kassanda): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, you gave clear guidance on how schools have been shortened by two weeks. In the previous lockdown due to he COVID-19, we saw a heightened increment of gender-based violence cases among students arising from homes. There were cases of early pregnancies, escalating beatings and domestic violence at home and the culprits were largely parents because they were within homes. This is the reason I am standing up today because, besides the concern of accumulated learning loss by students, parents right now are the culprits and perpetrators of gender-based violence. Parents are no longer friends with their children. Children are unsafe within their homes and do not want to share the problems they may encounter. I am, therefore, calling upon parents -THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, before you go far, it is a generic statement that parents are no longer friends.   Honourable members, I am a friend to my children. If others are not, please, do not generalise.    MS NABAGABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am glad you are friends with your children. There is a very thin line between respect and fear in our homes. In some homes, children fear their parents and so, cannot ably share the problems they encounter. My prayer is that we, the legislators, should be keener and watch parents during this holiday. (Interjections)  We can offer guidance in our 6146MINISTERIAL STATEMENTcommunities and talk about these issues so that we help the children and create a safer environment in their homes in order not to have escalating teenage pregnancies and gender-based violence. Madam Speaker, we are in a month, which will be commemorating the 16 Days of Activism against Gender-Based Violence. Therefore, we can all be activists in that and create a safer environment for our children in homes during this long holiday. Thank you very much.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Flavia. Honourable members, I am requesting parents not to abdicate their responsibility of parenting. It is their role to do parenting; whether the child is yours or not, please, do parenting. In the African culture, a child belongs to everybody. Therefore, ensure that the children are brought up in a proper way. (Applause)On the issue of early pregnancies, parents should talk to their children and educate them. Let us have a free talk with them and see what we can do for them to be better leaders tomorrow. Honourable members, we are not going to take too long. 2.26MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, KAJARA COUNTY, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to join you to thank the police for creating a safe environment on our roads. However, we still have a challenge concerning the zebra crossings and passenger crossing areas. Particularly, here at Development House, when Members of Parliament want to cross over, boda bodas do not stop, vehicles do not stop and this is the same even elsewhere in Kampala. It is a big challenge in this city. Municipalities are trying to observe this, but in Kampala, it is a very big challenge. My prayer is that the Minister of Internal Affairs ensures that our police educate motorists on how to respect zebra crossings. Otherwise, they will cause accidents even when the police have tried to avoid other sources of accidents. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we had a very bad scenario around Development House, where Members of Parliament cross to come to the House. How I wish we could finalise with our process and put a flyover. I remember Hon. Lokwang in the 10th Parliament asked for a flyover in that area and now, it is coming a reality. There is a big problem there. Honourable members, there is a procedural matter.MR NAMBESHE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is common knowledge that I come from a disaster-prone district of Bududa. Therefore, issues of disaster and catastrophic landslides including floods -THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chief Opposition Whip, we have a paper on disaster.MR NAMBESHE: This one is correlated to that.THE SPEAKER: No. They are going to present a paper on disaster immediately after this. So, you can bring your issue when the paper has been presented. MR NAMBESHE: Most obliged. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Matters of national importance -2.29MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, my friend raised a very important point. The issue I want to highlight is the failure by concerned institutions to demarcate areas of crossing on the roads. For instance, on a road, you find a new hump without any painting, causing drivers to hit humps and some may end up in a trouble. Therefore, my request is to make a rejoinder to the honourable colleague’s submission and ask [Ms Nabagabe] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6147THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 9 NOVEMBER 2022the Minister of Works and Transport to ensure that for any new road that is being marked –THE SPEAKER: Not only the new, but even the old ones.MR AOGON: Even the old ones. They do not renew the paint; the road signage is gone. Therefore, the road safety has gone down squatting.2.30THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS  (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Madam Speaker, the issue raised by Members is very important. We shall give it support because the fact is that there are many road accidents in the country. I take the responsibility to inform the minister in charge of works and KCCA so that we put zebra crossings on the roads; they are the ones in charge of these roads in the city.2.31MR DA VID SSERUKENYA  (NUP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I rise on a matter of urgent national importance regarding the monkeys that have raided Makindye-Ssabagabo in Busabala. (Laughter) Allow me to bring to your attention –(Interjections)-THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, listen to the Member.MR SSERUKENYA: Allow me to bring it to your attention that one of my wards, Busabala, has been invaded by monkeys. It is risky because they have started entering houses, yet, the Ministry of Health has just declared an Ebola outbreak. My humble request –(Interjections)THE SPEAKER: Order. Let the Member speak. It is his maiden speech. (Laughter)MR SSERUKENYA: My humble prayer is for an immediate intervention by the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. Thank you.2.33THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES  (Mr Martin Mugarra): I thank the honourable colleague for raising the matter. Madam Speaker, we are going to get in touch with our vermin officer at KCCA. Tomorrow, we shall be in his constituency handling the matter. Thank you. 2.33THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, the issue raised by the honourable Member from Makindye-Ssabagabo is not as light as it sounds. Monkeys are not known to be within human habitat. They know their natural habitats, which humanity has invaded. Our discussion yesterday about the central forest reserve and how the “two-legged monkeys” have invaded explained why the four legged monkeys are now –THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we do not have two-legged monkeys. (Laughter) That is not Parliamentary language. Please, withdraw it.MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, the beauty about language is that it is descriptive. It is not a reference to any individual. So, nobody should take offence. THE SPEAKER: No, there are no two-legged monkeys. (Laughter)MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, any individual offended by that reference should take my apology. It is not a reference to anyone, but to make the point that the minister’s assurance of picking them is only a partial remedy because more will come. It is further notice that when the discussion on the invasion of the central forest reserve comes up, Members should take cognisance of the fact that the attendant outcomes of this invasion is that, now, more animals and vermin and all manner of insects and rodents will invade our territory. It is not a small matter. 6148MINISTERIAL STATEMENTThe assurance from the minister is just a partial response to comfort the Member, but there is a problem. I thought that the minister would make reference to the problem – him being aware of it – and find the remedy globally. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister for tourism, you need to find out where the monkeys are coming from and the immediate and long-term remedy that we can have in that area and then, report back to this House. 2.36MR RAUBEN ARINAITWE  (Independent, Isingiro West County): Thank you, Madam Speaker. During your –(Mr Opolot rose_)THE SPEAKER: Hon. Opolot, are you Arinaitwe? Let him first talk.MR ARINAITWE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is a matter of national importance concerning the land that used to be for road maintenance camps along the highways in this country. The Ministry of Works and Transport used to have road maintenance camps land along the highways in this country, popularly known as Programme for Infrastructure Development in Africa (PIDA) In my constituency, we used to have one in Kagando on Kabale-Kikagati-Mbarara Road and another in Rwamucucu. What is happening is that people have invaded this land, got titles and are fighting each other. For example, on 10 October 2022, the whole of Ruborogota Subcounty political leadership - that is, the subcounty chief, the LC III chairman and the Speaker - were arrested and detained overnight because they were fighting to save that land, which belongs to Ministry of Works and Transport. My prayers to the Minister of Works and Transport are:1. Can we know whether the ministry still has interest in these parcels of land that used to be for road maintenance camps along the highways?2. Can the minister, if still interested, carry out inventory verification of these parcels of land that used to be for road maintenance camps?3. If the ministry is busy, can it delegate the management of these parcels of land to local governments such as subcounties to manage and protect them? I submit. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Arinaitwe. Honourable members, I want to give guidance to this House. We have the Leader of Government Business, who is supposed to coordinate all activities and ensure that the country is being run well. When we get issues regarding our counties, subcounties, villages or homes, handle it directly with the Leader of Government Business. When you stand in this House, raise a matter of national - and I am saying “national importance” – that concerns the country, not families, subcounties, villages and whichever. Leader of Government Business, I think you need to take it up.2.39THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS  (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Madam Speaker, in April, Cabinet observed that Government land across the country - land for subcounties, land for PIDA - like he has said - was under threat, not only in Isingiro, but everywhere in the country.Therefore, we were tasked - me as the chairperson, the Minister of Local Government, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the Attorney-General. And we have come up with guidelines that will help the country to secure and title all Government land across the country, including PIDA. When we are done with this, Madam Speaker, we shall also bring on board the Members of Parliament so that we can fight this problem together. Thank you.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [Mr Mpuuga]6149THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 9 NOVEMBER 2022THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of Government Business. However, I still urge Members that when you have issues concerning your constituencies, the Leader of Government Business’ office is open. Please, handle these issues before they come to the Floor of this House because they take a lot of our time - discussing matters of individual constituencies.MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter. Yesterday, you made a ruling to this House that the Minister of Health should come here and lay for us evidence that the intern doctors were paid. She pledged and said that she would lay the document at the beginning of the sitting. I am seated near the minister and I see her very relaxed. I do not know if she has come with the document to lay before this House. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right to invite the minister to lay that document before the House because the interns were calling the whole night asking for evidence of that payment? THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I just have one Member submitting a matter of national importance and then, we get reports from Hon. Businge and Hon. Muhanga?2.42MS IDAH NANTABA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me time to present the plight of a mother who also happens to be a widow. She lost her daughter in Saudi Arabia last week.Madam Speaker, this lady has two daughters whom she had sent abroad to search for greener pastures. One of them has passed away under very suspicious and unclear circumstances because her boss alleges that she died of an accident, and yet the last video she captured was when she was in her boss’ car with her boss, the children and another worker. However, the evidence coming out shows that her last time was with everyone else in the house in that very car. Nonetheless, she eventually passed on.The mother has appealed to me, as a Member of Parliament, to intervene. She is a widow and she is helpless. She does not work and has no money to repatriate the remains of her daughter.Her only other daughter who is now in Saudi Arabia, called Jackie, has been crying and sending audio messages to me, appealing for help, but I cannot afford to repatriate the body. The costs are too huge for me to handle. I have reached out to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, through the minister. I think she is handling the situation, but I have not yet got a positive response.The company that hired this lady is called Dream Connect Limited in Kibuli. They have instead advised Jackie, the sister, to obtain a death certificate and a police report regarding the circumstances under which this girl died. The girl is also another worker in someone else’s house. Helpless as she is, she has been asked to obtain all these documents and present them to the embassy in order for them to start the process of repatriating her remains. This is a huge burden for the widow and I request the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development; the Prime Minister or whoever is responsible, to intervene by way of helping this family, at least, to have their daughter’s remains repatriated. The daughter also alleges that her organs were all removed and yet, the accident story was very unclear. How would only one person die when the car was full of everybody else from the same home? Madam Speaker, my humble plea is that you help intervene to repatriate the remains of Lydia Aliba, a daughter of Kayunga, and more so, next to the village I come from. I am bearing the burden and it is too much. It is now one week and the mourners are in the house. I have to foot the bills of those who come to mourn with the family, but it is too much for me. It is not only that, but there are four other girls stranded, stuck and sick at one of the offices in Saudi Arabia. We were able to get one of the girls from Saudi Arabia two weeks ago, who came back and said, “Honourable member, you have helped me, but there are other workers 6150MINISTERIAL STATEMENTsuffering and they are about to die. If you do not intervene, they will die.” She is called Agnes and she returned two weeks ago. It is very painful; this woman has nothing to do. Her only daughter, who was helping her to survive, has passed on and now, the sister is also requesting to return home. THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we have heard your prayer. Can we hear from the Prime Minister?2.47THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Sarah Mateke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank my colleague who has raised that very unfortunate scenario. It is very true that she reported to my senior minister. Our embassy is following it up. There is a process of repatriating a dead body, which is the embassy is going to handle. We need the death certificate from the other side to confirm exactly what caused the death. Of course, after the body reaches here, we shall still do another post-mortem. I would like to assure my sister that the company that took our late sister will be the same company to repatriate the body to Uganda. Therefore, she will not spend any cost on that, but we shall get a whole report from the embassy because the Embassy of Uganda is handling it. Thank you, Madam Speaker.MS NANTABA: Madam Speaker, like – THE SPEAKER: Can I first hear from the Prime Minister? 2.49THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, honestly speaking, the issue of our young girls being killed in Saudi Arabia and the suffering they go through has kept on coming here since the Ninth Parliament. Madam Speaker, I remember the other time, you asked the minister to come and tell us what they have done and I picked interest. We have had so far, two or three meetings; officials have gone to the Government of Saudi Arabia to make sure that our girls are protected.Madam Speaker, the issue of Hon. Nantaba and our sister or our daughter of Kayunga, who is now the late, will be handled. I promise that soon after this Parliament sitting, I will make a follow-up; Hon. Nantaba and my sister, let us link up to help bring the body come back. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable Minister of Gender, as we said last time, we need to do due diligence on these companies that are taking our children abroad.We need to make sure that before you license, you do a proper check on these companies. I equally do not believe in what you said that the company, which took the person, is the one to bring back the body. I do not think they can do that. Many people have died and they have not helped them. Therefore, unless you put it as one of the conditions that in case anything happens to this person, you will be held responsible.MS NYIRABASHITSI:  Madam Speaker, I want to confirm to this House; unless the person does not go through our system, we now do due diligence; every girl that gets out of the country with a particular company, we have all the records. In addition, it is very clear that any girl who gets a problem from the other side under that company –(Interjections)-  of course, there are no boys. The company makes sure that they return the body. Madam Speaker, just two weeks ago, I had the same situation in my district, and the company that took the girl brought her back. In addition, the story was that they had removed her kidneys. However, when we got the postmortem report from Mulago Hospital, everything was intact. That is why we request COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [Ms Nantaba]6151THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 9 NOVEMBER 2022for a postmortem from the other side and get a report, but we also do the same from here so that we confirm what exactly killed our girl. Thank you. We can bring a report on that. THE SPEAKER: Leader of Government Business, you really need to interest yourself in the licensing process and all that kind of thing and check whether due diligence is done properly because we are losing our children. Hon. Muhanga, can we have your report?2.53THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Margaret Muhanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable members who raised this issue of non-payment of medical interns.Madam Speaker, I am cognizant of the fact that these interns need to be paid on time. Since we enhanced their salaries - or allowances because they earn allowances - we have been paying them in a timely manner except these last two months.I would like to lay on the Table proof of payment of medical interns for the month of September and October amounting to Shs 6.8 billion.I wish to note that payment for two facilities that are under processing include Kawempe National Referral Hospital and St Francis Nsambya, which is a PNFP. The submission of the two had errors and so, we first corrected the errors, and the money has been sent today.Madam Speaker, allow me to explain to the Members how Government works. The Ministry of Finance-THE SPEAKER: Before you educate us on how you work, when was the last time the interns were paid?  (Laughter)MS MUHANGA: Madam Speaker, as I said, they were paid in June and July, and we had inadequate funds to pay them for September and October.THE SPEAKER:  June and July- meaning they have not got August, September- MS MUHANGA: June, July and August were all paid in the first quarter. So now, we have paid September and October. THE SPEAKER: You have paid up-to-date?MS MUHANGA:  Up-to-date. However, I wanted to just give an explanation, Madam Speaker that the money goes to the regional referral hospitals.THE SPEAKER: Just a minute. I want evidence of the money that was sent to the referral hospitals. Can we have - because, we may think that you are the one who is making a mistake when it is the referral hospitals. So, can you give us evidence of the monies that were sent to the referral hospitals? MS MUHANGA: Madam Speaker, it is a long list of 51 hospitals and there is each date of when we sent this money. They are computer generated-THE SPEAKER: Where is Omara Paul? Give me that very long list. MS MUHANGA: I can read it.THE SPEAKER: No, I am going to verify. I want you to verify that list. Hon.Omala, you are the head of the team. Where are the two Herberts – please, Herbert Ariko and Herbert Tayebwa, together look at those lists and report back to the House.  Lay them on the Table. MS MUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to lay proof of payment for each regional and national referral hospital and Mulago Women Specialised Hospital and the dates when we sent this money and the amount.Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence to also lay on the Table the statutory instrument for the public health control of Ebola Virus Disease, as was requested yesterday-THE SPEAKER: As an extension.6152MINISTERIAL STATEMENTMS MUHANGA: The extension from 4th November to 16th December; here is the statutory instrument. THE SPEAKER: Can I have the statutory instrument given to Hon. Basalirwa.MS MUHANGA: Most obliged.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Rusoke. Honourable members, we are going to discuss those reports when we get feedback and after they have been analysed.2.58THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Victoria Businge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. During the Third Sitting of the Second Session of the 11th Parliament of Uganda on 03 November 2022, you directed the Ministry of Local Government to Table details of all funds disbursed to all local governments. I now take this honour today to lay a copy detailing all funds released to all local governments, districts, cities and municipalities for the two financial years of 2021 and 2122, as you directed. I beg to lay. Thank you, Madam Speaker. If downloaded, the Members can get the details.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The same committee will look at these releases. Hon. Omara, you will also look at the local governments and present a report to this House. Honourable Attorney-General, on the women’s councils -MS AMERO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am surprised that with the number of women in this House, you have a committee of Omara constituted with only men and without any woman in it. Are we proceeding correctly? (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish you could trust the criteria that the Speaker is using. Omara is an accountant, Herbert is an accountant - The information they will bring is for us to debate; I will allow the women to debate. The women will take the lead on debate. Honourable Attorney-General – there is a procedural matter.MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, I thank you. These assignments that you are giving to individuals and eliciting some reactions from colleagues – I want to seek your indulgence and your guidance whether, for purposes of minimising gender since the next thing will be political parties and the rest, it would not be procedurally right that they be sent to the line committees for further scrutiny and those who have issues can go to these committees and have them addressed. THE SPEAKER: I thought I had made a ruling on that. Honourable Attorney-General - Hon. Omara and team, we need feedback on that report tomorrow. We are not going to send anything to the committee, which may take one month. By the time the report comes back, we are in the fourth quarter. Can I have a report back in the House tomorrow? 3.02THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was asked to make a statement on the status of elections of women councils and committees. Madam Speaker, during the preparation and discussion of the ministerial policy statement for the financial year – THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, listen to the issue of women councils. MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, during the preparation and discussion of the ministerial policy statement for the Financial Year 2022/2023, the Electoral Commission presented a total funding requirement for the conduct of elections for women council committees from village to national level amounting to Shs 35.68 billion. However, only COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6153THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 9 NOVEMBER 2022Shs 15.68 billion out of the required Shs 36.68 billion was appropriated in the budget for the current financial year, leaving a funding gap of Shs 20 billion.The Electoral Commission had planned the election activities to take place commencing in June 2022 in order to avert a vacuum that would arise when the term of the current women council office-bearers expired on 23 August, 2022. Therefore, the Electoral Commission embarked on preparatory activities for the conduct of the elections hoping that additional resources would be provided by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. On release of details of the approved budget estimates for Financial Year 2022/2023, the Electoral Commission realised that the approved budget levels were not sufficient to conduct the activities. Without the required funding, the Electoral Commission had to indefinitely suspend the activities geared toward elections of women councils because there were no funds. It should be noted that the term of women councils and committees elected in 2018 expired and therefore lapsed on Tuesday, 23 August 2022 and therefore, there is currently no women council or village committees at national level.The Electoral Commission was invited and, indeed, appeared before the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to brief them on the status of women councils and their V ote 102 for Financial Year 2022/2023. This matter was brought to their attention, including the activities, which had been completed at the time of the suspension of the women council elections. The Electoral Commission received Shs 12.5 billion non-wage for both operations and electoral activities for the first quarter of which Shs 3.613 billion was allocated toward the conduct of by-elections for directly elected Members of Parliament for Soroti East constituency in Soroti City, Gogonyo County in Pallisa District, Bukimbiri County in Kisoro District, Busongola County in Kasese District and local Government councils by-elections in 26 districts across the country. The balance of Shs 8.445 billion went to the operational costs whose actual requirement for the quarter was supposed to be Shs 9.252 billion. Accordingly, the Electoral Commission is constrained to pay the outstanding obligations, yet, service providers and ad hoc staff that were engaged during the concluded activities are agitating for their pay. The Commission can only resume activities when the requisite funds are provided. Consideration should be given to the Electoral Commission’s request for a supplementary budget of Shs 20 billion to bridge the funding gap and immediately release the appropriated Shs 15.68 billion. This will enable the Electoral Commission to settle outstanding obligations and also fulfil the statutory requirement of organising and conducting elections for new office bearers for women councils and committees from village to national level. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Attorney-General. Do you want to say that we have a vacuum in the women councils? MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, the tenure expired.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, have you heard? The tenure expired - what now happens? Attorney-General, what remedy do you have for the women in the circumstance that the elections have not taken place? What is the immediate remedy?MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, the statement I have just presented was prepared in consultation with the Electoral Commission and our biggest request is that we be provided with a supplementary budget so that we cover the funding gap and handle the women council elections. THE SPEAKER: What did the money that was disbursed do? What was it used for?6154MINISTERIAL STATEMENTMR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, I have explained. THE SPEAKER: Is it Shs 15.6 billion? MR KAFUUZI: I have explained; I can read it again. Madam Speaker, while the request was Shs 35.86 billion, only Shs 15 billion was appropriated.THE SPEAKER: Was it released?MR KAFUUZI: From this statement, it appears not to have been released in the Financial Year 2022/2023.THE SPEAKER: Before you leave the microphone, is it possible to have a statutory instrument that extends the time of office of the existing women’s councils as we await?MR KAFUUZI: I appreciate your advice. We can work on it and lay it on the Table. THE SPEAKER: When do you lay it on the Table?MR KAFUUZI: We can work on the statutory instrument as we look for the funds.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a constitutional vacuum that needs to be resolved. If he is going to work on it and see how the extension can be done, can we have that document on Tuesday?MR KAFUUZI: I will try. (Interjections) THE SPEAKER: What did you say?MR KAFUUZI: We shall lay it on Tuesday.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kafuuzi, this is a very respectable House and therefore, when making a response, be committal to it.MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, I understand your request to have this laid on the Table by Tuesday, but ideally speaking, I want to have it presented to Cabinet first. Maybe give me -THE SPEAKER: But Cabinet sits on Monday and I am saying lay it on Tuesday.MR KAFUUZI: Okay. We shall do our best.THE SPEAKER: Are you laying it or not?MR KAFUUZI: Yes, we shall lay it.THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, if they do not lay it on Tuesday, we shall subject it to a debate. Let us wait until Tuesday and then, discuss. I know women, and men who love women are very concerned about this. Can we go to the next item. BILLSFIRST READINGTHE SPORTS BILL, 2022THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday, Tuesday, 8 November 2022, a matter of a need to update the obsolete legal regime governing the sports sector came up. As you recall, on 9 March 2022, the tabling of the national Bill for the first time was deferred pending further consultation on this for financial implications. Since then, there has been a lot of uncertainty about the fate of the consultation. Remember, the consultation was then led by the Government Chief Whip, who is now the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker.Yesterday, I was informed by the Minister of State for Education in charge of Primary Education that the internal processes were underway in Cabinet to introduce the Bill in Parliament. I have reflected on the effects of the continued absence of an updated legal regime on the sports sector, which is causing a lot of problems. It is about governance and the performance of sports in this country. As I stated yesterday, it is only sports that does not know issues of politics, religion and tribe. It is the only thing that brings everybody together. COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6155THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 9 NOVEMBER 2022So, when you are talking about sports, you are talking about the interests of everybody in this country. The introduction of this Bill by a private Member does not in any way imply that the legislature negated its role. We know the legislature is doing its role, but where we feel that at times, a delay on what we need, we come in under Article 94(4)(b) of the Constitution.A precedence has been set on this by the Succession (Amendment) Bill, where a Private Member brought a Bill, laid it on the Table, Government came up with amendments, and then, it was referred to the committee. Both Bills were harmonised. The Bill came to this House and it was approved. As we speak, it is now an Act. So, I do not see why we should deny a Member to bring a Bill for first reading. For the avoidance of doubt, the Executive still has an opportunity. The Minister in charge of Sports spoke to me and said he will bring the Bill next week. The two Bills will be discussed together by the committee and the committee will come up with one Bill for the House to discuss so that the House can come up with something that is credible enough from the community and Government. Therefore, - minister, would you like to say something?3.17THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to begin by thanking my brother, Hon. Moses Magogo for coming up with a Private Member’s Bill. I also take the same opportunity to begin by wishing my brother a happy birthday. On a special note, I would like to thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker for leading the country, specifically for giving my brother a well-deserved Range Rover. (Laughter) On the same note, I would also like to thank - Madam Speaker, can I seek your protection?THE SPEAKER: We are wondering whether it is related to the Bill. (Laughter) Honourable members, Hon. Basalirwa has been delegated to lay the Bill. MR OGWANG: It is related to the Bill because I am talking about the mover and that is, Hon. Moses Magogo. So, I beg your indulgence that you allow me to proceed with the response. But first, I need to begin by thanking Mama –(Interjections) - the Minister of Education and Sports, and my brother, Hon. Hamson Obua. Mama is the First Lady of Uganda; Hon. Janet Kataha Museveni. Madam Speaker, I need your protection.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in my culture, when you are giving respect to a lady, just call her “Mama”. (Applause) I would also feel sweet to be called “Mama” -(Laughter)- just like I call the Leader of Government Business “Mama”.So, do not feel offended. “Mama” is the First Lady, period. She will always remain the First Lady; you cannot change it. (Applause) MR OGWANG: The reason I brought this, Madam Speaker, is because Hon. Hamson Obua, who is my boss – the Government Chief Whip – was the minister of sports then. A lot of work has been done and for the record;i) There was consultation that took place.ii) There was sufficient harmonisation for the Bill.iii) As of now, the procedure requires that – as Cabinet – before any Bill is brought before this august House, it has to go through Cabinet. In that case, Cabinet is meant to look at this Bill on Monday and, after that, I will bring the Bill –THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are we talking about the same Bill? These are two different Bills.6156MINISTERIAL STATEMENTMR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence and make a submission. I am talking about the same Bill because there was harmonisation between us – the Ministry of Education and Sports – and the Member, Hon. Moses Magogo. I can even lay on Table the draft Bill, which was harmonised between Hon. Moses Magogo and the Ministry of Education and Sports before I joined the sector. It is from that, Madam Speaker, that I request this House to permit me to bring the consolidated Bill to this august House, after Cabinet has approved it on Monday. That is my humble appeal before this august House. I thank you so much.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members –(Hon. Macho rose_)-  procedure -MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, whereas my good brother, the Minister in charge of Sports in this Government, is submitting that there was harmonisation between Government and the mover of the Private Member’s Bill, I do not know whether we are proceeding well because he is speaking on behalf of Hon. Magogo, who is here. Madam Speaker, your guidance was very clear and accurate that it can be moved and Government can make a rejoinder so that this Bill, being a Bill that is wanted now, can help our country move fast. If we keep on waiting for private Members to bring Bills and processes come in such a way that we should wait for Cabinet to approve them, it can be another way of delays; moreover, this Parliament will account on how many Bills it has passed this year. I, therefore, do not know whether we are proceeding well for my good brother, the minister, to talk on behalf of Hon. Magogo, who is here. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Yes, Hon. Okot -MR JOHN OKOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, we were here discussing the same topic and you gave a ruling. You even went ahead and quoted the Constitution. We accepted, as the House, that a Private Member’s Bill can be moved and if there is any level of harmonisation, it will come at a later time. It should not stop a Member from producing or bringing in a Bill. Are we really proceeding well, yet, we discussed this matter exhaustively yesterday and came to a conclusion? THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is one chairperson in this House. We made a ruling yesterday. Under Article 94(4)(b) of the Constitution of Uganda, a Member of Parliament has a right to move a Private Member’s Bill. We have a legislative agenda of 62 Bills, but not even a quarter of the Bills have been brought to this House. I know my Majegere is going to push, but let us not deprive a Private Member from executing his role. (Applause) That is one. Secondly, where Government feels that the Bill is not sufficient enough, it can take it over at committee level – like it did with the Succession Bill. Government can go and take over the Bill at committee level and that will be sufficient enough. Pursuant to Rule 128(1) of the Rules of Procedure, I now invite Hon. Asuman Basalirwa to table the Bill for first reading.MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, before Hon. Asuman Basalirwa comes in, I want us to, first, correct the record – and I would like the mover of the Bill to put it on record. Which Bill is he coming to move now? The one I am bringing, as Government, is a harmonised Bill between the Private Member and the Government?THE SPEAKER: Was it laid on the Table? MR OGWANG: No. According to the procedure, which I found, there was a harmonisation meeting which took place at the Ministry of Education and Sports – and I am happy the former minister is here. He can be able to speak for himself.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6157THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 9 NOVEMBER 2022THE SPEAKER: Hon. Basalirwa?3.26MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, what is on record is a Bill that was gazetted on 10 December 2021; The National Sports Bill. It is what is in the Uganda Gazette and it is what I am going to present. Madam Speaker –THE SPEAKER: The harmonisation process was administrative, not what was discussed in the House.MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, I attended the harmonisation meeting with Eng. Magogo. The meeting was not on – actually, we did not conclude, but agreed to allow the Executive to proceed with the process. What I raised yesterday arose out of the delay. Therefore, what is clear is that there is a Bill, which was gazetted and it is on the Order Paper. Madam Speaker, I beg to move under Rule 128 –THE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter. Honourable members – Frontbench, I want to tell you one thing: we are not against the Bill, but we are helping you to work. We cannot have a Bill laid here and it takes eight months in the name of harmonisation. If you want to make any changes, you are free to go to the committee and even take over the Bill. I have just given you the precedence that we set in this House with the Succession Bill. It was laid here, Government wanted and took it over. You can still go and take over this. For us, we are showing you the way. We want you to do the work.MR OGWANG: I was rising – first of all, I thank the honourable member for the initiative and I want honourable colleagues to bear with me on what I am going to submit here. We all know that there are Rules of Procedure, which govern when we bring these Bills before this Floor. That is why I asked the first question - if we harmonise. There is a procedural matter, which I was going to raise because these are parts of the procedures, which this Parliament approved.Firstly, as he is going to read, is he going to lay on the Table a certificate of financial implications?THE SPEAKER: The certificate was already laid. It was laid. MR OGWANG: That is what I needed for us to get and I am happy that my predecessor is here as the Government Chief Whip.THE SPEAKER: We are past that stage. Yes, Dr Bayigga?DR BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, the minister knows the procedures of this Parliament very well. Is it in order, that at this time when we are calling for the Committee Stage, for the Minister to continue to rise to say – (Interjection)  yes, first reading –THE SPEAKER: It is not the Committee Stage, but the first reading.DR BAYIGGA: First reading – for the Minister to continue to technically defeat this process by calling for the certificate of financial implications, which was laid on the Table a long time ago?THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I appreciate your effort. When you look at the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, section 76, it talks about certificates of financial implication. I would like to inform you that that stage has passed. And because of that and as I said before, we are helping you to do your work in good faith. Do not deprive this country – do not be seen to be an obstacle to this country on sports, but kindly, just receive the Bill and go and work on it. I am making a very humble appeal to you  - please, have some love for these Ugandans.6158MINISTERIAL STATEMENTMR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I want to clear the record; I am not against the Sports Bill because I am the Minister of Sports and I am a sportsman myself. I want the country to know that very well. Number two, I am only trying to look at the Parliamentary procedures on how Bills are processed. So, I needed that to be made clear.  Now that you have guided, Madam Speaker, you are the Chairperson of the House; I cannot be able to proceed on a matter, which – because I raised the matter – actually, I had subsequent questions to ask, but for the record, let me stop there. However, I would like to say this. I welcome the Bill from Hon. Engineer Moses Magogo. As a ministry, we shall work with him and that is why the issues I still asked and raised earlier on is that; now this Bill, is it harmonised or not? Therefore, I will be able to go and make my submissions before the committee. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Minister of State for Sports. When you talk about the procedures, I would like to remind you that the custodian of the procedures of the law in this House is the person speaking – and that is the Speaker. Secondly, you are going to harmonise this Bill and you will be the one to bring it to the House; you are going to take it over from the committee. Pursuant to Rule 128(1) of the Rules of Procedure, I now invite Hon. Basalirwa Asuman to table the Bill for the first reading.3.33MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Pursuant to rule 128(2), I beg to move that the Bill titled “The National Sports Bill,2021” be read for the first time. I beg to move. BILLSFIRST READINGTHE NATIONAL SPORTS BILL, 2021THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands referred to the Committee on Education and Sports and the 45 days prescribed under rule 129(2) apply to the Bill and they will have to report back to this House. Thank you.MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, pursuant to your ruling, I beg to formally lay this Bill on the Table. I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER: Please, lay. Please, Committee on Education, start working on the Bill together with the ministry. I am told the Government Chief Whip would like to seek guidance.MR OBUA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I have no doubt in my mind – and the guidance I am seeking is in line with the provision of Article 94 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda – It may not apply to the Bill that has just been handled.However, going forward, Madam Speaker, rights move together with responsibilities. And in framing Article 94 – if it is read as a whole – much as a Private Member has the right, the Constitution also imposes some two responsibilities, especially when you read Article 94(4)(c) and (d).THE SPEAKER: Honourable Government Chief Whip, before you go there, can you first look at rule 222. First look at our rules; our operation in the House is guided by the rules.MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, the issue I am raising is not for the Bill we have already considered because rule 222 is on reconsideration of a decision of the House. However, I just needed to seek your guidance going forward on the provision of Article 94 as a whole, especially on Private Member’s Bill in terms of the responsibility that the Constitution imposes on a Private Member. Thank you.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6159THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 9 NOVEMBER 2022THE SPEAKER: Next item. MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE NATIONAL DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT PLAN3.37THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Ms Esther Anyakun):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, this information paper seeks to address Parliament on item No.1: the impact of disasters to the socio-economic development of the country and to appraise Parliament on the Cabinet approval of the National Disaster Risk Management Plan and also the Standard Operational Procedures (SOPs) of the management of disasters. Uganda in the past decades has been experiencing a widespread occurrence of disasters induced by both natural and human-made disasters. The country is undergoing increased exposure and vulnerability of population, livelihoods, critical infrastructure and environment to prevailing hazards that resulted in frequent economic losses and human mortality. According to the Statista Disaster Monitoring Network (2020), Uganda was ranked 15th, globally and the first in Africa to be affected by the natural hazard-induced disasters in 2020. Uganda is the 14th most vulnerable and the 48th least ready for particularly hydro-meteorological hazards.In 2016/2017, drought reduced GDP to about 2.3 per cent and led to an increase in poverty from 19.7 to 21.4 per cent. In 2020-2014, the disasters reduced the GDP performance by an average of 3.5 per cent. The Annual State of Disaster Report 2020 showed financial losses estimated to be Shs 563 billion, which negatively impacted the GDP by 3.5 per cent. The losses were an increase from the previous years by 14 per cent with over 80 districts affected adversely by natural disasters. Refugee influx into the country, particularly in vulnerable districts that are already prone to multiple hazards, further exacerbated the situation. Disaster Risk Management in the CountryMadam Speaker, Government of Uganda, in line with the provision of the national Constitution, has the mandate to respond to the plight of its citizens before, during and after the disaster strikes. Government has scaled up its structured approach towards sustained, systematic and comprehensive institutional and operational arrangements to strengthen disaster risk management. The National Policy on Disaster Preparedness and Management Priorities Mainstreaming – Disaster Risk Management (DRM) in all sectors Despite the fact that DRM policy has been in place and significant investments have been made to promote better preparedness to respond to disasters, there have been significant challenges to enhancing the effectiveness and efficiency of the system-wide approach to disaster risk management in the country. Success in protecting development gains and attaining sustainable development will depend on developing a national framework to guide institutional and coordination mechanisms for effective disaster preparedness management at all levels of government. The National Disaster Risk Management PlanCognisant of the impact of the disasters in this country, the President of the Republic of Uganda His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, issued a directive on 5 July 2021 to develop a comprehensive national disaster risk management plan and SOPs for Uganda. The directive was in realisation of the urgent need to manage disaster risks in the country through the implementation of tangible short, medium and long-term DRM and SOPs-related activities with a clear link to the achievement of the National Development Plan. 6160MINISTERIAL STATEMENTThe DRM plan, with support from UNDP, was formulated and consequently approved by Cabinet this year on 11 July 2022. It is aligned with the principles of the Sendai Framework, as it envisions a similar outcome, which reduces disaster risks and losses that are achievable under the programme implementation action plan of NDPIII.The vision of the DRM plan is “A Disaster Resilient Uganda capable to anticipate, prepare for and coping with all disaster risks.” The total multiple-sectoral and also hazard-specific DRM plan is around Shs 20.2 trillion. That is approximately $2.77 billion. This budget brings together all DRM measures to attempt outright avoidance of the impact on disasters in the country. However, taking into account existing and also potential resources, my office analysed the plan and presented it to the Cabinet, seeking approval of Shs 867.8 billion for short-term, medium-term and long-term interventions beginning with the Financial Year 2022/2023. The plan’s objective is: “To improve the understanding of disaster risk, hazard and vulnerabilities at all levels, strengthening disaster risk coordination and governance at all levels of Government; promote investment in disaster risk reduction to resilience through structural and also non-structural measures; capacity building, research, enhancing disaster preparedness for effective response and to ‘Build Back Better’ in a recovery, rehabilitation and reconstructive construction among others.”The Key Components of the Disaster Risk Management PlanThe DRM plan considers five major components of the disaster risk management;i) Disaster risk reduction (Sendai framework for disaster risk reduction - four priorities);ii) Preparedness,iii) Response and cross-cutting themes such as equipment and staffing. The four priorities of the Sendai framework include understanding of the risk, coordination, governance, investment in resilience and enhancing preparations for effective response and to “Build Back Better.Below is the Cabinet-approved budget breakdown for the short-term, medium-term, and long-term beginning Financial Year 2022/2023 to 2031/2032. Colleagues, you can look at that page No. 7 – I do not have to go through that, but when you note at the bottom, it says; “For detailed actions for the proposed implementation plan, see Annex one 2.2 and 2.3 on pages 234 to 238 of the DRM plan.” I am very sure we have these on the intranet. Financial Arrangements for Disaster Risk ManagementPresidential Seed Fund (equivalent to $50 million) for DRM to implement the short-term interventions beginning Financial Year 2022 and 2023. Disaster Risk Management FundThe Disaster Preparedness and Management Policy (2021) envisaged the establishment of the National Disaster Response Fund managed at the national level. The Department of Disaster Management and Preparedness and the Parliament of Uganda work closely to facilitate the enactment of the Disaster Preparedness and Management Bill budgetary allocations. Honourable members, it is now at the principal level, which is going to be presented to Cabinet.MDAs Annual PlansAll MDAs are expected to roll out mainstreaming disaster risk reduction to development in principle, as laid out in the NDPIII document. NPA will lead the monitoring and reporting on the compliance of the MDAs throughout the implementation of the National Disaster Risk Management Plan. [Ms Anyakun][Ms Anyakun]6161THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 9 NOVEMBER 2022Funds from Non-Governmental Actors The approved disaster risk management plan will allow stakeholders to activate their institutional and other arrangements to fundraise and also implement parts of this DRM plan.Funds Mobilised by Private SectorThe department at the office of the Prime Minister and other MDAs will work closely with the private sector to fundraise and also accept resources (in kind and financial) based on thematic and geographical interests. The SOPs have been developed and approved along with the DRM plan. It offers a set of directives that provide guidance to individuals, communities and also institutions before, during and after the event occurs.The overall oversight and also review of the plan will be based on the NDP III Monitoring and Reporting Framework. The Office of the Prime Minister technical oversight committee will form an interagency strategy and technical committee to jointly oversee the DRM Plan implementation, monitoring and reporting. The oversight committee includes the representatives of Government (senior Government officials from the Office of the Prime Minister), the United Nations, international NGOs, FBOs, the Uganda Red Cross and the donors, M&E committee, communication committee, resource mobilisation committee and thematic sector committee. In conclusion, the impact of disasters on lives, livelihoods, and economy is on the rise. The DRM issues are cross cutting and multifaceted. It is every one’s business and at the same time, necessitates predictable funding for proactive action. Lastly, implementation of the DRM Plan requires a concerted and also coordinated effort of all actors at all levels, including Government, NGOs, development partners, the private sector and the communities. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. I beg to lay the National Disaster Risk Management Plan 2021 to 2022, 2023 to 2031 to 2032. I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Honourable Minister. Honourable Members, you are aware that these natural disasters are quite many in several areas. Oftentimes, most of the Members raise issues of disasters as matters of national importance. We have been expecting this report and we are happy that we have received it. As a House, we should be able to see what to do with the challenges that are being raised by the minister.We have had a number of issues. One would ask, “Why don’t we have a national disaster commission?” However, we have had a discussion on that and it is underway. We took it upon ourselves and we have discussed it; it is being handled.I will now open the debate on this matter for 15 minutes. There was a procedural matter.MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the good statement that she has made on the Disaster Risk Management Plan. The procedural issue that I am raising pertains to emergencies, whenever disasters occur. The emergency operations require urgency.A number of us, led by the Leader of the Opposition, came with a report after visiting those areas that had been ravaged by floods, particularly Mbale City. In our report, whose recommendations were adopted by this House, one of those, which is key and fundamental, was for the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to have a separate vote so that they do not have to go through “Bikila Maria” to reach Jesus Christ. That in itself is responsible for the number of factors that delay response and intervention. 6162MINISTERIAL STATEMENTIt has even been raised by the line ministries themselves. The Minister, Eng. Hilary Onek, was very categorical when he presented his report here; that a number of times the delays have come because they have to go through another ministry; the Accounting Officer of the Office of the Prime Minister, before they access any funds for emergency operations. The procedural issue that I am raising is that this ministry - and we are reliably informed that even the President himself, who by virtue of his office is the substantive Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, has okayed the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees - the word “disaster preparedness” suggests having a sub vote so that they can easily respond to emergencies. Is it - THE SPEAKER: Honourable, are you speaking facts or hearsay? MR NAMBESHE: These are facts, Madam Speaker. These correspondences are - THE SPEAKER: If they are facts, is there anything written that the Accounting – MR NAMBESHE: Yes, please, I even have a copy of the correspondence from the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to the President. I also have the reply from the President. I have those documents. I can lay some of them on the Table. THE SPEAKER: Can we have a look at them? Lay them on the Table. MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, Hon. Hilary Onek wrote – and this is your copy, Madam Speaker - requesting to create a sub vote for the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. I beg to lay. THE SPEAKER: Do you mean you got that document from me? MR NAMBESHE: No, these documents are in the public domain, Madam Speaker – THE SPEAKER: You just said that it is my copy or are you saying it is copied to me?  MR NAMBESHE: Now that I have laid, all the contents of this correspondence are for your benefit. (Laughter) The other copy that I am laying on the Table, Madam Speaker, is that of the reply from His Excellency the President himself - THE SPEAKER: By the way, just as a correction, the letter is written to me, but this is a copy stamped by the Prime Minister, not by my office.MR NAMBESHE: That is why I told you that all these documents are in the public domain. I am also a recipient of some of those copies. That is why I am laying them on the Table. The other copy that I am laying is the reply. I am very concerned -  THE SPEAKER: Yes, go ahead because you are from Bududa. MR NAMBESHE: Yes, now you are talking. This particular one is a reply by His Excellency the President to the Minister for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. I beg to lay.The last one is from the Minister of Finance to the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. I beg to lay, Madam Speaker. All these copies are here.  THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Have you laid the one of the President?MR NAMBESHE: Yes. Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: When you got those lists, as somebody who is supposed to monitor Government, did you look at whether they qualify for a vote or not under the Public Finance Management Act?MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, the advantage of my office, as the Chief Opposition Whip, is that I am a consumer of loads of [Mr Nambeshe]6163THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 9 NOVEMBER 2022information. This is part of it. When I subjected this information to scrutiny, I realised it had substance for the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to have their own separate vote so they can address, intervene and respond with urgency to matters of disaster.THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable minister, you will speak last. Let us have Hon. Alex.3.59MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the honourable minister for articulating very well issues related to disaster response management. I want to thank her sincerely. For quite some time now, my colleagues and I, who subscribe to the Disaster Risk Reduction Forum in this Parliament have been talking about issues that have been raised in this very important report. We realised that disasters have increased both in intensity and frequency, and they are extremely very difficult to predict unless you have the necessary equipment and data and this is what I am going to talk about. Just last week, I had an opportunity to attend a meeting of stakeholders in this country regarding anticipatory action - this is all about the early warning. Until very recently, Uganda had very poor early warning systems. I am happy that Parliament came up with support. We pumped a lot of money that has enabled early warning systems to give good information; the Entebbe early warning centre. It is now very modern and able to give us 80 per cent reliable information that one can rely on. I thank the President for intending to introduce a fund.  This fund is long overdue. When my colleague talked about enabling the ministry to get a separate vote, honestly, each one of us should support this because we have all seen it. The response is very difficult between the minister and us. I do not know how many times I have had to go to the minister who has to promise me. Since I understand she does not control almost anything - firstly, we need to increase the amount of money we are currently giving to the Prime Minister’s Office. If it is three per cent, let us increase it to six per cent so that there is enough. Then immediately after, we can think of maybe having an autonomous department that can respond - (Interruption)MS AISHA KABANDA:  I would like to seek clarification from the Member. As we increase the Prime Minister’s budget from maybe three to six per cent, as you suggested, would you recommend where we would cut?MR BYARUGABA: No. I am talking about another budgeting cycle, like the one we are going to start soon. In fact, we have already started. Let us think about it so that we do not go crying that the minister has not responded when actually, they are unable to do that because the funding is very small. It is something we should be seriously considering. It is up to you and I. Let us give them money. The Prime Minister and the minister are here; let us give them more money and then, demand a response. Secondly, I want to thank the honourable minister for talking about the issue of mainstreaming. We talk about disasters. We come up with big debates in Parliament about disasters, but what is happening in the districts, for example, Isingiro? Do they have a committee? Are they doing anything in Isingiro? Are they funded? No, they are not. So, everything –(Member timed out.)4.03MR RICHARD WANDA (NRM, Bungokho Central County, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues in thanking the minister for the statement and the plan she has laid. I also want to appreciate the views of colleagues in regard to the budget. I have a concern about point No. 27. The minister indicates that MDAs are expected to roll out mainstreaming of the disaster risk response. My suggestion is that we should empower the local governments, not MDAs to do this work. 6164MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSecondly, my view is that this House should enable the ministry to work on preventive, not only disaster response because the causes of disasters are known. The Elgon and the Rwenzori regions are hit by disasters every year and the causes are known. Therefore, is it possible for this House to allocate resources to address corrective measures such that even the budget for these disasters will be reduced in the future? If we empower the local government committees, as the honourable colleague stated, I believe the response will be faster. I reported an issue from my constituency where a landslide destroyed people’s houses and gardens, but to-date, there is no response. If the local government committees are empowered, I believe proper service will be rendered to our people. Thank you.4.05MR ALFRED EDAKASI (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to reiterate the issue of the budget. Last year, when I raised the issue of the schools that were blown away by wind and storm in Kaberamaido, the minister told me, “You are among a very long list; so, maybe, think about it next year”. Yet, we were thinking about emergency response. I knew she was telling the truth. So, I went ahead and mobilised money some other way and roofed the health centre III and did something for the school. Therefore, I think it does make sense that we create a vote and increase it. Madam Speaker, I want to say that we can predict some disasters. Talking about the scenario in Teso - intermittent rain for two years - we knew we were heading for famine. Even when the rains were coming back, we did not have seeds and there was no intervention to provide seeds. Madam Speaker, we have people who, even with the rain cannot plant anything because they lost everything. I think the aspect of planning is important in preparedness. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Seminarian. He was supposed to be a Bishop. (Laughter)4.07MR MAXIMUS OCHAI (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to make a comment on the proposed establishment of a disaster risk management fund. I want to state as follows: Informed by macro-economic management, the creation of another fund outside the Contingency Fund, which actually is supposed to finance activities related to addressing emergencies and disaster would undermine the very essence of ensuring that we attain our macroeconomic aggregates including inflation. Therefore, I would propose that we should instead enhance and sustain the Contingency Fund to a level that is adequate enough, given our history. I thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Maybe just for a correction, what is stated in the President’s letter is that “the ministry should have a sub-V ote in the Office of the Prime Minister and the sub-V ote should deal with the issues of predictability or unreadiness of whatever is happening in the country”. So, they should be able to predict and always be ready and that is why they need a sub-V ote. That is what is written in this letter. Yes, Workers Representative - 4.09MR SETH WAMBEDE (NRM, Northern Division, Mbale City): Madam Speaker, I am not a workers’ representative. I represent – THE SPEAKER: Are you Werikhe? MR WAMBEDE: I am Seth Wambede, a neighbor to Bukedea. (Laughter) THE SPEAKER: Okay. Tell us about your disaster. MR WAMBEDE: Madam Speaker, disasters in Uganda are year in year out. Therefore, when you talk about a stabilisation fund, to me, it is overdue. Take the case of my area; a disaster [Mr Wanda]6165THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 9 NOVEMBER 2022hit us in July. Today, what was destroyed has not been touched at all. We are still there. We have had meetings with the Prime Minister; she keeps promising, but nothing comes out. She keeps promising that the Ministry of Works and Transport is working on it, but the works ministry is not giving us any solution. So, the idea of a stabilisation fund in her ministry is welcome. However, we also need to look at empowering local governments. I will give you another example. I have two major bridges that were destroyed and when I followed up, I got stuck. Those at the Ministry of Works and Transport were saying: “No, one of the bridges is not ours; it is a local one.” When you go to the local government, they say: “We have no funds because the destruction is huge. It requires over Shs 100 million, which local governments cannot raise” – (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Hon. Emmanuel - 4.11MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I thank the minister for the report and at the same time, thank you, Madam Speaker, for stating here that the issue of the commission is being looked at. This means that, very soon, we are going to have people who will start a disaster management commission. Madam Speaker, I have said “thank you” for that because the things we are discussing here – I would imagine – would be put to better use if we have that commission. Without that commission, it is going to be difficult for some of the issues to be implemented. Madam Speaker, we know that we have the Contingency Fund, which we are saying is at three per cent and we are proposing to increase it. I want to believe that that fund can only be put to good use when you have people who are managing it different from the ordinary staff within the Prime Minister’s Office. Madam Speaker, I want to believe that when the commission is being created, we will have experts who know about disaster management and preparedness. For once, I pray that when we reach that point, that money, which is put as Contingency Fund, is going to be respected. We often put money there, but other issues come and take it away. We do not respect whatever money has been created for a specific situation. We have, for instance, Uganda Road Fund, which is supposed to be drawing money from tax on fuel, but many times, it is not respected. That is why you may find that Uganda Road Fund does not have the money that is supposed to be supporting the road works in this country. I pray that we reach that point and that fund is respected. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want us to focus on issues raised on the report that are affecting our constituents. We can as well talk about the money, but I would want to hear from the Ministry of Finance regarding the issue of creating a sub-V ote. From the little accounting I know, there is no sub-V ote. You either have a subvention or a V ote. So, I do not know whether it is the finance ministry that misled the President to write about the sub-V ote. 4.15THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, you and I went to the same business school and read the same things. Therefore, you are very correct: the term “sub-V ote”, in Government accounting does not exist; you are either a V ote or a subvention. In this regard, disaster preparedness and management is a subvention under the V ote of the Office of the Prime Minister. Unless Government decides – and this is our role by the way, as managers of the Treasury, to determine whether to grant a V ote status or not - that we create another V ote -6166MINISTERIAL STATEMENTTHE SPEAKER: Hon. Musasizi, it is not a personal role, but that is a role that is embedded in the law, under Treasury Instructions, 2017. It says that for you to be given a V ote; 1. There must be a legal framework.2. There must be running activities, based on that financial year. 3. Funds should be allocated from the Consolidated Fund. 4. The institution should be able to raise non-tax revenue (NTR).5. They should be able to process through an Accountant-General. MR MUSASIZI:  That is exactly what I am saying – that if you want to be a V ote, with all those conditions in place, you must be able to process through the Accountant-General and the Accountant-General determines whether those conditions are satisfactory or not. THE SPEAKER: According to you, are they satisfactory for you to give them a V ote?MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, from our side, we have not got any indication that the system being used at the Office of the Prime Minister is not robust enough to enable us transact with them.4.18MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. By the time the President wrote this letter, there must have been sufficient discussions that prompted him to write the letter so that this disaster preparedness sector has its own V ote under the Prime Minister’s Office. The minister has clearly told us that you are either a V ote or a subvention. Now, disaster is having subventions; I am very sure the President meant a V ote, but somebody may be in the process did not understand considering that these are typos or errors that can occur.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sarah, do not misguide this House. A sub-V ote cannot mean a V ote. Let us accept there was a mistake. There is either a V ote or subvention. Hon. Sarah, you did not do accounting; so, do not even talk about it.MS OPENDI: I have a Master’s in Business Administration.THE SPEAKER: Do not tell us about that; Hon. Sarah, first of all, hear from the Minister in charge Disaster Preparedness; what could have happened? Why do they want a V ote on their own? Of course, we know they have challenges like any other ministry, but can we find out from the minister?4.19THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Eng. Hilary Onek): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, colleagues, who have appreciated the challenges the disaster preparedness ministry is facing because we are living on subvention, according to the accountants. These subventions come through the normal bureaucracy in the Public Service and that bureaucracy never avails the money on time for us to react or respond to disasters. (Applause) That bureaucracy is infringed on by other senior colleagues in in that Prime Minister’s office - money is diverted for causes, which are not disaster. So, these are the real facts on the ground. That is why I wrote to the President and said; “Look, the Disaster Department used to be a separate ministry.” In those days, they had offices at the Crescent Towers and they were managing disasters more effectively although that time disaster levels were less because the environmental destruction had not reached the current level. Today, the environmental destruction has reached a level whereby occurrences of drought, flood and all forms of destruction, hail storms are in abundance. Everywhere people are crying, schools’ roofs have been swept off, homes have been 6167THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 9 NOVEMBER 2022destroyed and the population is suffering. Here you are. In fact, if I were not strong enough, I would have had a heart attack a long time ago. (Laughter)Madam Speaker, when I see the suffering of people, I break down easily like I wept in Bududa when I saw people being pulled from the mud - dead bodies. And I told the President that “I will resign if I do not get supported to get these people away from that hazard.” (Applause)It is a real challenge. I would like to appreciate Hon. Nambeshe - we are now friends because we used to fight each other. You have understood our problem because the purpose for something called a ministry is supposed to be effective and efficient. Ours is not effective and efficient because of bureaucracy and we do not have authority over whatever is in the Contingency Fund. So, I support all that colleagues have brought up. I wrote to His Excellency, the President, requesting that we get a separate V ote, at least, if we are not going to stand alone as a ministry. The reason we should plan in advance and we had started planning.For example, during my tenure there of nine years now and nearly seven months - in that ministry, I am going to be 10 years next year in March. We had initiative; we started working closely with the hydro-meteorological systems, which predicts weather conditions, the rainfall, so that in advance, we can plan. We created a department called National Emergency Coordination Centre (NECC), which has been able to give warning, six months at least in advance to know when disaster is going to happen, but all those are on paper.To the Ministry of Finance, that one is not an issue; disaster comes and we are not ready; those are the problems we have. That is why I asked His Excellency, the President to give us a separate V ote. Secondly, I needed to recruit scientists to plan better. Disaster is a physical haemorrhage on our set-ups because of the climatic conditions, which have changed, the rising temperatures and many other things. The Ministry of Water and Environment does very well - it can always derive the data and the hydro-meteorological department, with which we are working on predictions are doing very well. We are sharing the data in predicting when those problems are likely to be.However, we need scientists to plan to use the data from the Ministry of Water and Environment, data on floods. We have to apply it for us to develop resilience to all these disasters happening. And these are challenges we have. So, in this plan, which my colleague read here, we intend to decentralise our operation; we do not want to operate as a Kampala-based unit. For example, for eastern region, we must have a centre in Mbale, whereby we will have food stores, all equipment, everything ready to respond when disaster occurs in eastern Uganda. In Western Uganda, hailstorms have started and then, the floods in Kasese will require us to be present there and not operate from Kampala.In the north, where sometimes, we are hit by drought, we are working closely with the Ministry of Agriculture to give us fast-yielding seeds, but even if they get them for us, what plan on the ground do we have to make sure that those seeds are planted on time to beat drought so that there is food? All these are plans to be done there. Kampala can be a coordinating centre, not an operational centre the way we are now. So, these are the reasons I requested His Excellency, the President, to allow us to work in a planned and scientific manner. However, I think, maybe, some advisors might have given a different view.6168MINISTERIAL STATEMENTTHE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the House has heard your cry.MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker- (Interruption)ENG. ONEK: Let me conclude then. Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker.MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, we have received the statement from the minister and we would like to appreciate them for sharing the plan with us. The Minister has spoken about his request. Madam Speaker, you have presented the letter from the President. Would it not be procedurally right to refer this matter to the relevant committee so that it can –(Interjections)  – yes, because we are talking of a sub-V ote and we cannot resolve that matter here. THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sarah Opendi, the role of giving a V ote lies with the PS/ST - that is the Ministry of Finance. Since the minister has presented his case and everything has been presented, we are going to refer this to the ministry to determine the suitability of the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to have its own V ote because of the emerging situations that come up and because of the bureaucracy that is there. So, Minister of Finance, you will report to this House on the directive of the President and then, we may disregard the mistake. However, what is there is pertinent. Give us feedback on what you will have agreed on, on having the ministry have a V ote.MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, we undertake to look into the matter and report back to the House at the earliest opportunity.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, look at this issue objectively and give us feedback in two weeks’ time. (Applause) MR MUSASIZI: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you. There is a procedural matter here.MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I listened attentively to the honourable gentleman, minister and engineer on whether the revelation was inadvertent, that I picked it; notably that whereas disasters are not mainstreamed in the budget to OPM, monies put aside for disasters are diverted. Would it be okay to offer comfort to this House, if the Rt Hon. Prime Minister explained the extent of the diversion of monies meant for disasters, an advertent revelation made by the honourable minister on the Floor of Parliament because it left a bad taste?It is very revealing of possibilities; because I have known the honourable engineer as a consistent gentleman. When you said he cried at some stage, I hesitated in my mind as to what would prompt the honourable gentleman to cry. (Laughter)Would it be okay, Madam Speaker, if the Prime Minister explained to this House the level of appetite that compels her to divert monies meant for disasters?THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, I do not want to take this debate into personal attacks. I know what you expect. I have already made a ruling to that effect. Next item - (Applause)MINISTERAL STATEMENT IN RESPONSE TO THE STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION ON THE INABILITY OF GOVERNMENT TO CLEAR CRITICAL STATUTORY OBLIGATIONSTHE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter. Just a minute, Hon. Anite.DR BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for this time. Yesterday, Members raised matters of security and they are of utmost importance. The minister in charge was not present and you directed that he comes and gives a statement about the closure of police posts all over this country. This is raising a lot of anxiety and security threats within our communities. 6169THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 9 NOVEMBER 2022Now that the relevant minister is around - the General - wouldn’t it be procedurally right to take charge and explain to this House why these measures were taken? Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Internal Affairs, you will give us a report tomorrow. Let us hear from Hon. Anite. Honourable Members of Parliament, as you recall, on 14th, Hon. Kivumbi, the shadow minister of finance presented a statement on the failure by Government to clear critical statutory obligations. In response, the Minister of Finance promised to bring a statement to this House.As you are aware, failure to pay these statutory obligations – for example, if institutions like National Water and Sewerage Corporation (NWSC) do not pay, then, you are failing the operations of those institutions. I even recall there is a letter that was written by the President, asking all the institutions that are indebted to NWSC to pay their money. That was the basis. Honourable minister - 4.35THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIV ATISATION AND INVESTMENT) (Ms Evelyn Anite): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition made a statement to this august House, in which he asserted that Government is unable to meet its statutory obligations. Madam Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition and honourable members, first and foremost, I categorically declare that Government is fully capable and committed to meeting all its statutory obligations in a timely and transparent manner, in order to address the issues of service delivery in this country. I will proceed to address the issues raised by the Leader of the Opposition as follows:Firstly, the Leader of the Opposition did allege that ideally, expenditure limits are expected to be translated into releases. However, it is not possible to determine how much has been released against the expenditure limits. My ministry’s response to that point raised by the Leader of the Opposition is that as you are all aware, the Treasury makes quarterly releases through the issuance of an expenditure limit circular. All Government agencies are able to spend up to the expenditure that has been provided through submission of warrants and expenditure requirements. There is, therefore, no difference between expenditure limits and releases. The spending agencies must expend as and when the expenditures become due. For example, whereas they release a quarterly limit for salaries, the agencies make payments on a monthly basis. Madam Speaker, the second question raised to us by the Leader of the Opposition is about salary shortfalls. Several local Governments are reporting salary shortfalls in funding for salary expenses for September. My ministry’s response is as follows: The salary shortfalls resulted from the enhancement of salaries for scientists and science teachers. This mostly affected local governments and as we are all aware of this issue, to avoid this in the future, we are programming enhancements, releases in quarter two to cater for any shortfall in the first quarter and providing adequate salary funding for the second quarter. Madam Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition raised the question of failure to remit local revenues. Parliament passed a resolution urging Government to revise the directive requiring local Governments to remit all local revenues to the Consolidated Fund. However, this has not been done; that is the question raised by the Leader of the Opposition. Madam Speaker, our response to this question is that in the Financial Year 2018/2019, Government reformed and streamlined budgeting releases and accountability for local revenue in line with section 29(2) of the PFMA (as amended). The main aim of the reform was to enhance transparency and accountability in the management of local revenue. The initial stage of the reform created challenges such as delays in accessing funds for service delivery. In order to address 6170MINISTERIAL STATEMENTthe above challenge, for the Financial Year 2022/2023, Government stopped issuing quarterly expenditure limits to the local governments for local revenue and instead releases local revenue are now daily, based on collections and remittances to the Consolidated Fund. This reform has enhanced transparency in revenue collection and reduced proliferation of commercial banks and accounts, which were prone to abuse. Madam Speaker, my friend and the Leader of the Opposition raised another question on expensive borrowing from the Bank of Uganda. Government borrowed up to Shs 8 trillion from the Bank of Uganda, which exceeds the 10 per cent legal limit under Section 36 of the PFMA. Section 23 also restricts transparency advances to the Government to 18 per cent. Madam Speaker, my ministry’s response is as follows: It is not true, our dear friend the Leader of the Opposition, that Government borrowed Shs 8 trillion from the Bank of Uganda. Indeed, the Bank of Uganda has already clarified this matter both in the print and the social media. In summary, the Bank of Uganda Act, 2000 mandates Bank of Uganda to perform the functions of banker to Government and agent of Government in financial matters. Government obtained an advance of Shs 2.1 trillion in the Financial Year 2020/2021, but not Shs 8 trillion as alleged by our friend, which was subsequently repaid in full. Since then, no such borrowing has taken place. Bank of Uganda manages the issuance and redemption of domestic debt securities on behalf of Government. This entails prompt repayment of matured Government securities to investors. The current outstanding amounts due from Government to Bank of Uganda relates to reimbursables attributed to this role. Government’s outstanding reimbursables to Bank of Uganda as at 30 June 2022 stood at Shs 3.37 trillion. In the current Financial Year 2022/2023, Bank of Uganda has made further repayments of matured securities worth Shs 2.51 trillion and received reimbursements from Government worth Shs 1.87 trillion, resulting in an outstanding reimbursable of Shs 4.01 trillion as at 15 September 2022. The Service Levy Agreement signed between Government and Bank of Uganda is intended to operationalise the existing laws and does not purport to create or give any new mandate to the Bank of Uganda outside the existing laws. Madam Speaker, I would like to lay the statement by Bank of Uganda, which I fully associate with, to the Parliament for the record of this matter and the statement is here in my hand. With your permission, I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER: Please, lay. MS ANITE: Madam Speaker, regarding revenue collections for the months of July and August, Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) collected Shs 3.58 trillion against a target of Shs 3.36 trillion, resulting in a surplus of Shs 221.7 billion. We are, therefore, very optimistic about meeting all URA targets in this financial year should this trend continue throughout the year and may the good Lord help us.I wish to reiterate that the ministry in which I am the Minister of State for Finance in charge of Investment and Privatisation is committed to budget transparency and accountability. At the beginning of every quarter, my ministry holds a press conference to update all stakeholders, including the general public, on the performance of the economy, revenues and quarterly releases. We do update the country and our citizens to that effect. My ministry usually shares this information in soft copy with all the Members of Parliament. This has maintained Uganda’s ranking of second best in Africa in the open budget survey. We shall continue to do our best to serve our country. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for the good report. Hon. Muwanga, do you have a rejoinder and a brief one?4.46MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We had expected [Ms Anite]6171THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 9 NOVEMBER 2022this response to come before the second quarter; it has really delayed, but let me go for the first issues first. Madam Speaker, approved budgets, quarterly warrants and expenditures by spending agencies are loaded on to an Integrated Financial Management System. Our overall level of departure with the Minister of Finance is on two important parameters. One, quarterly cash limits publicised and two, warrants submitted by spending agencies. It is my submission that the minister has not submitted evidence in the statement that the warrants loaded onto the information systems are equal to the cash in the limits, which are widely circulated. Honourable minister, this causes the discrepancy. They give agencies a cash limit; that this quarter, you will spend this amount of money. It is not necessarily that that is what will be released because releases depend on cash availability. Therefore, Madam Speaker, the pretense in this country has been that when they give cash limits, they have given agencies releases. Agencies go on to spend anticipating that they will have that money. Consequently, that money is not released to them. I asked the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to avail to this Parliament the releases to agencies, not cash limits. He has never done so. That is one issue. The second issue is very critical. Let me start with the statement of the Bank of Uganda – (Interjections)  - You note, sir. Madam Speaker, let me go issue by issue if he wants. I have no problem. I have dealt with the question of cash limits and I think – THE SPEAKER: Do you have a paper and pen or can I give you some? (Laughter) Honourable minister, there is a book here - a complimentary from the Speaker’s office.MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, on outstanding balances to Bank of Uganda - and we are saying this in the best interest of this country. Good enough, this morning, we had a discussion with the Governor, Bank of Uganda in the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Honourable members, outstanding balances in Bank of Uganda stand at Shs 4 trillion and the Government statement speaks to that. That is per this last quarter, but it was standing at Shs 3 trillion. The service agreement mandates Government to pay the reimbursable within a period of six months. However, when they fall due, the reimbursable turn into Government advances and begin to attract interest. When you go to IMF, these are the imperatives they look at to assess our debt credentials. That is why today, we are running away from concessional loans to commercial loans because we are failing on this parameter. When they look at our books in Bank of Uganda, Government of Uganda owes money to Bank of Uganda. Once a country is in that state, lending agencies do not give it concessional loans. The full effect is the kind of loans we have just approved. That is why we are asking.They are disputing a figure of Shs 12 trillion. Actually, we had reported Shs 11 trillion, but from their submission, it is now 12. We understated it. In the books of Bank of Uganda - since they manage our securities, they have been consistent on every resource envelope carried forward – it is Shs 8 trillion, which attracts an interest of over Shs 2.9 trillion for failure to make cash available. Therefore, we have a debt rollover. When you add Shs 4 trillion and Shs 8 trillion, then those balances are Shs 12 trillion. Even by the revelation of Bank of Uganda, the figure is that despicable. Madam Speaker, the other issue they are raising is sub-debt with the Bank of Uganda. The other issue is an update on the press release. Let me go to the last one, which is very critical: quarter-one releases. I have issues and I have gone through the numbers. 6172MINISTERIAL STATEMENTThey had Shs 8.8 trillion in quarter one. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development submitted a document to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development that salaries and other statutory obligations will be Shs 4.4 trillion. When you subtract that from Shs 8.8 trillion, you have Shs 3.9 trillion. I have here our debt obligation for the first quarter, as per the debt schedule. There was Shs 1.1 trillion and Shs 1.81 trillion. Madam Speaker, Shs 1 trillion is unaccounted for. What was it spent on? This is the money we are worried about - where Government went ahead and redeemed Lubowa, which Parliament had rejected. When you add your debt obligation in the first quarter, it is Shs 1.8 and Shs 1.1 for amortisation, and for the local reimbursement, it gives a balance of Shs 1,088 trillion. Where did you spend that money? On which spending lines?Therefore, our line is that they go ahead - and we need to have an inquiry into the debt refinancing. I am beginning to suspect it may not be a genuine figure carried annually in our book. That is why you have a balance of Shs 1 trillion for which, this morning, I touched Bank of Uganda. I can put it to the minister here to account for. I beg to move. THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Muwanga-Kivumbi. Under normal circumstances, we should not be discussing Bank of Uganda in the House because they are not here. Secondly, the Code of Conduct requires that the relationship between Government and Bank of Uganda is a fiducial one that must maintain confidentiality. When we start making a rebuttal on figures, then we are putting our country at total risk. Therefore, we can discuss issues of Bank of Uganda indoors and resolve them; we need to do that. It should not be a rebuttal that Bank of Uganda said this, we are saying this and the other is saying that. Let us talk about our quarterly releases; the first or second quarter. We appropriated, you never gave us money. I do not want a rebuttal.4.57THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Of course, I would like to thank my friend, the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development in charge of Investment, for the statement. It was a bit dismaying that the statement is coming late. The response is late and issues gather up when you do not get a quick response to urgent matters. One of the appalling things was that when we made these demands for a quick answer, Bank of Uganda, in its wisdom, thought it prudent to issue a statement in response to what Parliament had debated. This is why these matters became matters in the public domain and, therefore, a subject of public debate. Part of our concern, why these issues are coming back and forth is because our sense is that there is not enough transparency in reporting the public debt. The way the public debt is reported leaves a lot to be desired and we get the sense that there is under-declaration. If we are going to fix this economy, one of the issues should be truth telling. We cannot fix this economy in the dark.If we are indebted, can we know the extent of our indebtedness so that we can actually agree on what we can spend on as leaders in this country? If we under-declare the extent of our indebtedness, then, trouble begins. THE SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, there is a report by the Committee on National Economy coming up, on our indebtedness. It is supposed to be on the Order Paper – they are going to give us the level of our indebtedness to date.MR MPUUGA: That would be beautiful, Madam Speaker, which is why whereas Government was reporting Shs 73 trillion on the external and internal debt, our own computation points close to Shs 80 trillion. That contention is not healthy. (Interjections)  Well, if it is the latest report, then we shall have a conversation about it. [Mr Muwanga Kivumbi]6173THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 9 NOVEMBER 2022The question about prudence in management of statutory obligations still lingers. I can only be comforted by the minister that the report coming will provide clarity on these questions. At least in our position, as Members of Parliament, we must be in the right frame of understanding of what we are dealing with. I cannot be a legislator worth my name when I cannot prudently discuss and question the wisdom of Government’s priorities in this House. That is what we are waiting for. Without necessarily having this turn into a spurring exchange of what we know and what they know, we need assurance that there is going to be truth telling in the report. That report should be debated here, not as a matter of spurring, but for the sake of planning for this country and coming clean. When salaries are not paid - simple matters: local governments remit funds to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the finance ministry returns a quarter after hesitating for several weeks. Are these really difficult things for the finance ministry to come clean about so that we can be on the same page?THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, it is really something undesirable. You find an institution that belongs to Government, like National Water and Sewerage Corporation, not getting its payment, yet you know that by law, statutory payments take first priority. You have people who have not been paid salaries. The people of Umeme are not being paid; I have seen evidence to that effect. There is a letter that has been written by the President himself.We do appropriation - and I asked you a question: “Do we still own the role of appropriation?” We do appropriate, but you do not give institutions money. This also applies to very important institutions. Yes, we appreciate that we do not have money, but you must look at institutions and priorities.As the Leader of the Opposition has said, transparency is very important. If money is not there, say it is not there because you cannot give what is not there. If you are not transparent, we will imagine that you are distributing it from that building. (Applause) Yes, I have evidence. You distributed Shs 20 billion from the Ministry of Health to your hospitals and left our hospitals. (Laughter) 5.01MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to – THE SPEAKER: Members, I know you all want to debate, but we agreed that the report on our indebtedness will be brought to the House. The next item will be on appropriation. MR ODUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Looking at this statement, I would like to ask our ministers that before you bring a statement to read here - a statement drafted by technical teams - you, as the minister, must read that statement and be convinced that the issues you are going to present to this House are actually true. The question in this matter was the inability of Government to meet its statutory expenditures. What the minister has presented here does not even answer that concern.What are statutory obligations? These are obligations imposed by law. The law is certain at any one point. Even when you are bringing a new law, the same ministry issues that Certificate of Financial Implications. This means you are certain that you can meet that expenditure. Now, when we take the example of salaries, at any one point, you know the number of people you are supposed to pay. You have employed them. Even if a new law creates vacancies, you will issue a Certificate of Financial Implications. You have just confirmed here that your releases for the quarters were inadequate to pay the salaries. No wonder, you find that teachers have not been paid since July. In my district, Lira - and I have talked to several colleagues here - since July, secondary school 6174MINISTERIAL STATEMENTteachers have not been paid and they are striking. That is a statutory obligation. I usually see that when we debate here, the ministers take our debates casually and come with responses that are very casual, without minding about the implications of what will happen. I would like to ask the minister: if it pleases you, go back and bring a statement that is worth being presented in this House so that we are convinced and we, as Members of Parliament, know where to support you. Thank you very much.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Odur, as the minister goes back - if she is to go back anyway - what was mentioned that is not statutory? We need to help the minister. MR ODUR: If you read, I think paragraphs two or three, she said what they released was not enough to pay the salaries. The reason is that there were salary enhancements and disparities. Now, this is not something that came to the attention of Government out of the blue. Government is not like somebody walking by the roadside that will just see somebody roasting maize, and say: “Let me buy maize today. Let me buy a chapati today.” Government is a functional institution that knows where it is heading. That is the point I am making. Therefore, you cannot say that we have a shortfall because there was enhancement – which enhancement was not proposed by a foreign country, but by the same Government. Madam Speaker, let me conclude. In statistics, what the minister has presented would bring us to a correlation of null. That is what they call “white noise.” If you take two variables at different points and you correlate them, it gives you zero. That is what Government is running at the moment.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Odur, the enhancement of salaries - first of all, we made a provision for salaries and, then, there was a political statement on enhancement. The political statement was not budgeted for. That is why it came to this House and we said: “No.” However, since there was a statement on enhancement - that is why you find that there was that difference. Normal salaries were budgeted for.THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT AND PRIV ATISATION) (Ms Evelyne Anite): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You actually answered Hon. Odur’s concern. However, before I go to the issues that Hon. Odur has raised, I would like to concur with you on two points. The first is on the issue of Bank of Uganda. The good thing is that the Leader of the Opposition and the Shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development are my friends. They know that I am a very transparent leader. They know that what I say during the day is what I say during – (Interjections) - what are you ordering about? (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, magye magye is a very transparent leader; she will tell you that, “We have the magye,” and she means it. Honourable minister, please proceed.MS ANITE: But Madam Speaker, there is an honourable member protesting and she is female; she is resisting that I am not a friend to the Leader of the Opposition- (Interjection) - during the day; at night it is Kajik. Madam Speaker, back to serious issues -THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can you leave Hon. Anite? She has assured you that she is married to Kajik; why don’t you respect that?MS ANITE: Madam Speaker, I want to concur with you on the point of transparency, because we all serve the interests of our citizens, and they believe that as leaders, we have to be transparent and truthful. I really want to say that that is what we stand for. [Mr Odur]6175THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 9 NOVEMBER 2022In that spirit, I would like to request that we have further discussion with the Leader of the Opposition and the Shadow Minister of Finance, and Bank of Uganda, to discuss that we can rationalise and get the accurate figures. However, Madam Speaker, there are two ways of doing it; one way, with your permission -THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what she is suggesting is something manageable. The Leader of the Opposition represents all of you who are shouting. The Shadow Minister of Finance represent the finance ministry on your side; so, what is wrong with sitting and agreeing on what should be done? And I want you to know that you are a watchdog to Government. We reconcile figures.MS ANITE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will leave that point to rest –(Interjection) - by the way, I am not cornered, I am just observing decorum because I respect you and respect the House. However, if you want me to go bare knuckles, we can do it (Laughter).THE SPEAKER: Do not. Hon. Anite, you are addressing me; you are not addressing Hon. Suzan; she has her own issues. Can you conclude?MS ANITE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Shadow Minister of Finance, raised new points; I would like to beg you and the House that we shall respond to them. However, on the issue of cash limits and cash releases, I would like to submit that he is right. As Government, we make cash releases. When we give those cash limits, it does not necessarily mean that we have given the physical cash. The next paper that I am going to present will clearly bring that point out. We, therefore, release the cash to the different ministries and departments depending on the cash flows that we have. Therefore, when we acknowledge that we are going to give, for instance Shs 19 billion to sports, we have actually committed to Government that we will release that money. However, there will be a little variance on the actual cash released because it depends on the cash flow. That does not mean that we do not make good of our obligation; we actually often make good of that obligation. THE SPEAKER: Do you make good of the obligation even after the financial year or within the financial year?MS ANITE: Within the financial year, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. And thank you, honourable minister, for yielding the Floor. The clarification I would like you to give is the concern actually raised by my Minister here, that a request was made that a catalogue of releases be tabled severally in the committee and it has not been brought; could there be a reason classified in nature why that cannot be available?THE SPEAKER: LOP, I do not think it should only be releases; it should be appropriation, cash limits and releases; the three of them.5.12THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, just last week, I laid before this House releases for quarter two, and this document was referred to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back.Madam Speaker, I would like to get -THE SPEAKER: You laid here releases, not appropriation, cash limit and release.MR MUSASIZI:  Madam Speaker, I would like to beg your indulgence that I explain the difference between releases and warrants.Madam Speaker, we have an approved budget. From the approved budget, we subdivide it into four quarters. Per quarter, what we do at the beginning of the first month of the quarter, and not later than the 10th of the month, we do what 6176MINISTERIAL STATEMENTwe call “releases”. We issue releases, and at the same time, we call them “cash limits” for the quarter.When entities receive cash releases or cash limits, they begin invoicing or “warranting”. When you “warrant”, the next stage is for us to pay.THE SPEAKER: Do you pay what is warranted?MR MUSASIZI:  Apparently, under normal circumstances, what is warranted should be paid, but the current circumstances now require the warrants to be in a queue; you warrant as and when cash is available, and we pay; that is what is happening, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: You know, he is now being transparent, and that is what we are saying; tell us what is possible and what is not possible. MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, we run a quarter for three months. There is a question you asked, “Do we carry forward the releases?” THE SPEAKER: I know they do not. MR MUSASIZI: We do not. Madam Speaker, what I am saying, like now, we issued the releases for quarter two, but these have not been cashed. I thank you, Madam Speaker and the House that last week, we were able to pass the budget support loan. This budget support loan will take us far regarding paying warrants for this quarter. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you have heard from the minister and for the first time, the minister is being transparent. I thank you for being transparent because we thought you have money, but you do not want to give it to us; but we need the money. That is a fact: we need the money. Where you get the money is not our problem  -(Laughter)- because you came here and told us, you were able to raise Shs 25 trillion from collections. Therefore, we are waiting for that. That is under normal circumstances. However, we need that report and we need to have an analysis of that report. We need that meeting of the Bank of Uganda and - it should be actually a classified meeting - with the Leader of the Opposition and your team. Of course, that does not leave out the – (Laughter)MS ANITE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Indeed, we will work together on the timing of the meeting and we shall surely report our findings to the House. THE SPEAKER: Tell us when the meeting is going to take place. Next item?STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER ON THE STATUS OF RELEASES OF THE BUDGET FOR THE SPORTS SUBSECTOR FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/23THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, and honourable members of Parliament, a matter was raised here yesterday when we were congratulating our girls, the She Cranes, and an issue rose on the issue of sports. As you remember, I am happy the Minister of State for Sports is here and we passed a budget on sports and as we said, it is sports that brings everybody together. Sports are very important in this country. We, specifically, as the Parliament of Uganda - because we value sports - appreciate what sports does in our country. We even went ahead and ring-fenced this money. When it went to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the finance ministry asked, “What is ring-fencing?” Finance has taken over our role; it is not giving us what we are expected to have. Not really as sports, so, we asked the finance ministry, through Hon. Anite, to give us a report: 1. How much was budgeted for sports in total, that is, appropriation? 2. How much have you released in Quarter I per sporting body?3. How much have you released in Quarter II? 4. What is the way forward for unreleased money; are you going to release it?5. Do you consider sports a priority in this country? [Mr Musasizi]6177THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 9 NOVEMBER 20226. Finally, do you take the resolutions of Parliament as superior -MS ANITE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yesterday I was here in the House and I did make a commitment to you and the House that indeed, I will come back with cash limits and cash releases that were released to the sports sector. I want to start with the last question that you asked: do we take Parliament resolutions seriously? Madam Speaker, yes, we do take the Parliament resolutions seriously. Do we take the sports fraternity seriously? Yes, we do take the sports fraternity seriously, and it is because we agree that it is through sports that we unite as a country regardless of our political affiliations. Madam Speaker, that aside, allow me read a statement from the Ministry of Finance that the total approved budget for the Financial Year 2022/2023 for the National Council of Sports, is Shs 47.81 billion. Details are as follows: i) The wage is Shs 1.61 billion ii) Gratuity is Shs 42 billion iii) Non-wage is Shs 45.78 billion Totaling Shs 47.81 billion.Madam Speaker, a total of Shs 19.2 billion from the Government of Uganda has been released for the first quarter of the Financial Year 2022/2023. This represents 40 per cent of the approved Government of Uganda budget. The table that I have below summarises the performance of the budget category. Madam Speaker, wage in regard to our performance as a ministry to make good the directive or the resolution of Parliament, is at 50 per cent. Gratuity, we stand at 67 per cent. Non-wage, our performance to make good of the resolution of Parliament, is at 40 per cent. Madam Speaker, our expected performance is – THE SPEAKER: Is non-wage meant for federations?MS ANITE: Yes, Madam Speaker. My colleague, the Minister of State for Sports is here; he will make additional submissions. Madam Speaker, the non-wage release performance is below the ideal 50 per cent. We are short by 10 per cent due to the current prevalent cash constraints. Madam Speaker, I want to speak more to that point; that COVID-19 ravaged the whole globe and we are just recovering. Much of the money that we expect as Government was really from manufacturing and domestic tax, but we expected that our economy grows with industrialisation. However, COVID-19 has taken us back and we are not able to mobilise resources adequately as we used to. Notwithstanding that point, Madam Speaker, my ministry held a meeting with the ministry of sports on 12 October 2022 and subsequently requested the Accounting Officer of the National Council of Sports to submit the following information to ascertain the extent of financial pressure to trigger subsequent releases as budgeted by Parliament. Madam Speaker, we did request the National Council of Sports to give us the payrolls of all the relevant federations to ascertain the exact wage bill. We also asked them the contracts for all the staff that are employed by the federation, tenancy agreements for the federations that are renting, and receipts for the expenses on utilities. We also asked them for the calendar of all the international and domestic events for the Financial Year 2022/2023. We also did ask them to provide us with audited books of accounts from the federation. 6178MINISTERIAL STATEMENTMadam Speaker, up to now this has not been submitted to the ministry. However, my colleague, Hon. Peter Ogwang, has committed that by tomorrow, all that we asked from the National Council of Sports shall be submitted to the Ministry of Finance and that will follow with additional cash releases after we have reconciled. Madam Speaker, to conclude -THE SPEAKER: Before you go further, when the National Budget Framework Paper is presented to you, doesn’t it indicate all those that you are asking for now - the activities?MS ANITE: Madam Speaker, it does indicate that, but unfortunately in our country, we have increasingly witnessed issues of fraud, and ghosts. Therefore, we have resorted to reconciling. There is information and that is why -THE SPEAKER: Hon. Anite, when a team is playing, for instance if the She Cranes is playing and you know there is that activity, is that fraud? Is that a ghost game? We have an under-20 team that is stranded in South Sudan and they have won all the games. They cannot afford to come back to Uganda, and we are saying we are witnessing fraud.MS ANITE: Madam Speaker, that point has been misconstrued. I was referring to issues of rent away from games, and I am talking about the payroll. That is why we had wanted to -MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is it in order for the honourable minister to come here and assert that when we passed the National Budget Framework Paper and the Budget, we passed ghosts and fraud?THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do the monies that you are giving to those federations include rent so that you need to verify? It is basically for activities, not so?MS ANITE: Rt Hon. Speaker, regarding the items that you have made reference to, against which we have released the money, we have no dispute. The one that we are disputing and are reconciling with the Ministry of Sports is rent and payrolls. They have agreed and we reconcile -THE SPEAKER: But the federations do not have that.MS ANITE: Rt Hon. Speaker, if you allow -THE SPEAKER: Let us first hear from the FUFA President.MR MAGOGO: Rt Hon. Speaker, regarding the matter we are talking about, we have people who are directly responsible and can have access to this House to provide more information. What was budgeted for, for all the federations out of the 47, is Shs 35 billion. Out of the Shs 35 billion in the first quarter, there was nothing that was released to federations.In the second quarter, it was a total of Shs 2.3 billion plus Shs 4.5 billion and that is about Shs 6.8 billion. As we speak, while we are supposed to be at 50 per cent of the budget, only Shs 6.7 billion out of the Shs 35 billion has been released to federations. When we talk about the money released to the National Council of Sports, it involves monies that are going for other activities that are not federations and yet these activities that we are talking about - the teams’ travels - are actually undertaken by federations. Secondly, this money is eventually used for teams representing Uganda in international competitions, and not for some of the items that are being raised like rent and utilities. I would also like to mention that the money we get from Government for all the different federations is not for all their activities. You will find that the subvention we get from Government caters for about 30 per cent of the activities in most federations, across the year. So, if we do not get even the 30 per cent and start asking where the other money is supposed to be coming from – [Ms Anite]6179THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 9 NOVEMBER 2022I think to address the actual issues, we need to look at the figures in terms of how much goes to the federation, if we want to address the challenges of the teams. If we want to look at it as National Council of Sports, then we are going to be answering different questions that are not being asked. I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the percentage is 7 per cent so far released. We want a solution.5.32THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank you for allowing me and the finance ministry, to come and make presentations on a matter concerning the funding of the sports subsector. Here we are, addressing maybe 2 per cent of the actual problem. Why am I saying this? We are only talking about the National Council of Sports, but not about the entire sports sector in a holistic manner. The National Council of Sports is an area where federations fall, but colleagues, you come from different constituencies and districts. There is a Department of Physical Education and Sports in the Ministry of Education and Sports, which is responsible for coordinating sports activities all over the country. Fundamentally, what money was approved here? When discussing matters of sports, we must talk in a holistic manner. However, on why we are here today, I confirm that the total budget for the National Council of Sports, as per what my colleague has stated, is Shs 47 billion approved by this august House. That is a fact.Out of the Shs 47 billion, like the president of one of the federations has stated, if you look at the first quarter, what came to the National Council of Sports and what was released was Shs 9,365,001,657.I am talking about what was released as far as the quarter. That money is distributed within the federations. If you allow me -THE SPEAKER: How much was released?MR OGWANG: I am the minister for sports and I would like to beg your indulgence that you allow me to speak on a matter where I am -THE SPEAKER: I am asking how much was released because I need to record.MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, what was released in the first quarter was Shs 9,365,001,657 to the National Council of Sports. In quarter two, what was released was Shs 8,254,000,671. That is the money that the National Council of Sports received from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.What was expected and I would like this to go on record - For quarter one and quarter two, if you add, gives us Shs 17 billion. However, what was expected, as per the approved budget and according to the two quarters is meant to be Shs 27,852,000,118. The balance for quarters one and two is Shs 10,000,000,237. If that money is given to us, the question of what the President of FUFA, the netball President, the Athletics Federation and other sports federations want will be addressed. I thank you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, I do not want you to mislead this House. What we raised yesterday was on the issue of non-wage money going to federations. We are not mindful of how you run your National Council of Sports and not the Commonwealth because we ring fenced Shs 7.1 billion and it was paid. Now, tell us how much money was released in the first quarter for non-wage for the federations. We appreciate what you are giving us, as the National Council of Sports, but in the first release, remove Shs 7.1 billion because that was for the Commonwealth.6180MINISTERIAL STATEMENTMR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I want to address myself to what you have raised. According to the document I have on my phone here, which I have received from the Executive Secretary, National Council of Sports, if you look at the non-wage, the approved budget for the Financial Year 2022/2023 is Shs 7,175,177,500.THE SPEAKER: That was for the Commonwealth games and this House approved it.MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, can you permit me to submit because now I am going to the total expectations, as per what was released? It is Shs 1.7 billion. Fortunately, finance is here. It is Shs 1,737,740,866. Are you getting me? That was what was released.THE SPEAKER: Which quarter is that?MR OGWANG: Quarter one.THE SPEAKER: Shs 1.7 billion.MR OGWANG: Yes.THE SPEAKER: How many federations do you have?MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I have 51 federations, for the record.THE SPEAKER: There is a point of clarification from this side. MR MAGOGO: Madam Speaker, it is indeed true that the figure he is reading - Shs 1.7 billion - appears to have been released to federations. However, what happened is that that money was being lent from another subcode to federations. Otherwise, what was released to federations in allocation, was zero.When the second quarter was released, what the National Council of Sports did was collect back what it had advanced – Shs 1.7 billion. Actually, in the release, zero was sent to federations and Shs 6.5 billion was sent to federations. As we speak, the federations have not received that money, apart from the Federation of Uganda Football Associations (FUFA), but the rest of the other federations have not received that money. THE SPEAKER: There is more clarification.MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, this is exactly where I stood the day we approved the budget. We spoke about the amount of money that was meant to go to federations. I can be able to tell this House off head. We did approve Shs 47 billion to go to the federations.It would be good and prudent for the minister to come up with a well-articulated distribution of the money to the federations. This House did ring-fence money and instructed that Shs 17 billion go to FUFA. So, this House should be asking: out of the Shs 17 billion, how much, so far, have you released to FUFA?We said the She Cranes get Shs 3 billion. How much did we give to them? As we talk today, they have done a lot of work. They have given us credibility and a lot of shine around the globe. What is it that we have given to the Uganda Netball Federation (UNF)? The other one, which was ring-fenced, was boxing – Shs 3 billion. How much have we released so far? There was another federation and that is athletics – Shs 3 billion – and then the rest was given some money to be shared. Can we get that distribution so that we get to know how we are moving?Madam Speaker, I am aware there was a meeting at the Ministry of Finance regarding the issue of ring-fencing money for sports federations and I think that is where the issue lies. I do not know whether we obeyed the decisions of this House because Parliament is the one that has the mandate to budget and appropriate. So, who are the people, who are again appropriating outside the walls of Parliament? Madam Speaker, that is where the problem is.6181THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 9 NOVEMBER 20225.41MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (NRM, West Budama North East County, Tororo): Thank you very much. I listened very attentively to the minister of finance and he stated that when MDAs raise warrants, what they do is queue them. They do not retire the warrants; they queue them, waiting for the availability of resources. I am now addressing Hon. Peter Ogwang: could it be possible that the warrants are in the queue and have never been retired?5.42MR GEOFREY KAYEMBA-SSOLO (NUP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The best thing I want Government to know about sports and the federations is that these activities we talk about have specific dates because they are international activities and events.When the She Cranes are going to play in New Zealand or England, they have specific dates. They have to be facilitated according to those specific dates. We have just lost the Under-23 men’s football team, which would have qualified for the Olympics, because of money. When we wait and say, “Maybe we will give later”, these activities do not wait –THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kayemba-Ssolo, we did not lose; we withdrew because there was no money.MR KAYEMBA-SSOLO: We lost that opportunity where we would have qualified for the Olympics. Honourable minister and the ministry of finance, you have to know the special thing about sports is the dates where those events have to be.The She Cranes were actually looking for moneylenders to give them money to go and participate. It is the same thing with other federations. Boxers were supposed to be in Mozambique and at other events; they do not have money. These federations represent the national teams. If our national teams do not go there, it is the country that suffers.5.43MR GEOFFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, this is the first time for the minister of finance and that of sports to sit together. (Laughter)Hon. Peter Ogwang, my brother, I would like to let you know –THE SPEAKER: No! Hon. Peter Ogwang has never failed to sit with anybody, including you.MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I said “the minister”, not Hon. Peter Ogwang. (Laughter) I am raising this because we have people in the ministry of finance who think they are more powerful than Parliament. Some of these people do not have political goodwill in sports at all. That is why when it comes to the disbursement of funds, sports is not given priority at all. My brother, Hon. Peter Ogwang, Hon. Obua had the same challenges with those people. Since you have come in, I know they will fight you because you are a sportsman. These things are done intentionally. That is why you see the minister of finance is very quiet. He cannot talk because he knows the problem in his boiling house. How do we still bear this shame that our teams are stranded whenever they go to international matches? As we talk, we are the talk in Sudan. The She Cranes came back; they are begging to settle their bills. The shadow minister has just told us that the boxing team failed to go to Mozambique. All these are shameful. We, therefore, request you, the two ministers, to sit down and iron out these problems, but the problem is in the finance ministry. If we do not resolve this problem, we are going to have a problem in the sports sector of this country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.5.45MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am surprised this evening to see the minister of finance giving us a different figure. The Minister of State for 6182MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSports is giving a different figure. The FUFA President, representing other federations, is giving us also a different figure.These problems come as a result of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development disrespecting the role of Parliament. If we sit here and appropriate money, it is in the wisdom of the Members of Parliament, this Parliament, and the whole country. Therefore, for the finance ministry to go somewhere in their office and begin doing the appropriation that we have done - Madam Speaker, would it be okay for the two ministers to go back and harmonise the figures, then come before this Parliament? Otherwise, we are talking about a very important sector. We, as a country, have lost in very many fora where we could have represented this country and we have the potential. Madam Speaker, I see a lot of disjointed movement of troops. The Minister of State for Sports moving to the minister for finance and the other time, the finance minister was the other side. (Laughter)  Madam Speaker, would it be okay for you to allow them – give them the last chance to sit together and come when they are prepared and speaking one language before this Parliament? 5.47MS AISHA KABANDA (NUP, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Ogwang, the minister for sports, tried to blackmail this House when he argued that we are talking about FUFA in total disregard of other sports and he actually talked about sports in schools. I would like Hon. Peter Ogwang to bring to light to this House: how much money has been released to schools to take care of sports in the last two quarters? That will inform us about how much you care about sports in this country.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Jessica? 5.47MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. It is embarrassing to listen to uncoordinated information from the lead people that we have entrusted to help us in the different ministries. I have two issues for clarification. The sports minister gave us the details of the releases. Can the finance minister now make a statement on whether, indeed, they released these monies or not? This is an issue of emergency. We need to get a solution.Secondly, we raised the issue of the She Cranes and the ones who are battling in South Sudan. Specifically, on those two cases, I would like to know whether their monies have been released so that if the releases are not part of the monies for the two teams, we handle them separately rather than mixing them up. Thank you so much. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we are not talking about two teams. There are a number of teams and activities that were included in the National Budget Framework Paper and the finance ministry is aware of them. I am even surprised that they approved them before they looked at the activities. On that note, therefore, because of the inconsistency –(Ms Anite rose_) - honourable minister, I know you are dying to talk, but for the first time, your sister will not allow you to talk. As a result of your inconsistency, it is now becoming an attack and uncoordinated - general, what do they call it? Uncoordinated movement of troops.Can I have you in my office tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.? I will chair the meeting and you will report to this House at 2.00 p.m. tomorrow. (Applause) MS ANITE: Madam Speaker, we shall be in your office.THE SPEAKER: Including the PS/ST.[Ms Alum]6183THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 9 NOVEMBER 2022MS ANITE: Yes, we will mobilise ourselves, including the National Council of Sports and the state minister for sports. THE SPEAKER: When coming, I would like you to come with all the documentary evidence. MS ANITE: Yes. Our desk officers will surely be at your office. We also pray that the president of FUFA is present in the meeting. THE SPEAKER: He will be there as a Member of Parliament. (Laughter) Honourable members, we have Holy Fox, who has been carrying his box on the issues of human rights. Can we just ask him to lay on the Table then we debate tomorrow? MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORTS OF THE COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS ON THE 21ST, 22ND 23RD AND 24TH ANNUAL REPORTS OF THE HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION FOR THE YEARS 2018 TO 2021THE SPEAKER: Please, Hon. Mbabazi, go ahead.5.52THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMIT -TEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Ms Janepher Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to lay on the Table the reports of the Committee on Human Rights on the 21st, 22nd, 23rd and 24th Annual Reports of the Ugan-da Human Rights Commission for the years 2018, 2019, 2020 and 2021. I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much, Hon. Janepher. MS JANEPHER MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I also beg to lay the minutes of all the committee meetings and the written submissions of the 28 ministries, departments and agencies that appeared before the committee. I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much. (Applause) Honourable members, in tomorrow’s meeting, we will need the shadow minister for sports, plus the Shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I would like to thank you so much. I, therefore, adjourn the House 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.(The House rose at 5.55 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 10 November 2022 at 2p.m.) 