PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTTHIRD SESSION - SECOND MEETINGTUESDAY , 28 NOVEMBER 2023PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA11114SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTTuesday, 28 November 2023Honourable members, as you recall, on 19 October 2023, the Presiding Officer granted the Executive 30 days to respond to the matters that were raised by the Leader of the Opposition. The Minister, Office of the President (Security) wrote to me, asking for an additional week, which ended yesterday. I now direct the Executive to present the report to this House tomorrow. (Applause)  The Executive, let us be accountable to this country. Let us be transparent and do what we have been sent to this House to do. So, let us have the report presented on the Floor tomorrow.I would like to thank you very much for coming for today’s sitting. Vice-President, you are welcome. In the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from Katakwi District, represented in Parliament by H.E. the Vice-President of Uganda, Hon. Jessica Alupo, the Minister of State for Education and Sports (Sports), Hon. Peter Ogwang, Hon. Bosco Okiror and Hon. Joseph Koluo. Join me in welcoming them. (Applause)  You are most welcome and thank you for bringing very able leaders. Bring all of them back. (Applause)This afternoon, we also have a delegation of members of the standing and sectoral committees of the County Assembly of Makueni, Kenya. IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentTHIRD SESSION - 17TH SITTING - SECOND MEETINGParliament met at 2.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. On 22 November 2023, I referred the Judicature (Amendment) Bill, 2023 to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and we expected to get it today. However, we have been informed that we will have it tomorrow. So, we should be able to conclude with that Bill tomorrow. We need to see how to increase the number of judges so as to reduce the backlog of cases.Honourable members, over the weekend, it emerged that the Uganda National Netball Team, the She Cranes, has not been able to participate in the ongoing 2023 Netball Championship in Botswana. Considering that netball is one of our most successful sports disciplines and especially that it is being played by ladies – the Vice-President of this country is a woman, the Prime Minister is a woman and the Speaker is a woman. I do not think the Vice-President is going to allow that and I am happy she is here. Vice-President, you need to see what to do for our girls; they have not been able to participate.11115THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 28 NOVEMBER 2023They are;1. Hon. Jonathan Kimongo – the head of delegation 2. Hon. Fiametta Ndunda3. Hon. Boniface Mateso4. Hon. Alexander Masila 5. Ms Monicah Munene. You are most welcome. (Applause)  They have come to witness the proceedings of today. Thank you for coming to Uganda, your sister country.(Members rose_) Is it on my communication? Hon. Jacob? 2.06MR JACOB KARUBANGA (NRM, Kibanda South County, Kiryandongo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. (Laughter)  THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I said it should be on my communication, not matters of national importance. That is because you are never here; I have always given you Thursdays for matters of national importance. Hon. James?2.07MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have picked interest in your communication, especially – apparently, in Uganda, we have faced a crisis of the breakdown in infrastructure – THE SPEAKER:  Is it about my communication? (Laughter)  Hon. Solomon? Honourable members, I gave an order and I need an answer from the Executive. Can I first hear from them?2.09 THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Following your directive, the Government will give a statement, through the Minister of Internal Affairs, tomorrow. I would like to assure you that it will be here tomorrow. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Vice-President?2.10THE VICE-PRESIDENT (Ms Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker and colleagues, the matter which the Rt Hon. Speaker has raised is pertinent to Government and, indeed, to all of us. Yesterday, in Cabinet, His Excellency the President himself highlighted that Government through responsible Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) should expeditiously handle that matter and share the facts with the Members of this House, but most importantly, with the members of the community. It is an issue, which is being handled professionally. I would, therefore, like to implore Members of this House to work as a team and allow appropriate time to those that are handling the matter. If they are here on the Floor of the House and they ask for ample time, let us give them that respect so that they do due diligence and give us a full report that is satisfactory and factual. Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the concern and also to assure you that Government is taking up the matter even at its highest level. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. Meanwhile, as we give Government time, we have received a partial report. 2.12MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County South, Bugiri):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to react on the issue of sports. Before I react, I would like to take this opportunity to thank you for standing with me greatly when I lost my dear mother. Madam Speaker, you showed me a motherly heart. I would also like to thank the honourable members of Parliament. They came in large numbers to stand with me. I am forever indebted to you. Madam Speaker, thank you 11116SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTfor uniting Parliament and helping us Members to always move together. You have really been a great leader in that area. I would like to comment on your communication concerning sports. The honourable Minister of State in charge of Sports, Hon. Peter Ogwang, was on this Floor of Parliament and he gave us a verbal commitment, which is on the Hansard  that there is no time when Uganda will not be represented, especially the She Cranes. The She Cranes perform even better than the Uganda Cranes on the international rankings. It is not easy to underlook the women of this country when the ladies perform like this. It is golden that the She Cranes are performing the way they are performing. If we do not get serious, we can easily lose out, as a country.My issue is, wouldn’t it be procedurally right to invite the Minister of Sports, Hon. Peter Ogwang, to come and give us a commitment because he committed himself to this House. He told us this would never happen. We even asked the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and he stood here and said the money for sports will be given. Hon. Musasizi was here on record. However, this has not been done. Let us put these people to task so that they can give us answers. Then, we can see a way of supporting the She Cranes. This is the only thing we can do for the ladies of this country. (Applause)  Now that the ladies are in leadership, we should stand with the women of this country by supporting the She Cranes so that the whole country and Uganda at large sees that the 11th Parliament is pro-women, pro-people and pro-Ugandans. I beg to submit. 2.14THE VICE-PRESIDENT (Ms Jessica Alupo):  It is on record that Government is a very strong supporter of sports. Many of you who come from Kapchorwa know how Government is establishing a high altitude centre there for all federations of sports to participate. We have been appropriating money for that and you know how much we have spent on it. We processed a very important Bill in this House, the new National Sports Bill. The idea is that the new sports Bill will take care of all these gaps that have now been created, even because of lack of this money. The new National Sports Bill takes interest in all these gaps. For this particular case, we would like to congratulate the She Cranes for the stellar performance they have always accorded to us as a country whenever they have gone to preform, especially in international netball games. I will take it upon myself to follow it up with the Minister of Finance, who is my son, Matia Kasaija - (Laughter) – and ensure that this issue is sorted.  THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I think the issue of the She Cranes is beyond financial. It is administrative in nature. It is a corporate governance issue. The minister needs to make a follow up and come and report to this House on the cancellation of the Certificate of the Federation. It is a more serious issue than financial because we appropriated the money - they have it. It is a governance issue. 2.17MS LAURA KANUSHU (NRM, PWD Representative):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I walked in while you were speaking about sports. I would like to take this opportunity to thank you. This afternoon, I ably represented you. I would like to thank you for the support you offered one of the girls who is a swimmer with a disability. She has one arm. Thank you for breaking the stereotypes. Thank you for showing the world that people with disabilities can be champions in sports. Madam Speaker, I ably represented you and presented the ticket that you offered to her, together with her mother since she is a minor and cannot travel alone. I would like to thank you heartily for that motherly and kind gesture. I would like the world to know that that girl is a champion and she is coming home as one. Thank you, Madam Speaker. May God bless you. COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [Mr Silwany]11117THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 28 NOVEMBER 2023THE SPEAKER:  Members, today is free sitting. I have seen someone who is very heavy. (Laughter)2.18MR BARNABAS TINKASIMIIRE (NRM, Buyaga West County, Kagadi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to thank you very much for putting this matter of human rights on the agenda of this Parliament. We who sit on this side of the House have been looking very ugly. THE SPEAKER:  First sit down. I do not want us to discuss anything on human rights. We will have the debate on human rights tomorrow . (Applause)  It is going to be on the Order Paper. Let the report come. We will look at it after it has come. Let us not speculate. I know you are one of the senior leaders in this House and you know very well that we do not debate in anticipation. MR TINKASIMIIRE:  Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I certainly would not divulge any contents of what will be presented tomorrow because I do not have the statement. I was only thanking you because we, who sit on this side, were looking very ugly. People are asking, “Where is the other side of the House?” (Interjections)THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Tinkasimiire, I have not seen a single ugly person this side. Everybody looks handsome and beautiful. (Laughter) Hon.  Tinkasiimire, you are the most handsome man. (Laughter)  MR TINKASIIMIRE: You know, I did literature at A-level, and I am using the word “ugly” to mean that we were not looking nice to those who advocate for human rights. THE SPEAKER: Hon. Tinkasiimire, let us leave that. We will handle it tomorrow. Nobody looks ugly. The issue is, if you have a problem and you say; “give me time”, we will give it to you, even if it is any other person. The fact is that the report will be on the Floor tomorrow. We will discuss it. MR TINKASIIMIRE: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. The issue I wanted to raise, on top of that, is whether the other side that walked out is going to be here tomorrow. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: Hon. Tinkasiimire, which side walked out? I did not see anybody walking out. I have never seen anybody walk out.2.21MR GEOFFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, this is the most beautiful and handsome House of legislation of the Republic of Uganda. I am happy that everybody is in the House, including the Whip of Forum for Democratic Change party (FDC), Hon. Nsibambi – THE SPEAKER: We have the Attorney-General, Hon. Katuntu.MR MACHO:  And we have Hon. Ebwalu, one of the senior leaders of FDC. Everybody is in the House today. (Applause)  Therefore, Madam Speaker, I want to appreciate your communication. You did give the Government spot to come tomorrow and make a submission concerning the challenge we have. My question is, for how long will you be awakening the ministers? I, therefore, pray that our dear President reshuffles his Cabinet and gives some of those Members of the Opposition to become active. This is because unless you call ministers to come and give submissions, they do not come at all.Madam Speaker, I believe that there is fatigue in the Cabinet and a need for a shake-up, so that we can have an active Cabinet to deliver the manifesto of the National Resistance Movement.THE SPEAKER:  Can I have order? Honourable members, the issue of reshuffle was not part of my communication. (Laughter)  The President is a very able person who knows his people. He knows his ministers, so if that is your advice to him, I hope you do not need a slot there. 11118SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT2.23MR ISAAC OTIMGIW (NRM, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your communication. Last Financial Year, 2022/2023, we allocated about Shs 48 billion towards the National Council of Sports. (Interjections)  47? No, it was raised to Shs 48 billion.  THE SPEAKER: It was Shs 47 billion. MR OTIMGIW: Thank you. There was a time they were facing budget suppression and this House stood very strong to make sure that the Budget for the National Council of Sports is not reduced. On top of that, about Shs 6 billion of it was set aside by the National Council of Sports in order for the different federations to participate in international competitions. Therefore, when we hear that She Cranes are failing to participate in Botswana, it creates a challenge, yet as Parliament, we did our part on that ground. THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether we are all in this House and hearing what we are saying. It is not a financial matter. It is beyond financial. 2.24THE VICE-PRESIDENT (Ms Jessica Alupo):  Madam Speaker, I have got information that the certificate for the She-Cranes as a team has not been cancelled. The certificate, which has been cancelled is the certificate of Uganda Netball Federation because of gaps, which involve accountability issues. Madam Speaker, the She-Cranes, according to the National Council of Sports, will not participate in Botswana. This is not because of the certificate, but because teams pulled out and the World Netball Federation, together with the body, which is now managing the netball federation, called the normalisation body, deemed it unfit for the other few teams, which have remained - a few members of the team - to go to Botswana for technical reasons. However, the She-Cranes will go to London and Wales in January. They have two international matches in January. Therefore, the operations of the She-Cranes have not been hampered in any way. They will continue playing. The Uganda Netball Federation is being discussed by the World Netball Federation, the teams of National Council of Sports and the Minister of State for Sports so that the certificate for the Uganda Netball Federation is revived. As of now, it is clear that it is cancelled for technical reasons involving accountability. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. That requires us to get a report from the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) on the investigation on the Netball Federation. Therefore, PAC should present that report. Next item. There is a procedural matter. MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With respect to the Vice-President, and in the same spirit of sports, when the National Council of Sports revoked the certificate, it meant that the Ugandan National Netball Federation was prevented from organising any international representation. That means they cannot organise anything. The battle that the Vice-President knows is hampering - because there is an ad-hoc committee, which said it is not sure whether they will be in a position to organise the games in January when Uganda will play England, New Zealand and Australia. Madam Speaker, I request, through your office that the President commits on the microphone that Uganda is going to participate in January. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we have the Vice-President commit, let us get a report from the Minister of State for Sports, which will inform this House on the decision it shall take. We will need that report tomorrow on the Floor. Clerk, put it on the Order Paper. Yes, procedure?MR AOGON:  Madam Speaker, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs was given COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR11119THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 28 NOVEMBER 2023a task, on 23 May 2023, to deliver the National Legal Aid Bill to this House for discussion. To-date nothing has happened, yet I have heard that another Bill is going through the same committee. Do we still have the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs or is it gone? I would like to find out whether it is procedurally proper for us to proceed as though everything is normal when things are appearing to be abnormal. THE SPEAKER: Hon. Silas Aogon, we have a very able legal committee headed by none other than Hon. Rwakoojo, and deputised by Counsel Yusuf Mutembuli. With all the legal brains in this House, if the legal Bill has not come forth, then we must first investigate why. However, the chairperson has a reason why. Chairperson, can you give us information? Boss, Hon. Silas Aogon, this is not Kumi Municipality –(Laughter) - where you just go and make noise in the middle of the road. 2.30THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTRAY AFFAIRS (Ms Robina Rwakoojo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your kind words regarding my committee. The last time it came up here, the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker was in the chair. When he asked about it, I informed him that we were supposed to have a meeting; you, him, the honourable member and I. That is the position up-to-date.THE SPEAKER: Did you have the meeting?MS RWAKOOJO: No, we did not because you were not here at that time. (Mr Aogon rose_)  She has been on leave. Easy.  (Laughter )THE SPEAKER: Hon. Silas Aogon, if a meeting is supposed to take place, then we should organise for it and resolve these issues - No, do not update me because I am the one to chair the meeting. I am going to invite you for a meeting on Monday and we resolve that issue. We will have a meeting with the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, but that does not stop us from processing tomorrow’s Bill. Honourable members, in the public gallery, this afternoon, we have a delegation of speakers and deputy speakers of Kiruhura District, led by the District Speaker, Hon. Seth. You are most welcome. Please, stand up. They are represented by Hon. Wilson Kajwengye, Hon. Herbert Tayebwa and Hon. Jovanice Twinobusingye. You have very good leaders from that area; they are very capable so bring them back. (Applause)  THE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter.MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In May this year, this Parliament passed the Employment (Amendment) Bill, 2022 and there is a timeline within which the President is supposed to consider it and either assent to it or if he has reservations, he sends it back. Now that we have the Vice-President here, would it not be procedurally right for us to be updated as to why the President has held this Bill beyond the stipulated time? THE SPEAKER: When we process a Bill, the person who assents to it is the President of the Republic of Uganda. It does not go through the Office of the President, but it goes directly to His Excellency, the President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. Hence, the Vice-President may not be aware of the Bill that we sent. However, the person to respond to that should be the Attorney-General because he is the Legal Advisor of the country. LAYING OF PAPERSREPORT OF THE OPENING UP OF NEW AREAS (LAKE KYOGA, HOIMA AND KADAM-MOROTO BASINS) FOR PETROLEUM ACTIVITIESTHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last week, a matter arose on the on-going mineral exploration activities in parts of eastern and northern Uganda, to which the minister undertook to make a report; an allegation was made by Hon. David that there is an airplane 11120SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTmoving around the whole area. We need to know what is happening. The minister is supposed to give us a report to that effect. This is pursuant to Rule 31 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 2.35THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, if I make this statement, those airplanes are usual airplanes. They go to do reconnaissance; to find out using aerial surveys, to see the ground and see what would be available so that we are ready for future development. Having said that, I have to lay these papers on the Table. The purpose of this statement is to submit to Parliament a detailed report on Lake Kyoga, Hoima and Moroto-Kadam Frontier Basins and report on evaluation and impact assessment studies undertaken in areas to be opened for petroleum activities. The report is on what those airplanes were looking for. This submission is in accordance with sections 47(5) and 47(6) of the Petroleum Exploration Development and Production Act, 2013, also referred to as the Upstream Act. At this sitting of Parliament, I hereby lay on the Floor three evaluation reports on the areas; that is Lake Kyoga, Hoima and Moroto-Kadam Frontier Basins to be opened up for petroleum activities. If any of you wants to go and do some activity there, such as exploration, you should apply; you are free to go. These are three reports of impact assessments and studies and a detailed report on areas to be opened. These reports are not simple to lay. I have to carry them almost on my head. I beg to lay. (Laughter)  THE SPEAKER: Can you read the titles of your reports? Which report are you laying on Table? Read each of them, one by one. Honourable members, the reports are informative. They will be deposited in the Library so you can look at them.MR LOKERIS: These are the evaluation reports of different areas for exploration; this one is for Kadam-Moroto Basin and it also has a big book. The title is, “Petroleum Exploration, Development and Production Activities of the area.” These are the reports - THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, on the one you are calling a big book, you should say, “It is an Impact Assessment on the Basin Proposed for Petroleum Activities for Moroto-Kadam Basin.” The origin is from the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development. Read it like I am saying. MR LOKERIS: I will read the other one.  The big one here is the Impact Assessment of the New Basins Proposed for Petroleum Activities; that is the Moroto-Kadam Basin.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Do you beg to lay?MR LOKERIS: I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER: Thank you.MR LOKERIS:  I beg to lay. The other one is, An Impact Assessment of the New Basins Proposed for Petroleum Activities; Lake Kyoga Basin. I beg to lay.This big one is, An Impact Assessment of the New Basin Proposed for Petroleum Activities; Hoima Basin. I beg to lay. These are reports of the valuation in the same area. THE SPEAKER:  Read them.MR LOKERIS:  These are:i. Valuation of Preliminary Data and the Hydrocarbon Potential of the Kyoga Basin. ii. Valuation of the Preliminary Data and Hydrocarbon Potential for the Hoima Basin. [The Speaker] LAYING OF PAPERS11121THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 28 NOVEMBER 2023iii. Valuation the Preliminary Data and Hydrocarbon Potential of the Moroto-Kadam Basin. iv. Report on the areas to be opened up for petroleum activities, combining a simple report on all of them. I beg to lay. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Yes, Hon. Chemaswet? MR CHEMASWET:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on rules 31 and 32. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the title of the report to capture the two basins in Elgon-Kadam Basin and Moroto-Kadam Basins? That would be the appropriate title for this. This is both a political question and a pride of the communities. THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Chemaswet, the titles of these areas are determined by the geographical coverage of the Ministry of Energy. It is not the local way of saying this is Sebei Region or Elgon. There is a way the Ministry of Energy scientifically makes it. Therefore, that is okay. Yes, honourable minister?MR LOKERIS:  Madam Speaker, you are right. These are determined by the geology of the area. It was determined long ago by the way they saw the continuation of those areas. The small districts that have created fall within that basin. We do not change the basin; we can change administrative units, but not the basin. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Mapenduzi –MR MAPENDUZI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 16 of last month, I raised a matter of national importance in regards to how the oil districts are being treated and I was particular on how the Nwoya District has been deliberately left out from all the benefits. The Prime Minister directed the Minister of Energy to urgently have a meeting with the leaders from the Acholi Subregion so that the issues to do with the benefits and how the oil districts are being treated can be harmonised. To this day –THE SPEAKER:   Hon. Mapenduzi, how is that related to the laying of papers? MR MAPENDUZI: Madam Speaker, it is procedural. THE SPEAKER:  Can we handle that on Thursday during the Prime Minister’s time? Thank you. Next item.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE COMMEMORATION OF WORLD AIDS DAY; 1 DECEMBER 2023THE SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, as you are aware, 1st December is World AIDS Day and this is a global time for reflection on the HIV-AIDS-related stigma. The minister is here to present a report, pursuant to rule 52(1). I got an apology from the main minister, so, Hon. Kyofatogabye will be the one to present the report. 2.46THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AND METROPOLITAN AFFAIRS (Mr Kabuye Kyofatogabye):  Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. (Interruption)  MR AOGON:  Madam Speaker, I am concerned that the person who is coming to read the report is totally not known to me. I see as if there is a stranger in the House. Is it in order for a stranger to come and stand before us? I do not know the person totally. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, it depends on how you define a stranger. Hon. Kabuye Kyofatogabye is a Member of Parliament and he is a minister. It is just because he is an ex-officio  member, but it is also because you, Hon. Aogon, are never in the House. Hon. Kyofatogabye. (Laughter)11122SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTMR KYOFATOGABYE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. A statement on the commemoration of World AIDS Day – THE SPEAKER:  Maybe for the benefit of those people who are never in the House, make a mention of your name and your ministry. MR KYOFATOGABYE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. My name is Kabuye Kyofatogabye. I am the Minister of State for Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs. Good enough, I am well known to Hon. Tinkasimiire and that is why he even knows my baptism name as Joseph. A Statement on the Commemoration of World AIDS Day, 1 December 2023. Madam Speaker and honourable Members, Uganda has made tremendous progress in combating the HIV and AIDS epidemic over the last ten years, not to mention the previous years.Currently, Uganda has an estimated number of 1.4 million people living with HIV , of which 1.2 million people are on treatment as per the estimates and statistics from the Ministry of Health. The country has registered a 65 per cent decline in AIDS annual-related deaths, that is; from 37,000 in 2016 to 17,000 in 2022. However, new HIV infections, especially recorded by the year 2022, stood at 52,000. HIV prevalence had dropped from 7.3 per cent in 2011 to 5.1 per cent last year. It should be noted that each region has variations in HIV prevalence and this, therefore, calls all of us for a multi-pronged approach in addressing the HIV response. In spite of the progress made above, there are still challenges, especially HIV infections occurring among young women  and girls. About 1,000 persons get infected with HIV every week. For example, infections among young people aged between 15 and 24 accounted for 37 per cent of all the new HIV infections in 2021 - and I believe this was during the lockdown - with new infections occurring three times more among the young girls, compared to the boys in the same period, and about 326 people die weekly due to HIV/AIDS related ailments.Madam Speaker, the drivers of new HIV infections include multiple sexual partnerships; sexual and gender-based violence; negative socio-cultural norms and values like early marriages and widow inheritance; transactional sex; income inequality and poverty; high level of school dropout; stigma and discrimination; and inequity in access to prevention, care and treatment services. Concerted efforts by all stakeholders are required to address these challenges I have mentioned.You may recall that each year, on 1st December, the Uganda AIDS Commission, which is domiciled under the Office of the President, mobilises partners at national and subnational level to observe and participate in HIV/AIDS advocacy events.Key among them is World AIDS Day. This event provided a powerful advocacy platform that is well aligned to the Presidential Fast-Track Initiative for ending HIV/AIDS as a public health threat in Uganda by 2030 and mainstreaming HIV for epidemic control.The above initiative aims to ensure that nobody is left behind. It promotes increased focus on provision, effective interventions of the HIV/AIDS response and addresses prevailing gaps in coverage of key services in the country.Currently, Uganda, like other countries globally, is undergoing the post-COVID-19 pandemic recovery and its effects. The impact of COVID-19 was immense across the country. These included disruption of social services in education, health and livelihood in general; a rise in teenage pregnancy; increase in gender-based violence across the country; donor transitioning and budget cuts from HIV/AIDS services to other interventions. All these MINISTERIAL STATEMENT11123THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 28 NOVEMBER 2023have had a significant impact on attaining the presidential fast-track goals of ending AIDS by 2030 in Uganda. This, therefore, escalated the HIV infections among the young people across the country.Madam Speaker, the global World AIDS Day 2023 theme is “Let Communities Lead”. It calls on each of us to do all we can to individually and collectively tackle challenges, which are holding back progress in ending AIDS. The national theme for this year is: “Ending AIDS by 2030: Keeping Communities at the Centre”.With the 2030 target in sight, it is critical for everyone to reflect on their individual and collective responsibility towards ending AIDS in Uganda.Madam Speaker, the objective of this statement is to inform and seek your support towards the commemoration of the World AIDS Day that will be held on 1 December 2023. The national commemoration will be held at Kibaale Playgrounds in Rakai District.As a country, we always commemorate this day to take stock of achievements in the fight against HIV and AIDS, and rededicate more efforts to the fight against this epidemic. Every year, Uganda joins the rest of the world to commemorate this day. Since the early 1980s, His Excellency the President has spearheaded the fight against HIV and AIDS in the country, which has resulted in him winning various accolades at continental and global levels.In June 2017, His Excellency the President launched the Presidential Fast Track Initiative to end AIDS as a public health threat in Uganda by 2030. Since then, the country has registered many achievements, like I have mentioned above. It is, therefore, critical to have increased and consistent sensitisation of the public about the prevalent risks of new HIV infections and what an individual needs to do in order to mitigate the risk.Commemoration of this day provides a strategic opportunity for all of us in engaging the public at national and subnational levels. This is timely because of the high social interactions across the country, where some people tend to indulge in irresponsible sexual behaviour, thus acquiring HIV and AIDS infections.The Office of the President will provide oversight to Uganda AIDS Commission – Actually, we shall continue to provide oversight - to ensure that community sensitisation is intensified, as part of the commemoration activities.As I conclude, I would like the House to receive my prayers, which are mainly to inform you and the honourable members on the following:1. That Cabinet has agreed that the World AIDS Day takes place in Rakai District in central region;2. That the preparations for the commemoration of the World AIDS Day, 2023 have already commenced. Note that the World AIDS Day will be commemorated on Friday, 1 December 2023 under the theme: “Ending Aids By 2030: Keeping Communities at the Centre”;3. As national leaders, come out to support the preparations for the commemoration of the World AIDS Day and to relay HIV messages across the country in order to increase HIV awareness and advocacy;4. To participate in the commemoration of the World AIDS Day. I welcome all of you in Rakai this Friday; and5. To support HIV financing, since the funding partners have significantly reduced HIV funding in the country.I beg to submit. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. We have seen your prayers, but I do not want to say they are misguided. They should sound like you are informing us. It is not a prayer because you have already decided, so, you do not need our approval to do that. 11124SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTYou can only inform us that “this is what we have decided”, but not what you want us to allow you to do.Honourable minister, we had what was supposed to come this week – injectable ARVS. Can we have a debate on this statement together with the one of injectable ARVS? Honourable minister and the Government Chief Whip, Hon. Obua, what was supposed to come as preceding items for this week?2.56THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Ms Margaret Muhanga):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yes, there is that plan under the Ministry of Health to start injectables for HIV and I think it will start around February next year. We are preparing those who need it because there are people who are already on-THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, this week, we are supposed to discuss a paper on injectable ARVs. So, as you bring your paper, let us discuss it together with what has been presented.MS MUHANGA:  Most obliged, Madam Speaker. We shall bring the paper on Thursday. THE SPEAKER:  Okay, thank you. “ Mugole”  you are most welcome. I am happy to see the newest “ Mugole .” First greet the members. (Laughter)3.01MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independ -ent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the compli -ment and thank you, honourable members. “Mugole” is a newlywed person, but the Quran has prescribed to us -in the laws of this nation, under the Marriage Act, the Hindu and the Mo -hammedans; we profess the religion of Islam and it is an option to us. It is not a command, but it is left on to us that for those that can do equity and those that can manage and indeed, can handle four, the door is open. I would like to thank you all for your prayers. People are asking me about the number, but it is a private matter. Just know that there is still another slot open. Thank you, very much. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, Hon. Muhammad, for those who are asking for the number, there is a slot. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of Alur-Zombo Connect Youth and Dir ber Women’s Group from Zombo District.They are represented by Hon. Esther Afoyochan, the Commissioner, Hon. Songa Biyika Lawrence and Hon. Okumu Gabriel. Please, stand up. That is the team from Zombo. You are most welcome and thank you so much for coming to this House to be with your good Members of Parliament; please, bring them back. (Applause) They are very good Members. Hon. Biyika, make sure that you support our people and they must bring you back. MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF LAND OWNED BY GOVERNMENT INSTITUTIONS ACROSS THE COUNTRY .THE SPEAKER:  Honourable Members, you will recall that on Wednesday, 15 November 2023, during a debate on a statement from the Minister of State for Disability Affairs, on the Commemoration of the International Day of Persons with Disability, a matter arose on the fate of public land across the country. I directed the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to present a statement to this effect. I now invite the minister. 3.04THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua):  Madam Speaker, on Thursday last week, you directed the Minister of Lands to come today to present a statement on the status of land owned by the Government in Uganda and the minister was duly informed. [The Speaker] MINISTERIAL STATEMENT11125THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 28 NOVEMBER 2023Unfortunately, this mid-morning or afternoon, we got information that the honourable Minister of Lands had lost a very close relative and is unable to be with us-THE SPEAKER:  I have seen one minister of Lands.3.05THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Mario Obiga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that my senior was due to present that statement, but unfortunately, she is bereaved. Myself, I have just left Mulago because yesterday, I had an accident and have been in hospital since yesterday, but I am okay. We will coordinate and present that statement. I thank you for the words of goodwill. THE SPEAKER:  Sorry minister, we wish you a quick recovery and we keep praying for you. MR OBIGA:  Amen. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable Government Chief Whip, you had different instructions - I think because we saw him. The honourable minister was given a report to present and I was insisting that it must be presented by the Minister of Lands so that she can be able to respond. However, let us receive the report, upload it and then she comes to present it on Thursday, So that you study the report, get all those areas that have been mentioned, then you can be able to discuss. I hope it has the Golf Course of Soroti. Please, lay the report. You can actually read the report and then, leave the debate to the minister. 3.04THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The statement is two and a half pages, the rest is an attachment highlighting all the public land we have in Uganda.  Madam Speaker and honourable members, this is a statement to Parliament on the status of land owned by Government institutions across the country and it is signed by Hon. Judith Nabakooba, Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. 1. Rt Hon. Speaker, during the 11th sitting of the 2nd meeting of the 3rd session of the 11th Parliament held on Tuesday 31 October 2023. The House adopted the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the Management and Utilisation of Uganda Police Force Land in Selected Areas in Kampala. 2. During that sitting, you guided that the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should present to this august House a statement on the status of land owned by Government institutions across the country on Wednesday, 15 November 2023. 3. We all know and recognise the importance of land as a vital resource for the socio-economic development of our country. As the Government, we have put in place measures to ensure that Government land is effectively and efficiently managed and utilised well for the transformation of the country from a peasantry society to a modern and prosperous country. 4. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development together with the Uganda Land Commission have an inventory of Government-owned land across the country. I now beg, on behalf of the Minister for Lands, to lay on the Table an Inventory of Land owned by the Government all over Uganda. The inventory indicates the Government property registered under Uganda Land Commission in every district of Uganda. It also includes both the Government land that is surveyed and unsurveyed. According to the verification exercise being carried out by the National Land Information Centre, which is under the Ministry of Lands, 11126SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTHousing and Urban Development, out of a total of 17,296 parcels of Government land throughout the country, only 4,146 (24 per cent) are surveyed and titled, leaving 13,150 parcels, which constitute 76 per cent, unsurveyed and not titled. This situation has made it difficult to manage. Madam Speaker, I need to inform this House that there is widespread encroachment on the Government land by some local communities and irregular allocations of government land by some district land boards. In order to address the above cited challenges of managing government land, Uganda Land Commission is in the process of coming up with a project that will undertake a comprehensive Government land inventory. The project concept was submitted to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Madam Speaker, the ministry and Uganda Land Commission are also encouraging all accounting officers to adhere to the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 (as amended), which requires all Government entities to declare assets under their control annually in the National Assets Register. This will also contribute to the updating of the Government land inventory. Engagements with other stakeholders to comprehensively document all Government land are ongoing. We shall continue to monitor and manage Government land as well as put in place measures to ensure that Government land is secure and utilised optimally. It is signed by Hon. Judith Nabakooba, Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, Government Chief Whip. Members, look at the report – look at the areas that you have interest in – study it very well then we will have a debate. Hon. Yusuf, do you have anything to say? He is the Shadow Minister of Works and Transport.3.12THE SHADOW MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Yusuf Nsibambi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the brief presentation. However, when you talk of “public land”, under the law, there is nothing called “public land”, but land owned by the Government. The most intriguing thing is what they call the “inventory of land owned and controlled by the Government”.I was the Chairman, Kampala District Land Board and I can say, from a point of authority, that whatever has been presented as percentages actually do not exist. You are talking of titled and untitled land. Most of the land is not titled, but encroached upon. After the coming into force of the Constitution, where you have lawful and bona fide  occupants, the percentages are reduced. Therefore, it is quite important that you have something comprehensive – undertake a study and do not rely on those figures or the inventory presented, which is historical. Right now, in Kampala, even the perimeters of State House are encroached upon and people have titles. Madam Speaker, I think this is a serious matter. District land boards have abused their authority under the guise of the new law. There is also a lot of protection of people by the law as lawful and bona fide occupants. This is something, which we have to study comprehensively. I see this two-page statement like a love letter. It is not good enough to do a good job. (Laughter)  So, the debate on Thursday would be in futility. THE SPEAKER:  At least, it is not a love letter to Hajji. (Laughter)  Thank you very much. Honourable members, study that report. I will ask different sectoral committees to pick on the land belonging to different entities under them. If we are talking about gender, the Committee [Mr Obua] MINISTERIAL STATEMENT11127THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 28 NOVEMBER 2023on Gender, Labour and Social Development must pick land for persons with disabilities and youth. Let us study it, come back and debate. Different sectoral committees should be able to discuss because this arose out of the land belonging to persons with disabilities being grabbed. 3.15MS NAOME KABASHARIRA  (Independ -ent, Rushenyi County, Ntungamo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the Govern -ment Chief Whip, who represented the minis -ter. However, I have a concern. When you look at the inventory, which he has just laid, for some of the land, it just says, “plot this” and “plot that”. There is nothing like acreage –THE SPEAKER:  That is why we need to study it so that we come back, debate and ask for clarification: you are saying this is a plot; how much acreage and on which road? If it is on Mackinnon or whichever road, we should be able to come back and get clarification from the minister. MS KABASHARIRA:  Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right, now that we have seen, that she prepares and comes on Thursday with everything ready?THE SPEAKER:  That is fine. Of course, because you are fast, you have seen it. Honourable Government Chief Whip, tell the minister to come with all the details in regard to land owned by the Government. MR OTIMGIW:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just thought that maybe we could have it on record clearly. The shadow minister pointed out that the communication from the Government Chief Whip was only two pages, but he mentioned clearly that he had an accompanying document. Maybe the minister could lay it. THE SPEAKER:  The annex is also laid. MR OTIMGIW:  Maybe, he could lay it properly. THE SPEAKER:  The problem is that we gave you iPads, but you do not carry them. Where did Hon. Naome see hers from? She was very fast in seeing it. (Laughter)  There is an attachment. Honourable members, study this report. When you look at it, it even indicates the sectors. There are those under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, those under the trade ministry, those under Uganda Prisons and those under Uganda Police Force. Then, you will be able to appreciate it. 3.18MS SARAH OPENDI  (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had raised the issue regarding the Employment (Amendment) Bill. This is a Bill that we passed here with a lot of interest because it was going to help most of our people who are being exploited out there. The Attorney-General was not in the House. Now that he is, wouldn’t it be right for him to explain where the Bill is and why it has taken all this time before the President assents to it – outside, I think, the 45 days that the President is allowed to be with the Bill? Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know why we are insisting; this matter can always be handled. The communication on these Bills is between the Speaker and the President. As the Speaker, I have said you will have it. The Attorney-General only does the cross-checking, but I will be the one to give you the final word. I am the one who signs to go to the President. You tell her to listen - Next item.STATEMENT ON PREPARATIONS FOR THE COMMONWEALTH SPEAKERS AND PRESIDING OFFICERS CONFERENCE 3 - 6 JANUARY , 2023THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, as you may already be aware, Uganda will host the Commonwealth Speakers and Presiding Officers Conference from 3rd to 6th January 11128SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT2024. It will be done by the Parliament of Uganda. In order to bring the Members up to speed with the progress of the preparations, the organising committee that was headed by Hon. Abdu Katuntu is ready to report and bring us to speed on how far we have gone and whether we are ready to host our Speakers and Presiding Officers.Before he does, I invite all of you to the opening of that ceremony. You will be there. (Applause) Thank you. Hon. Abdu Katuntu?3.20MR ABDU KATUNTU (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a statement to update you and the House on the upcoming 27th Conference of the Speakers and Presiding Officers of the Commonwealth (CSPOC).The Parliament of Uganda will host the 27th Conference of Speakers and Presiding Officers of the Commonwealth from 3rd to 6th January 2024 at Speke Resort Munyonyo. Uganda was confirmed as the host of the conference at the last CSPOC in Canberra, Australia in January 2023 where Rt Hon. Speaker, Anita Annet Among, was appointed as Chairperson of the Standing Committee. The official opening ceremony is expected to take place on Friday, 5 January 2024 and will be presided over by His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda.Background to the conferenceThe Conference of the Speakers and Presiding Officers of the Commonwealth (CSPOC) was created in 1969 as an initiative of the then Speaker of the House of Commons of Canada, Mr Lucien Lamoureux. CSPOC membership is restricted to the Speakers and Presiding Officers of national parliaments of all independent sovereign states of the Commonwealth. It consists of 22 bicameral parliaments and 30 unicameral parliaments.Currently, it consists of 74 Speakers and Presiding Officers of national parliaments from 52 Commonwealth countries. Up to 180 delegates attend a typical conference, including the Clerks and Secretary-Generals as observers. It operates on a two-year cycle, holding a conference of full membership every two years, usually early in January, and a meeting of the Standing Committee at the same time, the intervening year. The objectives of the conference are to: (i) To maintain, foster, and encourage impartiality and fairness on the part of Speakers and Presiding Officers of Parliaments. (ii) Promote knowledge and understanding of parliamentary democracy in its various forms. (iii) Develop parliamentary institutions. Madam Speaker, upon your guidance, preparation for hosting of the conference has been ongoing since January 2023, only that the focus, at the beginning, was on the preparations for hosting the 3rd Ordinary Session of the 6th Parliament of the Pan African Parliament (PAP) which was postponed to around April/May 2024.Following the commitment to host this conference, a Coordination Committee chaired by myself and consisting Hon. Mwine Mpaka and Hon. James Kaberuka were established to coordinate the preparations. In addition, sub-committees consisting Members of Parliament and technical staff  were established to assist in the preparation of the various activities of the conference.These include the following: (i) Conference Management  (ii) Conference Secretariat and Documentation(iii)  Information Technology Support (iv)  Accommodation[The Speaker] STATEMENT11129THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 28 NOVEMBER 2023(v)  Transport, Media and Publicity(vi)  Protocol(vii)  Medical and First Aid (viii) Entertainment, Excursion and Tourism (x) Spouses and Accompanying Persons(x1)  Gifts and Souvenirs (xi) Security and AccreditationMadam Speaker, following the establishment and constitution of sub-committees, several meetings of the expanded coordination committee involving subcommittee chairpersons and secretaries and meetings with the various stakeholders have been held, in addition to the meetings of sub-committees.The entities represented in these meetings are: Civil Aviation Authority, Uganda Revenue Authority (UNRA), Directorate of Immigration and Citizenship Control, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Health, Uganda Tourism Board and all security organisations including the Special Forces Command, Uganda Police Force, and Internal Security Organisation.Madam Speaker, the preparations are in advanced stages. All sub-committees continuously present their progress reports to the expanded coordination committee, which discusses them and provides guidance. The agreed-upon conference venue; Speke Resort Munyonyo and suitable hotels to accommodate the delegates were identified and communicated to the delegates. A link has been provided for Members to book online. The deadline for registration was extended from 16 November 2023 to 1 December 2023, which is a couple of days away. So far, 40 Speakers and Presiding Officers from 33 countries have confirmed attendance and apparently profiled the lists for accreditation purposes. I can mention the countries that have confirmed: Republic of Tanzania, Namibia, Sri Lanka, Seychelles, Ghana, Malawi, Lesotho, Zambia, Canada, Botswana, Samoa, Tonga, Mauritius, Guyana, Pakistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Kiribati, Jamaica, Malaysia, Cameroon, Sierra Leone, the Bahamas, Mozambique, Kenya, South Africa, Kingdom of Eswatini, Trinidad and Tobago, Nigeria, India, Maldives, Dominica, British Virgin Islands and Uganda the host.The procurement, especially for offices, plenary hall, breakaway session rooms and other requirements are on-going. The Standing Committee approved the topics for discussion at the Kampala conference and they will include the following: 1. Environment, climate change and the role of Parliament.2. Diverse and inclusive-sensitivity Parliaments (youth and gender sensitive).3. Security measures for Parliamentarians and Parliaments.4. Health and wellbeing support in Parliaments and the role of Speakers and Presiding Officers.5. A special session on Building consensus for Parliamentary Business: The Role of Speakers and Presiding Officers.FundingBudgets and work plans from all sub-committees were discussed and harmonised to avoid duplicity of activities and tasks. These were incorporated in the budget of the Parliamentary Commission for the current Financial Year 2023/2024.Expected BenefitsThe country stands to benefit from this conference as the trickledown effects on the economy will be felt immediately and thereafter.The benefits to the country include: i) There will be private visits to the different attractions around Uganda and this will enhance our tourism potential and subsequently, increase income.11130SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTii) Speakers and Presiding officers will hold bilateral and multilateral meetings and these are expected to strengthen ties between the different parliaments around the Commonwealth.iii) In that regard, Parliament of Uganda will also foster cooperation with other parliaments which will create alliances and in the end strengthen diplomatic ties with those countries.iv) This conference is especially important to deepen Parliament diplomacy and augment Uganda’s role in Commonwealth parliamentary collaborations, as well as present opportunities to share practices, experiences, expertise and knowledge on best practices.v) With the delegates, accompanying persons and other officials expected to grace the conference, this presents opportunities to create business and entrepreneurial linkages to cement trade relations with the visiting delegations.vi) This high leve1 event comes with increased tourism hits, and its attendant dividends for the small, medium and large scale investors across the tourism value chain.vii) CSPOC, in general, enhances globalization which brings up opportunities for cooperation, especially in areas of economics, public affairs, security and general parliamentary diplomacy.Madam Speaker, I call upon all Members of Parliament to embrace the meeting and welcome the delegates in our usual warm way. When requested, kindly participate in the organisation of this meeting.We have had one innovation this time round, Rt Hon. Speaker; to entertain our guests, we are getting groups from upcountry. It has always been that we look around Kampala and get groups here. This time, we are getting groups from the west, the North to do the Bwola  dance, from the east - to help expose these upcountry groups to international meetings, but also for them to earn a little bit of income because it has always been Ndere Group performing. (Applause) Madam Speaker, I beg to report.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, Hon. Katuntu, for that report. Basically, the report is informative and also it serves to invite you to get involved in the activity and attend the function. I think we are good to go. When I see Afande  Charity here, security will be guru-guru .We are set to go. It is a good thing to host visitors from all those countries. You should consider yourselves lucky. During your time in the 11th Parliament, you should be very happy to host these visitors.I want to thank you very much, Hon. Katuntu, and we will be glad to receive the visitors. When they are here, we will show our good manners. (Laughter)This is also to inform you that on 21st, we will have our end of year party. This time we are not going to get dancers from outside because we have people who perform in Parliament here. We shall have Obangaina , we have the Hilderman’s, we shall have the Ebwalu’s of today; so, on 21 December, we will have an end of year party in the compound here. Thank you. Honourable Minister, do you have something to say?3.33THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (DISABILITY AFFAIRS) (Ms Hellen Asamo): Madam Speaker,  I respect your ruling and I want to thank Hon. Katuntu for the presentation and also congratulate you for hosting that big meeting. I was just looking at the inclusive areas and I saw gender and youth. This Parliament is doing very well for people with disabilities. How I wish we would bring up that topic so that other Parliaments can take advantage of it and in future, we might have a Parliament of disabled [Mr Katuntu] STATEMENT11131THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 28 NOVEMBER 2023people to discuss other issues. Therefore, I am just suggesting that we include that important group of human beings into the presentations. Secondly –(Interjection)-  I am also being reminded of the elderly here. Secondly, I also want to thank the Rt Hon. Speaker. You were not there during the national prayers, but you promoted our own and we danced and clapped. He was so excited that the President then gave him an envelope. I think he even got confused at a certain point; Ibwalat . He really danced and everybody was saying, I think this is good promotion. I support bringing our artists from outside, but just bring us there. Thank you, eyalama .THE SPEAKER: Persons with disabilities -MR KATUNTU:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is noted, but as you know, the topics are agreed upon by us and the Secretariat in Canada.However, the second topic will be, “Diverse and inclusive parliaments”. Where we had limited ourselves to youth and gender sensitivity, we can discuss with Canada and include the issue of people with disabilities.THE SEAKER:  Since Uganda is the one discussing that, we will include persons with disabilities.MR KATUNTU:  Exactly, because this particular topic is going to be presented by Uganda.THE SPEAKER:  Yes, Atat.3.36MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like the Chairperson of the Coordinating Committee to confirm that management of the elderly will also be included.You have now included people with disability, but can you also confirm, so that it is captured, that you will also include the elderly persons? Thank you.MR KATUNTU:  I hear you, loud and clear. I am sure the youthful Hon. Cecilia Ogwal is worried about the elderly. However, we shall try to take that into account.THE SPEAKER:  You know, when you talk about inclusivity, it includes everybody; the young people like Hon. Atat Cecilia - It is about inclusivity.3.37THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DE -FENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (VET -ERAN AFFAIRS) (Ms Huda Oleru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the op -portunity. Madam Speaker, after listening to that wonderful report, I thought it wise that I should take this opportunity to thank and appreciate you.I know there are many countries that would wish to handle this conference, but I think it is because of your lobbying capacity that for the first time, we are hosting it in the country. (Applause)Therefore, just leaving that report without recognising your efforts would be unfair. I thought I would take this opportunity to thank you.As Members of Parliament, we are proud that you have managed to pull this conference. We shall be in history that the Speakers’ conference and the Commonwealth were hosted in Uganda.Secondly, it confirms the maturity of the democracy of this country. I do not think such a conference can be hosted in an undemocratic country. That shows that our country is maturing in terms of democracy, stability and peace. As an anchor, it is making all these big international conferences come to the country and as Ugandans, we will benefit. I know the 11132SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTbenefits are immense and therefore, I thank and encourage you to continue lobbying for more conferences of this nature so that our economy can grow.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, you are so mean; you cannot even clap for -  (Applause) By the way, we are also supposed to host the African Parliamentary Union (APU), which is being headed by Hon. Nakut. 3.39MR JONATHAN EBWALU (Independent, Soroti West Division, Soroti):  Madam Speaker, I would like to go on record and thank you, on behalf of the people of Soroti City, because we are going to host this conference during your time as the Speaker of this Parliament. I am also happy that it is going to come at a time when I am a Member of Parliament of Soroti City. I am a member of the committee and I am at the secretariat. We are going to do everything possible within our means to ensure that this conference is hosted in Uganda successfully. However, I thank you for the job well done. The world, women and the Government is happy. I thought I would go on the Hansard  record to thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you.MR EBWALU:  Are you forcing me to say FDC? This function is by the country and it is hosted by Uganda. Therefore, we must be proud of our country. I thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, Uganda is bigger than any party. It is our country. (Laughter)3.41MR MARTIN MUZAALE (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking you for enabling this country host this particular event. Allow me to also thank the committee; it is a good committee and we expect a lot from them. On the issue of investment, I am very concerned because we need to prepare ourselves, as a country, if we are to attract investors. In most cases, these functions come and find us unprepared in certain areas. People have come here – and these are leaders who can go back and market our country. However, if we do not have brochures that can market our country in areas of investment, they might go back without information. Therefore, I ask the committee to come up with brochures in areas of investment so that these people can pick this information.THE SPEAKER:  Let us get back to you, Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. We are promoting you. What do you have to say?3.42THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUES (Mr Martin Mugarra):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for making it possible for Uganda to host this big conference. I also thank the committee, through your leadership, for establishing a special Committee on Tourism and Trade. We are fully represented by the Uganda Tourism Board so we will be able to avail whatever this country has to offer as a good tourism destination. We have prepared all this for the visitors.THE SPEAKER:  Maybe, for your information, there is a team coming next week.MR KATUNTU:  Madam Speaker, Malaysia alone is sending a delegation of 50 people and many of them will not be doing the politics of the Commonwealth. They are also coming as investors. We will be liaising with the Uganda Tourism Board and other agencies of Government to see if they can have bilateral meetings.3.43MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independ -ent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. If there is anyone worried, but also happy about the occasion, it [Ms Oleru] STATEMENT11133THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 28 NOVEMBER 2023is the Member of Parliament for Kampala be -cause of the status of our infrastructure at the moment. It is two-way; I am glad that at the moment, there is concerted effort from even you, Madam Speaker. As I add my voice to congratulate you upon these dual milestones; the African Parliamentary Union being hosted here and this Commonwealth meeting, it is a show of confidence that your colleagues on the international stage have in you. It is also the desire to visit the pearl of Africa, which is Uganda, because of her milestone achievements. I call upon Members of Parliament and the Executive to put on our boots and go the extra mile to see to it that we improve our infrastructure within the remaining days in form of maintaining the roads, cleaning up drainages and lighting our Kampala-Entebbe Expressway. Let us start this from the airport. Currently, at the airport entrance, the check point has been moved away - and that is amazing - to a further point, but the road you use when you are entering the airport is still full of potholes. On Sunday, I saw people struggling – I do not know which route you use, Hon. Obua, because I can see you are surprised. Maybe they remove barricades for you and you go through directly. However, the turn off towards the airport is in bad shape. Madam Speaker, you can go and visit it. When people are travelling, they continue to carry luggage on their heads. This is the image that we give our visitors; that we cannot get an escalator at the airport, even when it is still under construction. People carry baggage from the parking lot and have to move with it upstairs. It is a little bit embarrassing and I know we can do better. We have confidence in you, Madam Speaker, and in this House. Let us try to clean up the face of this nation from the airport to the Kampala–Entebbe Expressway where there are no lights at the moment, into the city as well. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  We will do what we can. For what we cannot do, it will be done later - Is it on the host?3.46MR LAWRENCE SSONGA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo):  Madam Speaker, I take this opportunity to add my voice and congratulate you and the team for lobbying for Uganda to host the Speakers Conference.Between 22 and 29 September 2019, we hosted the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference here and I was one of the panellists who facilitated the topic on climate change at Speke Resort Munyonyo and it was well attended. There were resolutions that were passed in that meeting and now that we are hosting the Speakers’ Conference, I think this is a big boost to build on what has been started, since the Speakers are the Presiding Officers in the different Commonwealth countries.  I also commend you for including the Committees on Environment and Climate Change amongst the discussions. As you may know, most of the small Commonwealth nations like Vanuatu, Samoa, Fiji, St Kitts and Nevis, the Grenadines and the Dominican Republic are small countries that face the brunt of climate change and environmental degradation. As we talk about the Small Island Development States (SIDS), we should, in our discussion, also focus on countries that may not necessarily be part of the SIDS, including Uganda which still has small islands within itself. In most discussions at the Commonwealth, Inter Parliamentary Union or international level, islands like Koome and Buvuma are forgotten and yet they face the same problems faced in the Solomon Islands. I would like to thank you and congratulate Uganda because next year will be very busy for us. We have the Commonwealth Speakers’ Conference, the Non-Aligned Movement, the G-77 and China, the Third South Summit. These are important meetings that will build on partnerships, increase investment, and improve Uganda’s image.11134SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTTHE SPEAKER:  Thank you. We will also host the Pan African Parliament (PAP). Professor – I have a new Whip.3.49 PROF. ELIJAH MUSHEMEZA (Independent, Sheema County South, Sheema):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join those who have congratulated you and the team you worked with to host this conference here. I look forward to seeing the benefits that we are likely to get. However, we need to draw lessons from past experiences. In 2007, before the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting  (CHOGM), I was on a committee of four people: Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi, Gen. Mugira, who is a Member of this House, Dr Mulema and myself as inspectors to check what the organising committee was doing. To our surprise, when we moved around to check on accommodation, what the hotel owners were telling the committee was not there. As a result, the visitors, especially some of those who had come for business, relocated to Nairobi while others went back because the accommodation was not sufficient. I would like to give a piece of advice to Hon. Katuntu that you will need to physically go and crosscheck some of these things. The information they give you, in most cases, is for purposes of winning contracts yet in actual sense, they do not have the infrastructure or the resources. It might also interest you, Madam Speaker, to get a few other individuals to go – like the work we did at that time – (Interjections) – I resist being heckled by colleagues. We could share more of these ideas with the organising committee, but drawing from past experiences is very important for a successful organisation. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, I would like you to know that we do not book for these Members; they book online. They get their accommodation and everything online. Is that not what it is?MR KATUNTU:  Madam Speaker, this is not a conference where the Parliament of Uganda is going to be paying for the accommodation of the delegates. What we did was to provide them with the hotels and they have booked for themselves. However, every sector has a whole sub-committee; the one on accommodation is headed by Hon. Mapenduzi and they are thorough and detailed. The one on conference management is headed by Hon. Okot-Ogong. The one on tourism is headed by Hon. Kibalya. The one on souvenirs and spouses is headed by Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. The one on security is headed by Hon. Bainababo. Hon. Prof. Mushemeza, just know that the captain has an experienced hand at this. Every sector has a sub-committee of experienced professionals and good enough, we organised the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) and we know what happened and we were around during CHOGM. Therefore, we picked from all those experiences.Madam Speaker, you ought to inform the House that this October, the Pan-African Parliament was supposed to sit here. Unfortunately, they could not because there were problems with the leadership in South Africa. It is even bigger than this conference because we are talking about 500 people coming here for four weeks. That will be another opportunity to showcase our country. There is confidence in this country called Uganda by the international community and we should continue to portray ourselves as a destination for conferences, tourism and business. I thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I have an item that I need to finish. Yes – 3.54MR PAUL OMARA (Independent, Otuke County, Otuke):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues. One, we have very many visitors coming to our country and we need to portray the correct image. Every time I drive STATEMENT11135THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 28 NOVEMBER 2023around the city of Kampala, the manner in which the boda bodas ride - I would like to appeal to the Minister, Office of the President (Security) or Minister of Internal Affairs that from now on, can we organise ourselves before the visitors come? We have one or two months. We should try to limit the boda bodas coming into the Central Business District (CBD) when the visitors are here because the image we see as any of us drives in Kampala is not what these people see in their capitals.  Two, the President had an opportunity to visit the major spotlights where construction work is taking place. As Parliament, we always have committees that do oversight. Since this is big, I would like to propose that, if it is possible, you lead us to visit some of these places including the construction works within Kampala –(Interruption)THE SPEAKER : There is a procedural matter. MR ISABIRYE:  Madam Speaker, I had reservations when you earlier on ruled that the report that was presented by Hon. Katuntu, the Chairperson of the Coordinating Committee, was just informative. As we continue debating, there are things that we need to talk about in-house. We are hosting international visitors who are high-class. We do not want to talk about how our bedrooms look. This is a national forum. We cannot say we are exposing how ready we are when we are talking about roads. (Laughter)Madam Speaker, I congratulate you for being the first Speaker in the history of our country to host such an important conference. The procedural matter I would like to move is that the debate on this particular item is closed such that – (Interjections)- Wouldn’t it be procedurally right to close debate on this report such that other issues are handled in the committees internally?THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, like I said before, we are ready to host our visitors. It would have been selfish of the committee, the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker not to tell you what is happening in the institution. We are giving you a brief of what is happening in the institution so that you are part and parcel of the whole activity. The issues on whether we are ready or our bedrooms are clean, is sorted. We are ready to host our visitors and the issue of the traffic is also sorted. That is why the President inspected the roads; because he values these visitors. The lights on the Kampala-Entebbe Expressway are almost complete. They are installing lights there. Can we get an update from the Government Chief Whip who was part of that team? 3.59THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua):  Madam Speaker, you have said it all. Honourable members, in preparation for all major international events that Uganda will host in 2024, the following is being done - I would like to give a quick response to a very pertinent issue raised by Hon. Nsereko, the Member of Parliament for Kampala Central. On the issue of Kampala-Entebbe Expressway, we all know that by design, it was meant to have lights. As we speak, those who have used Kampala-Entebbe Expressway know that the lights are getting fitted. (Applause)On the question of major infrastructure, it has been alluded to that the Head of State took it upon himself, as the chief host, to move and inspect major infrastructure; roads, the airport, accommodation and conference facilities. In his wisdom, as part of boosting what Kampala Capital City Authority is doing, he directed that the Special Forces Command unit in charge of engineering will work on some roads. As I speak, those roads have been handed over to them and they have started working. Honourable colleagues, to support what Madam Speaker has said, we may not be where we would wish to be, but we will get there. We promise you that we will get there. We shall host all these international conferences successfully. Thank you. 11136SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTTHE SPEAKER:  Thank you. You will find that those so-called big countries, the big boys around, used to be where we are and we will also get there. (Applause)  Minister of Tourism, do you want to speak after your boss?4.01THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOUR -ISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Martin Mugarra): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just to avert the fears of the Members, despite what is being said, Uganda has been ranked among the sixth best nations in hosting MCE in Africa. (Interjections)  MCE is meet -ings, conferences and events, where what you are talking about; NAM and G77 fall. We have been ranked among the top six in the whole of Africa. Therefore, there should be no worry. When it comes to hotels, UTB, which is a member of the committee, does classification of all the hotels in this country. I am sure a list of the hotels that are safe has been availed and the classes are there. Anyone can book online knowing the class they will get when they get to Uganda. There should be no worry. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. That is why we are even hosting AFCON. (Applause)MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON A FIELD VISIT TO KARAMOJA AND TESO SUBREGIONS TO ASSESS WATER FOR AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION FACILITIESTHE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the importance of water for production in agriculture cannot be overemphasised. Right now, most parts of the country are receiving a lot of rainfall, but within few months, some of these areas will be water strained, like my place in Karamoja. This calls for functional water for production, storage facilities, among others. Whether or not, it is being done, the committee will now present its report. My brother, Hon. Frank, will tell you that he has put up a dam in Bukedea, but it will be the committee to tell us whether it is there or not. Committee chairperson, can you present your report?  4.04THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Janet Okori-Moe):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on a field visit to Karamoja and Teso subregions to assess water for agricultural production facilities. In the same vein, I beg to lay the minutes of the meetings of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries while considering the report of the water for production facilities in Teso and Karamoja. (Applause)THE SPEAKER:  Please lay. MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Speaker, I now beg to present the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on a field visit to Karamoja and Teso subregions to assess water for agricultural production facilities. I am not going to read word for word because it is uploaded and I believe Members have gone through it. I will go straight to page three on introduction. In accordance with Rules 159(c) and (d), 189(b), (e) and (f) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries conducted a field visit to Karamoja and Teso subregions to assess water for agricultural production facilities. It now reports in accordance with Rule 34 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. To give a small background, like you had already hinted, globally, water for production accounts for over 80 per cent of water drawn for use. According to the Ministry of Water and Environment, less than 2 per cent of water available in the country is used in production, but there is a sharp increase in demand primarily due to climate change and degradation of natural resources.11137THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 28 NOVEMBER 2023Consequently, 83 per cent of the agricultural communities in Uganda continue to depend on rainfall as a source of water for production. About 21 per cent of agricultural communities utilise wetlands, 14 per cent utilise streams while the least use operational sources of water for production including valley tanks which is 0.2 per cent and rock catchment rainwater harvesting which is 0.3 per cent, according to the Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS). UBOS further states that the country is increasingly facing major challenges of prolonged droughts and unexpected floods due to climate change variability. It is predicted that Uganda will be water stressed by the year 2025. Cognisant of the climate variability and the importance of water for production, Government prioritised increased access and use of water for agricultural production in the NDPIII, through the five sub-interventions that are lined up here: i) Completion of irrigation schemes under construction. ii) Construction of new irrigation schemes. iii) Development of infrastructure and services for bulk water storage and transfer, including water abstraction systems, transmission mains, water pumping systems, storage tanks, and water distribution networks. iv) Development of solar-powered small-scale irrigation systems for small-holder farmers outside conventional irrigation schemes. v) Promotion of water use efficiency in agricultural production. In addition to the interventions mentioned, Government through the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, and Ministry of Water and Environment has been providing infrastructure for water for production facilities in the country since 1960 to-date. The infrastructure includes valley dams, valley tanks, earth dams and irrigation schemes, among others. On page 5, we have a table showing water for agricultural production loan projects in Uganda. However, as a summary of that table, the Government’s efforts to reduce reliance on rain-fed agriculture and mitigate the effects of climate change remain unsatisfactory, as the plants are not yet yielding the desired results. Several challenges have been recorded with these projects during the course of their implementation and utilisation. They include: i) Lack of a sustainability plan for the infrastructure. ii) Poor location and siting of facilities, placing them in areas that are far from people who are in dire need. iii) There is misuse of established facilities by the beneficiary communities.iv) Abandonment of projects by contractors at implementation phase, thus causing loss of funds to Government.  v) There is also absence of a clear policy framework streamlining the roles of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and Ministry of Water and Environment. vi) A recent Cabinet Directive placed the responsibility of establishing and managing water for agricultural production facilities for on-farm activities under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, while the Ministry of Water and Environment is supposed to establish and manage facilities for off-farm activities. vii) There is also the challenge of poor or inappropriate project design. 11138SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTviii) There is poor coordination during implementation, shoddy and incomplete work in most of the facilities. Madam Speaker, like I said, the committee visited the two sub-regions of Karamoja and Teso based on the background information that is highlighted below. Karamoja’s prevailing pastoral and agro-pastoral production systems are characterised by long dry spells and cyclical droughts that are exacerbated by climate change. The scarcity of water associated with the drought is considered the greatest risk to agricultural development. In addition, a considerable number of valley tanks - up to 20,000 cubic metres and wells - have been constructed across the sub-region, but most have dried up due to the long dry season. Much of the existing water storage infrastructure suffered from consequences of years of utilisation without proper operation and maintenance. Furthermore, water catchment areas supplying water to the water storage sites are under threat due to overgrazing, forest destruction, bushfires and increasing charcoal production. Like in other regions, Teso sub-region depends on agriculture as a key economic activity. However, the area has been experiencing erratic and unpredictable rainfall, which has resulted into frequent floods, water logging and severe prolonged drought, contributing to food insecurity. The Government has established a number of water-for-production facilities, but the demand is still high. It is against this background that the committee conducted a field visit to Karamoja and Teso, to assess the selected water-for-production facilities. The objectives of the field trip are captured under 3.0, the methodology is under 4.0.After the field trip, the committee had an engagement with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; Ministry of Water and Environment and; Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The sites that were visited are in 4.2 that is; in Moroto, Nakonyen Valley Dam; Amudat District, Katotin Small Scale Irrigation Scheme and Kosike Valley Dam. In Kaabong, the committee visited Longoromit Valley Dam and Usake Valley Dam. In Kotido, the committee visited Kaoyangorok Valley Dam and Kailong Valley Dam. In Abim, the committee visited Kawomeri Valley Dam and Kanu Valley Dam; in Soroti, the committee visited Alere Small-Scale Irrigation scheme; in Bukedea, Acomai Irrigation Scheme and Akero Valley tank. In Kumi, Amosingo Small-Scale Irrigation Scheme and Agurut Valley tank; while in Serere, the committee visited Opapa Small-Scale Irrigation Scheme. Findings in Nakonyen, Moroto District. The committee was informed that work commenced in January 2023. The facility, after completion, would have a capacity of 1,580,000 cubic metres and would serve the people of Tapac and the neighbouring communities. The committee was informed that a cost of Shs 9.1 billion was to be spent. Committee observations The cost of the project has been increasing over time. The original cost was Shs 8.1 billion, but at the time of the committee visit, it had increased to Shs 9.1 billion. As of October 2023, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries had revised the cost to Shs 10.9 billion. After nine months, the project is behind schedule and may not be completed within the planned activities. [Ms Okori-Moe]11139THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 28 NOVEMBER 2023The project design provides for water points for livestock, but lacks a provision for irrigation, aquaculture and provision of clean water for domestic consumption. There was no seen adherence to social and environmental standards. But on a positive note, even as the contractor continued to do his work, there was a provision for watering points for livestock. RecommendationsThe Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should ensure that the contractor expedites completion of the remaining works without compromising the quality to avoid additional costs. This should be done under close supervision of the Ministry. The project design should be revised to make provisions for irrigation, fish farming and clean water provision. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should ensure that the contractor adheres to the environmental and social safety standards by planting trees around the project site. Katotin Small-Scale Irrigation SchemeKatotin Small-Scale Irrigation Scheme, which is located in Amudat District, was started on 11 May 2021 and completed on 20 January 2022, at a cost of Shs 1.9 billion. Observations by the committeeThe project has not been handed over to Amudat District Local Government and this is hampering rehabilitation works for the facility. The committee also observes that the criteria for allocation of the 10 acres of land to the community members was not clear. RecommendationThe recommendation is that the Ministry of Water and Environment hands over the Katotin irrigation scheme to Amudat District Local Government, which should, in turn, establish a facility user committee. Kosike Valley Dam Kosike Valley Dam, still in Amudat, is being implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. At the time of the visit, Shs 1.6 billion had already been spent and the cost of the project is expected to be Shs 11.6 billion. At the time the committee visited, the work was at a standstill – only the clearing of the site had been done. The committee was informed that there was a disagreement on the land ownership. The committee observes that Government is likely to lose money if the issues that led to the stalling of the project are not addressed. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, which is implementing it, did not adequately engage the community – that is what the committee discovered from the field. Recommendations The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should expedite the process of compensating the landowners so as to pave way for faster and safer project implementation. The Ministry should, as a matter of urgency, adequately engage stakeholders to resolve the diverse interests and concerns of the community – because the community reported that their cultural area was tampered with during the siting of the project. Longoromit Valley DamLongoromit Dam, in Kaabong District, was constructed by the Ministry of Water and Environment at a cost of Shs 7.2 billion and at the same time when Arechek Dam in Napak District and Kobebe Dam in Moroto District were constructed. Apparently, in the subregion, the best dam that one can see is Arechek Dam. 11140SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTBy the time the committee visited the dam in Longoromit, it was not functional and completely run down. ObservationsThe committee observes that even the wild animals from Kidepo National Park have escalated the rate of the silting of the dam because they also drink from the same dam. We were informed that some water weeds have invaded the park and that is why the wild animals are getting scattered everywhere. Longoromit Dam is dilapidated to a large extent and would require a substantial number of resources to rehabilitate. RecommendationThe Ministry of Water and Environment should budget for the fencing and rehabilitation of Longoromit Earth Dam in the coming financial year and the funds should be released during the first quarter. Madam Speaker, sometimes we appropriate monies to some of these entities, to do due diligence to water for production, but the monies are not released.The committee recommends that effective Financial Year 2024/2025, Uganda Wildlife Authority should budget for the fencing of Kidepo National Park to stop the animals from escaping from the park and also provide drinking points for the animals. Usake DamFor Usake Dam, located in Ik Constituency in Kaabong, the work is currently ongoing and it is being implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. It is expected that when completed, it will have a capacity of 2,880,000 cubic metres and will cost Shs 6.9 billion, of which at the time of the visit, Shs 4.7 had already been spent. Observations Progress on construction works is between 50 and 60 per cent, yet the completion date is nearing. The equipment and manpower on the site, that we saw, were inadequate. There is a permanent water source that makes that site very strategic, and the watering traps were constructed. However, there is no adherence to the environmental and social safety standards. We did not see any tree around the dam that is being constructed. There is also, of course, lack of community involvement. RecommendationsThe Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should ensure the timely completion of the Usake Dam.The contractor should be urged to plant trees around the project site to demarcate the land and reduce soil erosion. Kaoyongorok Valley DamKaoyongorok Valley Dam, in Kotido, was constructed by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries at a cost of Shs 9 billion. During the visit of the committee, the district officials reported that the dam had never been handed over to Kotido District Local Government. Observations The dam is located in the wilderness in a very remote and insecure area. The place is uninhabited, has no road and it is hard for the intended beneficiaries to access and utilise it. The committee also observed that water was covered with algae, water weeds and swamp vegetation, which made it difficult for livestock to drink from that dam. RecommendationsThe Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should complete the project and hand it over to Kotido District Local Government for further management. [Ms Okori-Moe]11141THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 28 NOVEMBER 2023The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, through their Department of Agricultural Mechanisation and Infrastructure, should support the construction of an access road to the facility and also plan for the maintenance of the facility.Kailong Valley DamKailong Dam is located in the Lokitelaebu Subcounty in Kotido District and it was done by the Ministry of Water and Environment. According to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Planning, when they appeared before the committee, Kailong was constructed at Shs 1,095,857,000 and handed over for utilisation. However, some records put the figure at Shs 3.2 billion. The committee was not able to verify which figure was the right one. Observations The facility was not completed and handed over to Kotido District Local Government. There are discrepancies, like I have said, in the project costs by different entities. People interpret the figures differently. Recommendations The project should be completed and handed over to Kotido District Local Government, which will hand it over to the user communities.The Auditor-General should carry out a value-for-money audit of the project and ascertain the actual project cost. Kawomeri Valley TankKawomeri, in Abim, was constructed at a cost of Shs 3.5 billion by the Ministry of Water and Environment. The committee found the facility surrounded by bushes. The facility had algae and water hyacinth.The committee observed that the valley tank was actually non-functional – it had a non-functional outlet system, affecting its ability to provide water to the beneficiaries in a controlled manner. Whereas the Ministry of Finance reported that the project was commissioned, the district and community reported that construction of the facility has neither been completed, nor handed over to the district. Recommendations The Ministry of Water and Environment should complete the construction of this project and hand it over to Abim District Local Government. The facility should be fenced with immediate effect because the committee was informed that some four children drowned in that water because of curiosity to go and swim in a non-protected dam. Kanu Valley DamKanu Valley Dam construction facility was launched in April 2022 by Her Excellency the Vice President. The work at the facility has stalled due to land wrangles. The committee observes that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should consult the district leadership about the choice of this project. The committee was informed that the community and the local government were not consulted; that is why the land wrangle is going on. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should work with the Government valuers and local leaders to verify the list of all land owners so that they are compensated and construction work starts as soon as possible. Alere Small Irrigation Scheme is located in Katine Subcounty in Soroti District. This 11142SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTfacility was constructed by the Ministry of Water and Environment. The facility has a valley tank with a capacity of 20,000 cubic metres, a solar abstraction system, irrigation network, and a modern nursery bed, among others. The committee observes that the facility has not been handed over to Soroti District Local Government, yet it is being utilised. The committee also observes that farmers lack skills in good agricultural practices and agribusiness management.RecommendationThe Ministry of Water and Environment should hand over this facility to Soroti District Local Government. The district, through the production department, ensures that farmers are trained on irrigation practices, agribusiness, and supported to maintain the infrastructure. Acomai Irrigation Scheme, is located in Kamutur Subcounty, Bukedea District, and is still under construction by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries under the Agricultural Value Chain Development Project (A VCDP).According to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, construction of this project commenced in November 2021 and is expected to be completed in July 2024. It is supposed to have a number of projects within it; construction of six secondary canals, 6.4 kilometres of steam roads, storage building, residential and office buildings, drop structures, flood protection works, storage tank, embankment filling, and compartment, and construction of a bridge over River Sironko at the intake site to connect Bukedea and Bulambuli districts. The scheme is a large one and is estimated to cover 1,608 hectares, where the net irrigable area will be 1,480 hectares with its water resource from River Sironko, at the estimated cost of $37,807 million. ObservationsThe project implementation is slow. Whereas the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development reported that the progress of the work had reached 47 per cent –MR NSEREKO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my senior colleague, Hon. Okori-Moe for the wonderful report. My procedural point is in the form of a request - that since we have this report uploaded, and she is well far to the observations - that she goes straight to the recommendations, and we can carry on a meaningful debate. Otherwise, her report is amazing. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you.MS OKORI-MOE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, I thought I would talk about everything about Bukedea, but my brother is stopping me. He does not know that Bukedea is Nalongo’ s  district of. RecommendationsThe committee recommends that a provision be made to retain Tajar Valley Tank operational so as to save Government money from getting wasted. The committee was informed that the facility was established at Shs 2 billion, and the committee wishes that another project like Tajar would be given to the local community as the other major project goes on. The committee also recommends that Government undertakes deliberate efforts to source market for the scheme produce when operational to motivate farmers. Akero Valley Tank in BukedeaObservationsAkero Valley Tank infrastructure is dilapidated and needs to be rehabilitated. [Ms Okori-Moe]11143THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 28 NOVEMBER 2023The committee recommends that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should budget for desilting and renovation of Akero Valley Tank. This should include restoration of its banks, renovating inlets and spillways, and all the others that are listed. The committee also recommends that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries prioritises and expedites rehabilitation of this dam as soon as can be possible. Amosingo Small-Scale Irrigation Scheme Recommendations The committee recommends that the Ministry of Water and Environment that constructed this scheme, hands over the project to the district local government for further management and sustainability. The committee also recommends that the ministry reviews the cost of renting land to the farmers with a view to maintaining profitability of the investment. The committee further recommends that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Ministry of Water and Environment should harmonise the provision of agricultural extension services and personnel. The line ministries in consultation with the district local government should facilitate the formation of a facility management committee to provide a framework for effective maintenance of the facilities. Agurut Valley Tank in Kumi RecommendationsThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries ensures completion of the project in accordance with the design specifications. Upon completion, the ministry should hand over the project to the Kumi District Local Government to facilitate the usage of the facility by the community. Opapa Small--Scale Irrigation Scheme –THE SPEAKER : Honourable members, most of these dams are either not completed, they are not fenced, or even those that are completed have not been handed over to the districts for better management. As Hon. Nsereko was saying, you would give us the generic observation that one, the fencing, the spoor design, and late completion of almost all of these dams and then the fencing and rehabilitation of these dams are not being done. For instance, Akero Dam is dilapidated. Even the one of Acomai, is behind schedule. When you talk about releases of funds - because I know the Minister of Agriculture is going to come and say, “We budgeted for this, but we were not given money.” Then the issue of fencing Kidepo National Park, the animals should not live together with the people because at the end of the day, one will eat the other. There should be a fencing of these places. Regarding the unprotected dams, I told the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries that I was going to fine him because of one of the unprotected dams around my place, where I have lost over 20 cows that fell in it. We need to fully construct these kinds of dams. Conclude.MS OKORI-MOE:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I conclude, the issues you have summarised are what the committee found on the ground at nearly all the water for production facilities we visited. The exception is on most of the ones being implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries that are still at construction stage. Construction of a number of them has not concluded. The other issue –THE SPEAKER: Madam Chairperson, how do we know a dam to be constructed by the agriculture ministry and one by the Ministry of Water and Environment? 11144SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTMS OKORI-MOE: That is the question, Madam Speaker. When the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development appeared before the committee, I requested for a tripartite meeting with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and; the Ministry of Water and Environment. We are still waiting for that meeting.The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has already informed us, as a committee, that the matter is being handled by Her Excellency the Vice-President at Executive level. He requested that we leave that issue to be handled by the Vice-President because right now, it is not clear who is where. It is a matter for the Executive to handle. Finally – (Interjection) – The Speaker will give you time. THE SPEAKER: Let her finalise.MS OKORI-MOE: Finally, one thing that the committee observed was that most of the water for production facilities in Teso Subregion do not have a problem of land wrangles. However, most of the sites in Karamoja have a problem of land wrangles. There are a lot of land wrangles and this has delayed –THE SPEAKER: That is because of failure to involve the communities. Once you involve the communities in this, then you will not have wrangles. MS OKORI-MOE: In conclusion, the demand for water for production facilities by communities across the country continues to increase, more especially in water-stressed areas like Karamoja and Teso subregions. Honourable colleagues, in areas where the facilities exist, the communities are underserved. With this submission, thank you for listening and your attention.Thank you very much. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson of the committee. Hon. Abrahams Lokii?4.41MR ABRAHAMS LOKII (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Madam Speaker, I thank the chairperson of the committee for an elaborate report. I would like to start with the information that I wanted to provide. The issue of defining who should do construction works on certain sites needs to be seriously discussed because there was a conflict at that dam you were talking about that serves the people of Tepeth. At one point, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Ministry of Water and Environment collided over the site and up to today, we do not know whether the matter was resolved.THE SPEAKER: The Karimojong leaders even organised and mobilised people to chase officials from the agriculture ministry and burn their equipment. We got that information. MR ABRAHAMS LOKII: Those are the issues that need to be resolved because our Karamojong do not like confusion. One person comes and a site is given; the second day, it is somebody else they do not know. That is basically a reaction. Two, I would like to observe that in the whole of Karamoja, while water –THE SPEAKER: As leaders, let us desist from mobilising our communities; let us be leaders. This is one Government; you cannot mobilise people to burn equipment and attack these people. That was very unfortunate. My Karamojong people do not behave like that. Next time, let us not do that. It is good for us to come back, sit down and agree that this is consensus. MR ABRAHAMS LOKII: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was observing that while there is a problem of water in Karamoja, Kotido District is the most water-stressed. I would like to appeal to the Ministry of Agriculture, 11145THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 28 NOVEMBER 2023Animal Industry and Fisheries if they are able to help, to provide water. This is what has caused problems between the people of Kotido and the Acholi because every dry season, these guys move, in the name of following the water that flows to the swamps. If these matters are not attended to, people are bound to have a lot of conflicts. We have a very critical dam called Longor – between Agago and Kotido districts. It has been there for years, but has silted up. I would like to appeal to Government to consider desilting this dam, in order to help our people. Finally, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the dam in Kaoyongorok is actually incomplete. The chairperson tried to be polite. When we went there, even the LCI of the area was willing to walk through the dam. If a dam’s depth is about three metres, then what would you call a water pond? How many people can it serve? How long would it last? The challenge we have is that most of the water reservoirs that are constructed do not provide water in the dry season and yet, the purpose is to provide water during that season. If these reservoirs cannot provide water, what alternative do our people have? It is important for the engineers to begin making better designs and maybe think of other options of putting water pumps, so that in the dry season, wind power can be used to pump water into the dams to restrict a lot of movement. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 4.45MR HILLARY LOKWANG (NRM, Ik County, Kaabong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the committee chairperson and members for the well elaborated report. I will begin with the issue of Usake Dam. This dam was launched in 2018 and it has been there six years down the road. The first money that was allocated to that dam was indeed Shs 6.9 billion. However, there were about three contractors on the same dam, until the ministry took over. On the issue of community involvement on Corporate Social Responsibility; I recall one day when we agreed that they pick murram from a site near my farm, we said that let that money be used for opening a community access road connecting my constituency to Dodoth West County. These people did not give that money; they simply went away. Thirdly, on the issue of Longoromit Dam, it is true. We have been sharing it with elephants and buffaloes. When I went there on Saturday, I found many elephants on the road in the afternoon and had to give them way; I first stopped, reversed and then let them go. Otherwise, these animals have been damaging crops in most of the subcounties. That part needs to be fenced because these animals have caused a lot of food insecurity in the subregion –THE SPEAKER: There is a point of order; somebody is putting you on order.MR MUZAALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable member from Iki-Iki –THE SPEAKER: No, he is from Ik.MR MUZAALE: Ik. I do not know whether what he is putting on is a Madonna shirt. Therefore –MR HILLARY LOKWANG:  Madam Speaker, before I came to the House, I read the Rules of Procedure on the dress code, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Are you now the Speaker to respond? MR MUZAALE: I do not know whether the Member is in order to speak on the microphone 11146SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTwhen he is wearing an ordinary shirt in this respectable honourable House. I thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I am actually constrained to rule because, you see, the young man was almost being eaten by the animals (Laughter).  Next time, he will come in a suit. Let him finish his statement because he met those big animals. MR HILLARY LOKWANG: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. As I conclude, on the issue of the dams in Karamoja, sometimes – I heard the chairperson complaining that the Ministries of Water and Agriculture account for one dam. How is that possible; that these two ministries are allocated money and then they account for one dam? I think we need that issue to be sorted out. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. That will be clarified by the minister. 4.49DR GEORGE BHOKA (NRM, Obongi County, Obongi ): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I add my voice to thank the chairperson of the committee for that report. First of all, the issues that have been highlighted from Teso and Karamoja cut across the water- stressed areas. I suggest that the committee considers a more comprehensive assessment to look into other areas like West Nile, Busoga, and Bunyoro, amongst others, to have a national picture of the situation - THE SPEAKER:  Actually, when we start discussing Karamoja and Teso alone, they will imagine it was because the Speaker comes from those two areas. I am happy that the minister is here and these things are real. Let the minister give us feedback that they are going on the ground, but can the committee make a comprehensive report for the whole country? (Applause)  This is because you are talking about Teso and Karamoja, but that is not even two per cent of the whole country. Now you have left out the cattle corridor. Honourable minister, can you come and – because all these things are true. The minister is not going to deny any of them. 4.50THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Frank Tumwebaze):  Madam Speaker, congratulations on the upcoming conference. I thank the committee chairperson and the members for the oversight report. I have gone through the report, which I just received today, but we have been interacting with the committee. For each of the dams we are implementing - if time allows, we can go into detail on the challenges we are facing. The committee generally knows the budget of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. When we talk of water for agriculture production, we are talking about water for livestock, aquaculture (fish ponds) and irrigation technologies. All of these – and of course we even talk about farm access roads because there are rural roads that are not coded by either the Ministry of Works and Transport or the district. When we put up this infrastructure, we have to ensure we open the roads. The common factor we have in all of this is a limited budget. Our development budget, as the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, ranges between Shs 90 to 130 billion for the whole country. Out of that budget, water for agricultural production is always allocated 60 per cent, which comes in quarters. Now, what we have done, as the agriculture ministry, which should be a point of correction in the report, is that we never contract private contractors. We have tried to build in-house capacity in the mechanisation department. We also deploy ministry engineers. All those dams - if they were to be contracted - the cost would almost double. For example, Nakonyen Dam; they say, the cost of constructing it was Shs 8.1 billion, [Mr Muzaale]11147THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 28 NOVEMBER 2023which increased to about Shs 10 billion. I inquired from our engineer for mechanisation and the justification is that it is because of the fuel increase and the cost of steel. Madam Speaker, all the dams that are not yet handed over will be handed over upon completion; they will be fenced. When I visit some of the dams, as a cattle keeper, I know that even if you have not studied animal husbandry, when you put up a water pond and allow cows to go and water for themselves – my father gave me enough strokes for that. We should be able to fence the dam and have the watering troughs around it. This will be done and we have already given a policy instruction. I agree with you, Madam Speaker that – I think the reason Karamoja and Teso stand out is because Teso is prone to flooding and Karamoja is prone to drought. I am sure if the committee works together with us, we can bring the broader country - water for production challenge. I have some hope to give you and I am not in anticipation because this matter is already in the Committee on National Economy - When we get our loan, we are going to equip our mechanisation centres. We will have our fleet of machinery expanded. Each region will have a resident unit for water for production. We will be able to intervene in all of these areas and –THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, as you have that hope that you will be able to handle this, that is one more reason why we need to know the needs of each place. We need to know the needs of Hoima, Ntoroko, Soroti and Kamwenge so that we know what we are going to spend on. You will find that even Serere, where the minister comes from, is also asking - We need to know all the needs so that we are able to budget properly, now that there is a loan there and we are going into the budgeting process. We need to have that information. MR TUMWEBAZE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker for the guidance. We are trying to harmonise the issue of mandate clash with the Ministry of Water and Environment. It has been there and it goes back – the differences in who does what. The Cabinet has directed that the Vice-President resolves the matter with us and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I have hope that we shall resolve this and we will be –(Interjection)-  Yes. Okay, I can take as many as the Speaker allows. THE SPEAKER: What clarification do you need? MR KABERUKA: Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me the opportunity, and honourable minister, thank you for giving way. The honourable minister has said that we have hope. The loan is being processed and you have mentioned something very clear and critical; needs assessment. Is this loan going to help us address the needs assessment because it is already being brought? On which terms is it being brought? Is it, therefore, taking cognisance of the needs that we are talking about? Secondly, you have mentioned the issue of the mechanisation unit –THE SPEAKER: Before the Government applies for a loan, they always do a preliminary needs assessment and that is the basis of the loan. We want the committee to go from one district to the other so that it helps - MR KABERUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think that will enrich - If the road could also address those findings, then it would be perfect.The minister has alluded to the fact that he has a very operational mechanisation unit, which is very okay. He has also talked of farm access roads. I would like to know how that mechanisation unit works because at one time we asked for a unit. For the last four years, we have never got a reply. Who benefits from such a unit? How do we access such services from that unit? How is it being operationalised at your ministry? Thank you. 11148SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTTHE SPEAKER:  Hon. Kaberuka, I want you to separate the road units from the agricultural mechanisation unit. MR KABERUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have farms. We asked, as a district, through the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, but it is for farm access. That unit was purposely meant for that, as mentioned. However, how do we access it because it seems it is a preserve of the few Ugandans?THE SPEAKER: No, it is for all Ugandans. MS AGABA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, and congratulations. I would like the honourable minister to clarify an issue of irrigation that is put in the district. We all know that irrigation and water for the dams is all water for production. However, you find that they are charging a lot of money from our poor people for the water at the district level. They are telling our people to pay a million shillings per acre. When the honourable minister came to the committee, I asked him and he said, that is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Which is which? What does the Ministry of Finance do? What does the Ministry of Agriculture do? Our people are suffering and there is no help. Madam Speaker, like you said, we also need to be thinking about the cattle corridor because in Bunyoro and mostly in Bugangaizi East County, we are water-stressed. Our animals are dying and production now going low. Our crops are destroyed because when it comes to a dry season, our crops are no more. We cannot harvest. We do not have what to do and irrigation has become for who-is-who. I just want clarification from the honourable minister. Thank you so much. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, you will first clarify what has been said. However, the Ministry of Finance collects money and Ministry for Agriculture provides water. (Laughter)MR TUMWEBAZE:  Madam Speaker, thank you. I understand the pressure of water for production. The project is called UgIFT. It is a basket donor fund. It has money for health infrastructure, water infrastructure – the programme she is talking about – and schools. This basket was negotiated by the Ministry for Finance and the disbursements are from the Ministry of Finance directly to the districts. I think when they were negotiating, part of the loan conditions was that the beneficiaries of irrigation technologies on farms should contribute 25 per cent. That is purely a loan condition, not our domestic policy. I think the Ministry of Finance weighed other advantages and took it up - (Hon. Ababiku rose_)THE SPEAKER:  There is a procedural matter.MS ABABIKU:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am constrained, but allow me ask whether we are proceeding rightly. When Hon. Dr Bhoka brought in the issue of bringing a comprehensive report to cover the whole country so that we have a comprehensive debate that would provide a comprehensive solution; you guided that the committee goes and does extra work. We did not proceed to have a debate over which the minister can have comprehensive responses. Therefore, I am in a dilemma whether we are proceeding right to have this debate and engagement with the honourable minister when there are other issues, which we have not yet raised. I seek your guidance. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable member – she used to be my chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs – My chairperson, we are proceeding very well. For one reason, we need to get action-taken reports on this to form a basis for all of the other reports. We are going to adopt this report. We have already ordered the committee to go and bring a comprehensive report for the whole 11149THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 28 NOVEMBER 2023country. We have reports for two sub-regions now. We will adopt this, which will form a basis. After adopting this report, I expect the minister with his team to go on the ground and see whether what the committee is reporting is really correct and then take action. We need action, not lamentations. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have the staff members of Nyakibale Upper Primary School in Rukungiri District. They are represented in Parliament by Hon. Dr Rutahigwa Elisa. He is the tallest man in the House and very active and Hon. Natukunda Midius. She is a nice girl there. She is one of our little girls, but very active. (Applause)The people of Rukungiri, bring back our people. We are comfortable with them. (Applause) I thank you very much, honourable members –you do not have the locus to discuss this. Let them bring a report from Tororo and –Honourable members, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on a field visit to Karamoja and Teso Sub-region to assess the water for agricultural production facilities be adopted by this House with amendments. (Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, we expect a report from you on actions taken on those dams you are just throwing there. They are killing our cows. ADJOURNMENTTHE SPEAKER: Honourable members – the problem is that you people sit here for two minutes, you go out and come back while I sit here from the time I come. Then you come up with procedure. I therefore adjourn the House to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow. (The House rose at 5.06 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 29 November 2023 at 2.00 p.m.)  