

Thursday, 29 November 2018

Parliament met at 2.04 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I wish to make the following adjustments on today’s Order Paper: There will be a short statement from the Leader of the Opposition; she wants to make some announcements. 

We also alter the Order Paper to accommodate a motion from hon. Cecilia Ogwal in relation to a motion for a resolution of Parliament to congratulate and commend the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, Speaker of Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, for establishing the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association and other related matters. That will be accommodated.

Honourable members, tomorrow our Members will be going for the East Africa Community Games and there was a meeting of Speakers in South Sudan, which took place on 21st September in Juba. The Speaker grew concerned about some of the activities that take place during these East Africa Community Games for Parliament and they came with the following resolutions:

    i. The Speakers agreed that each Legislature considers imposing sanctions against its Members who would not conform to the prescribed rules of the tournament. This arose because there are Parliaments or Assemblies that have not adhered to the rules that were agreed upon for the conduct of these games and tournament. It has affected the integrity of these games and caused tension where there should be no tension. 

    ii. Therefore, the Speakers agreed – and I communicate to our Members who are going for these games to observe the rules. If others are going to breach the rules, let it be them and not the Parliament of Uganda or its Members. This goes even to the staff who are going to help in the management of the affairs of these games. Please let us strictly observe the rules of these games.

The Minister of Public Service was required to make some statements on the payments that have delayed for the former workers of the East African Community - he was supposed to make that statement yesterday and he did not do so. Today, I will also alter the Order Paper to accommodate his response.

Honourable members, this is my substantial communication today to you. You are aware that the three major roles of Parliament are legislation, oversight and representation. If these roles were to be assigned weight, in my view, the legislative role would be given a higher score on the scale. 

As Parliament, we have continued to exercise this role as much as we can. Performance of Parliament however, is greatly hinged on competence and effectiveness of the committees which form the engines of processing parliamentary business.

In respect to Bills, just like my senior colleague, the Rt Hon. Speaker said, our performance leaves a lot to be desired. We have not performed as well as we should, as a Parliament. For this reason, the provision of the Rules of Procedure will henceforth be strictly enforced so that we can improve on our performance on Bills.

Rule 128 of the Rules of Procedure provides for reference of a Bill to a committee in the following terms:

    (1) Whenever a Bill is read the First Time in the House, it shall be referred to the appropriate committee appointed under the provisions of these rules.

    (2) The committee shall examine the Bill in detail and make all such inquiries in relation to it as the committee considers expedient or necessary and report to the House within 45 days from the date the Bill is referred to the committee. 

The Clerk is henceforth directed to do the following:

    i) Immediately a Bill is read for the first time in Parliament and referred to the committee, the Clerk shall write to the chairperson of the committee notifying him or her of the business referred and the date when the 45 days will elapse. The mover of the Bill - be it a minister or a private member - will be copied in on the same correspondence.

    ii) Three days before the elapse of the stipulated period of processing of the Bill by the committee, the Clerk shall remind the chairperson and the mover of the Bill of the intention to reflect the Bill for second reading on the Order Paper.

    iii) The Clerk shall, on the due date, reflect the Bill for second reading in Parliament.

    iv) With or without a report of a committee designated to handle the Bill, the House shall proceed to consider the Bill and conclude with its passage as envisaged in the rules - this is with or without a report of the committee on the lapse of 45 days.

Rule 121, provides for the procedure for a Private Member’s Bill:

    (1) A Private Members’ Bill shall be introduced first by way of motion to which shall be attached a proposed draft of the Bill.

    (2) If the motion is carried, the printing and publication of the Bill in the gazette shall be a responsibility of the Clerk.

    (3) Following the publication of the Bill in the gazette, the progress of the Bill shall be the same as that followed in respect of the Government Bills. 

For emphasis, the Private Members’ Bill from First Reading to passage shall require 45 days. Any request for benchmarking in whatever form on a Private Members’ Bill will not be entertained by the Office of the Speaker because, in my understanding, the rationale for benchmarking would only apply on post-legislative scrutiny. 

Situations have arisen where private Members, upon being granted leave to present a Private Members’ Bill, write letters to the Clerk and want to go for benchmarking to draft their Bill. This will not be accepted; it does not make any sense. 

Therefore, please, Members who have been granted right or leave to present a Private Members’ Bill, your recourse is the First Parliamentary Counsel in the Attorney-General’s Chamber to draft for you the Bill and bring it for First Reading. Any effort to go for benchmarking before you have even drafted the Bill would really not be a fair request to make. 

I further direct the Clerk to work out dates for consideration of all the remaining Bills, which were referred to the committees by Parliament, so that chairpersons and movers of the Bills are ready and available to handle them in Parliament. Therefore, if there is a Bill that is on the Order Paper, we will proceed whether there is a report or not because the motion will be for Second Reading and it is this House to debate that Bill and pass it. 

I also call upon the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to indicate to Parliament the loss of interest in some Bills. I am aware that some Bills were saved from the Eighth Parliament and due to various developments, some of them may not stand the test of time anymore. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please, indicate to us those Bills that you are no longer interested in or those that have become irrelevant for purposes of passage of time so that we can remove them from our business and clean up what is before us. 

Honourable members, it is our duty to work together to better the life of our people. The electorate had confidence in us; that we, the Members elected and assembled here, could execute the mandate conferred by the Constitution. We should rise to the occasion and carry out our roles of legislation, representation and oversight without fear or favour, ill will or affection. 

It is in that regard that I once again call on all of us to show commitment and change our attitude in handling business in Parliament. It is only then that the Government manifesto and aspirations of the people of this country will be realised. 

I take this opportunity to as well appeal to all of the staff of Parliament, especially those who participate in committees to play their supportive role with due diligence, commitment and meeting the time schedules expected of committees in handling business before them. Thank you, honourable members and this directive takes effect now. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the guidance you have given us on handling Bills seems more amplified, more detailed and clearer than what we have in our official Rules of Procedure. 

The procedural issue I am seeking is whether we could have it incorporated in the current amendment of the Bill so that Members are adequately guided on how to handle matters of business. If it is not clearly specified, as you have read now, there are times when we do not understand the implication. 

Mr Speaker, I really like detailed guidance you have given us and I am begging that it becomes part of the Rules of Procedure, since we are in the process of amending the Rules. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. I have not done anything beyond quoting the provisions of Rules 128 and 121 of our Rules of Procedure. That is what is already provided in the rules; that when Bills come to the House and are read for the first time, they go to the committee for 45 days. After 45 days, those Bills are expected to come back to Parliament for Second Reading and eventual passing. Therefore, I have not read anything new; it is just the rules. 

The emphasis I have made, however, is that once those Bills have gone to the committee, the committee must respect the 45 days. If they do not come back within the 45 days, Parliament will proceed with the Bill with or without their report. This is because the mandate to pass or disallow those Bills rests with Parliament but not the committee. 

The committee is supposed to advise us on what we need to look at when we are passing the Bill. It is supposed to facilitate the debate on the motion for the Second Reading of the Bill. Hence, we do not adopt or disallow a report of a committee. It only informs the content of the debate in relation to the principles of the Bill - and probably propose amendments that have arisen based on the committee’s consultation with people in this country, who are most likely to be affected by this Bill. 

However, it cannot be people in China, United Arab Emirates and America who are supposed to be consulted in the content of a Bill that is going to affect Ugandans. If you want to go and look at what other countries do, first pass your law. Thereafter, you go and benchmark on post-legislative scrutiny. For example, you can tell them that we have passed this law; and it is working well with you; why is it not working well with us? What do we need to change? However, first pass the law. 

In other words, honourable members, I have not created any new rules. I have simply re-echoed the positions of rules that are already so well outlined in our Rules of Procedure. 

MR MWIJUKYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Just last week, I raised a matter of national importance to the effect that the Uganda Police Force was restricting the activities of the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC). The Inspector General of Police wrote to the FDC and said that they cannot have rallies; instead they should go and organise town hall meetings. 

The same concern was again raised by the Leader of the Opposition and she even attempted to go and meet the IGP. However, he was not in office and she was referred to the Deputy IGP, who kept her waiting for an hour. 

Consequently, Mr Speaker, our rallies, which were scheduled for Western Uganda; Rukungiri, Mbarara and Kasese were stopped by the police. The minister was supposed to come today to tell us why this is happening. However, the minister is not willing to come or he is not ready but a new development has since come up. 

The police have now banned FDC activities and rallies in Ankole. If you read today’s Daily Monitor, while addressing a press conference yesterday, the Regional Police Commander, quoting the guidelines of the IGP said, “I am banning FDC rallies in Mbarara and surrounding districts.” To me, this is not just disturbing but criminal.

Mr Speaker, the procedural matter I am raising that since the minister was directed to come but he has not done so yet the situation is getting worse; how do we proceed when the ministers are not willing to intervene in a situation that warrants that they come and tell us how we should immediately proceed? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this matter was raised last week and again on Tuesday, with additional concerns from the Leader of the Opposition. Is there a likelihood that the minister will come to Parliament to brief us on this situation quickly? 

2.23
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, right now I cannot tell why the minister has not come or whether or not he is coming. I could probably step out and find out whether he is coming or not and then schedule – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It cannot be today because it is not on the Order Paper. It has to be next week. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Okay, then, I have time to inform him. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we expect a statement on Tuesday afternoon on this particular matter raised by the Leader of the Opposition and other Members? We expect a statement from the minister in charge of this sector on Tuesday next week.               
 
GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MS ACHIRO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I rise on a procedural matter. About two months ago, there was a report from the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the giveaway of the Government ranches to private individuals and investors. We have been waiting for this debate or a statement from the minister but to-date, there is no response from the minister.

Today in the morning, in Aswa Ranch, there were individuals who were claiming that they were given that piece of land. Mr Speaker, are we really proceeding right by waiting for one or two months for a statement that is really important? I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, this is your docket.

2.25
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Member who has raised this concern. We are going to bring the statement on those ranches, especially Aswa Ranch. 

Mr Speaker, we beg that you give us a month because we have many papers lined up. I beg that you allow us that time.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for giving way. The information, I would like to give him is that we have received information that 20 former members of the Ninth Parliament have formed an association. As we talk, they met His Excellency, the President, and they were allocated 12 miles of land in Aswa Ranch for their personal use.

As we talk, they are in the process of buying animals to take them to Aswa Ranch yet this land has got very serious contention. Let the honourable minister be very clear. (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please, let us have some order. You rose on a point of information; how can somebody give you information on information? Let him finish and then you can deal with the minister directly.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The point I would like to raise is that it looks as if there are some individuals who are playing with the Aswa Ranch. They are taking advantage by saying that Aswa Ranch is Government land yet this is not the case. There is a serious conflict between the local people and the people who are planning to own that land for their own interest.

Honourable minister, when coming with your report next week as requested by the Deputy Speaker, we beg you to inform the august House - and let those former members of the Ninth Parliament stop risking because it is causing a lot of conflict in the community. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are the one on the Floor – so you manage.

MR YAGUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I would like to give to the House is that it is not only Aswa Ranch but there is Ruhengyere Ranch and Sanga Ranch in Kiruhura District. The list of the so-called investors who were given this land was published in the newspapers. I think the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries raised this issue and the minister was supposed to give a statement. 

As I speak, some two or five square miles have been given to somebody from South Sudan. Amos Dairy has also been given land in Inshara and many others. 

Mr Speaker, the constituency I represent - Kashari North County - is densely populated and seasonally, peasants migrate to other areas and rent land at Shs 200,000 an acre per season. They have been so faithful and have not encroached on these ranches. It hurts to see the Chinese and people from South Sudan being given land to graze Ankole animals as if none of the people from Ankole or Ugandan can do that. That is the information I would like to give you.

MS OKETAYOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, you are requesting to be given more time to come up with a statement on this issue. You are very well aware that when this proposal to give away part of the land under ranches came up, the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries intervened and we had a meeting with you.

We halted the process until when the committee comes up with a report for a resolution of Parliament. Indeed, the committee did a very thorough consultation with very many stakeholders. Now that the process of giving away part of this land under the ranches is going on despite what we resolved as a committee that the process should be halted, what will happen in the meantime since you are still requesting for one or two months? Will the process of the giveaway continue? Honourable minister, I would like you to come out clearly on this and help us.

MR OCHEN: Mr Speaker, the issues concerning ranches in this country are very serious issues. In the Seventh and Eighth Parliaments, Government constituted a commission that comprised people like David Mukula and others. This team went to Ankole and other places, redistributing the ranches. The question at that time was; who are these people? It happened to be individuals who now own those ranches; just individuals who were rewarded.

Government from day one had a purpose for these ranches. That purpose was meant to transform the agriculture sector in this country. What has gone wrong with the original plan? Government is now shifting the plan from developing ranches to awarding individuals to run their own activities. What has gone wrong?

For example, in Olilim which used to be the holding ground for the cattle bought from northern Uganda for the Meat Packers in Soroti District was given away at Shs 150 million. Over 150 kilometres land in Teso, which was given by our forefathers to Government free of charge; if Government’s plan of using that land changed, the land should have reverted to the original owners who before giving it away. (Interjection) Land was given out and it is the military we found in Olilim. 

You can no longer go to that land because part of it is used for artillery range target. I know that is a national interest but Mr Speaker, when you come to a ranch in Akokoro, Aswa and to a ranch that my brother from Ankole is talking about, things are happening. I believe the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries may not have full power about the locations of these ranches -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you rise on a point of information?

MR OCHEN: I rose on a point of information. Honourable minister, the information I would like is that can you, in your statement, brief this House on the details regarding the original plan that this country entered into regarding the ranching schemes that we are following vis-à-vis the current position? It will be important if the country is informed.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, for Aswa Ranch, I would like to inform you that Acholi District administration gave that land to Aswa Ranch and it was meant for agricultural activities which could even create job opportunities for our people. 

I also would like to inform you that the people who are there actually harass the indigenous people. They go with guns. They are the mightiest; they make the indigenous people more vulnerable than what that project was meant to do.

Since the Acholi District administration gave that land to Government for that purpose and the land is no longer being used for the intended purpose, the land should revert back to Acholi. That is for Aswa Ranch; it could be the same for other ranches. I thought this is the information – hon. Okello Okello who was here in the Eighth Parliament worked a lot on issues with land and he guided us. 

Actually, we do not want this court thing; we should have gone to court to get back the land for Aswa Ranch to Acholi community. The people on Aswa Ranch could be Ugandans and we love them but they are making the rightful owners of the land more vulnerable than ever. Guns are pointed at them; so, they are running all the time.

Honourable minister, that is the information I would like to give you. We are going to slaughter all those animals; we will spear them. You are taking us for fools. Thank you.
	
MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, I would like to assure the Leader of the Opposition and the honourable members that the original plan and purpose for these ranches has been considered and it will remain. When I bring this report, I will certainly have to put all these considerations and issues right. They will be explained. 

Therefore, there is nothing like doing anything against the wishes of the people of Uganda or against the law. We are doing everything for the good of our people. 

Mr Speaker, you can see the issue is a bit wide. Allow me to come after one month. Let me come back here in January to handle this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter is not new; it has been with the minister for a long time. This Parliament will be adjourning for Christmas on 20 December 2018. Can the minister come back on Tuesday, 18 December 2018 and brief Parliament about the situation without fail? Come and brief Parliament so that we avoid these tensions that are beginning to build up. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

2.39
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since I became the Leader of the Opposition in August, we have been working with the Shadow Cabinet constituted by my predecessor. 

This is the list of the new Shadow Cabinet. Of course you are aware that as the Opposition, we are thin. Therefore, the reshuffle will just be a few changes here and there. 

I would like to announce: 

        1. Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba as the Shadow Attorney-General;
        2. Hon. Medard Sseggona as the Shadow Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs;
        3. Hon. Anthony Akol as the Shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development;
        4. Hon. Lucy Aciro as the Shadow Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development;
        5. Hon. Anna Adeke as the Shadow Minister for Youth and Children Affairs;
        6. Hon. Jonathan Odur as the Shadow Minister for Public Service and the Presidency;
        7. Hon. Francis Gonahasa as the Shadow Minister for Agriculture;
        8. Hon. Peter Okot as the Shadow Minister for Animal Industry and Fisheries;
        9. Hon. Mathias Mpuuga as the Shadow Minister of Education and Sports;
        10. Hon. Allan Ssewanyana as the Shadow Minister of Sports and Creative Arts;
        11. Hon. Benard Atiku as the Shadow Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs;
        12. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi as the Shadow Minister of Internal Affairs;
        13. Hon. Joshua Anywarach as the Shadow Minister of Human Rights;
        14. Hon. Betty Nambooze as the Shadow Minister for Kampala Capital City Authority;
        15. Hon. Atkins Katusabe as the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs;
        16. Hon. Francis Zaake as the Shadow Minister of the Eastern African Community;
        17. Hon. William Nzoghu as the Shadow Minister of Works and Transport;
        18. Hon. Julius Ochen as Shadow Minister of Health;
        19. Hon. Simon Oyet as Shadow Minster of Energy and Minerals;
        20. Hon. Charles Angiro as Shadow Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities;
        21. Hon. Gershom Sizomu as Shadow Minister of Rehabilitation, Relief and Disaster Preparedness;
        22. Hon. Paul Luttamaguzi as Shadow Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development;
        23. Hon. Ibrahim Kasozi as Shadow Minister of Physical Planning;
        24. Hon. Fred Turyamuhweza as Shadow Minister of Trade and Industry;
        25. Hon. Emmanuel Ongiertho as Shadow Minster of Cooperatives;
        26. Hon. Betty Muzanira Bamukwatsa as Shadow Minister of Local Government;
        27. Hon. Joy Atim as Shadow Minister for Special Regions Affairs;
        28. Hon. Denis Oguzu Lee as Shadow Minister of Science, Innovation and Technology;
        29. Hon. Florence Namayanja as Shadow Minister of Water and Environment;
        30. Hon. Kato Lubwama as Shadow Minister for Culture and Performing Arts and;
        31. Hon. Muhammad Nsereko as Shadow Minister for Security.

Mr Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. It has been a question that very many people were asking but when I took over from my predecessor, I said we were going to continue with the then Shadow Cabinet until today, when we had the reshuffle. I would like to thank all of you and encourage us to work harder for the people of Uganda. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do these appointments take effect immediately? (Laughter)

MS AOL: These appointments take effect immediately. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, can I have the honourable members who have just taken office move to the Front Bench – (Mr Oboth rose­_) On what matter do you rise?

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, I do not know how to register this disappointment. I have been faithful this side. I did not hear Busoga. I did not also hear Bukedi, where I come from and I was expecting a slot. How can you help me with the LOP? I was expectant; she had promised me something. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Leader of the Opposition was very clear that these appointments take immediate effect. What that means is that there is no vacancy. (Laughter)

Honourable members, I have just received a communication that the Prime Minster will not be available today and we had already scheduled the Prime Minister’s Question Time for 4.00 p.m. I have not had any indication – unless the First Deputy Prime Minister is going to take full charge. However, I have had communication from Dr Ruhakana Rugunda that he will not be available this afternoon. Thank you.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWERS

QUESTION 46/03/10 TO THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before we get the answer, the Member for Adjumani District said there was an urgent matter she wanted to raise.

2.50
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise on an urgent matter of national importance. This morning I received five calls from Adjumani and yesterday, I received 10 calls over the lack of X-ray services. People are not getting treatment as expected because for eight years now, the district referral hospital does not have an operational X-ray machine. The Ministry of Health is aware of this case. 

Therefore, I request to know from Government why up to now they have failed to rectify this situation. Secondly, when are they resolving the problem? I really need rescue from Government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will exclude the Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister from answering this question for obvious reasons; he comes from Adjumani.

2.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have listened to the Member and the urgency of the matter. I will take it up with the Minister of Health and inform her about the next step to ensure that Adjumani Hospital gets an X-ray machine.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We do not want the minister to come here with a statement. We want that matter resolved so that the honourable member for Adjumani can just come and tell the House, “We are okay now.” This matter is not for the Order Paper. 

2.52
MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): “In 2012, Government built and launched Bugoto Landing Site Fish Facility in Mayuge District. However, the fish facility has never been put to use and is wasting away. Even then, the facility lacks the basic requirements for fish storage, such as an ice plant. The Askari, a one Mufuta Muhammed and a porter, a one Mwanje Halid responsible for guarding and maintaining the facility respectively have not been paid for their services since 2012.

Will the minister explain to this august House:

    i) The purpose of establishing Bugoto Landing Site Fish Facility?
    ii) Why the facility has not been put to use since 2012?
    iii) How much it cost Government to establish the facility?
    iv) Whether the ministry carried out adequate assessment before, during and after construction of the facility?
    v) Whether the contractor met the civil and architectural specifications of building the facility?
    vi) Whether there are any steps being taken to make the facility operational? If so, at what stage are they?
    vii) Why the Askari and the porter who were deployed at the said fishing facility have never been paid their salary arrears since 2012; and when will this be rectified?”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister – 

2.53
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

Mr Speaker, in response to hon. Waira Majegere’s question, Bugoto Landing Site Fish Facility was one of the facilities constructed through the Fisheries Development Project, with the overall objective of increasing income from fishing through availability of a higher quality fish product.

Under the Fisheries Development project, two fishing landing site facilities were constructed in Mayuge District, located at Bugoto and Bwondha. The operators nominated by the district local government from among the then existing staff of Mayuge were trained on the basics of operation and maintenance of the installed equipment at the fish landing site facilities.

The district local government was also provided with the manuals for the management of the facilities. The two fishing landing sites were handed over to Mayuge District Local Government on the same date and with clear instructions as follows: 

    i) To provide security to the facilities as the contractor, M/s Spencon Services Limited,  was to withdraw their security from the sites upon handover;

    ii) Put the landing site to immediate use for fish handlings, as it had all the requisite facilities for handling fish in a hygienic manner to ensure safety and quality of fish for human consumption. However, only Bwondha Fishing Landing Site has been put to use since the handover.

Mr Speaker, I have indicated everything that was handed over   but the list is really long.

On whether the ministry carried out adequate assessments before, during and after construction of the facility; 

The Fisheries Development Project rose out of the Fisheries Sector Study and Fisheries Master Plan that was conducted in 1997. The study identified critical areas in fisheries development especially in the areas of capture fisheries, fish post-harvest handling and aquaculture sub-sectors. In the post-harvest sub-sector, there were high losses in quality due to lack of fish handling facilities both at the landing sites and at the domestic markets.

Therefore, the construction of Bugoto Fish Landing Site Facility was from an informed finding on the need by the Fisheries Master Plan Study. However, at the time the construction of the facility was done and handed over in 2012, there was a general collapse of the Nile Perch Fishery. This partly contributed to the lack of utilisation of the Bugoto Facility, coupled with the disagreements of the beach management leaderships of the landing site.

On whether the contractor met the civil and architectural specifications of building the facility; Mr Speaker, the contract for the design and supervision of the construction works of Bugoto Fish Landing Site Facilities was undertaken by M/s MBW Consulting Ltd - a consultancy firm hired by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

The construction works was contracted to M/s Spencon Services Ltd. The fish landing site facilities at Bugoto were constructed as designed and contracted out for construction.

Whether there were steps being taken to make the facility operational and if so, at what stage they were; the ministry is looking at a Public Private Partnership arrangement for the management of all the constructed fish landing site facilities. This is because even where such facilities are in use under the management of the district local governments; there is general lack of maintenance.

Mr Speaker, at the moment, the focus by the ministry is on the recovery of the Nile Perch Fishery. It is only then that it will make business sense for the private sector to invest in the fish landing site facilities. The Nile Perch stocks in Lake Victoria have since increased by 30 per cent.

On why the askari and the porter who were deployed at the said fishing facility have never been paid their salary arrears since
2012 and when they will be paid; Mr Speaker, as already mentioned in (ii)above, at the time of the handover and commissioning of the fish landing site facilities, Mayuge District Local Government was asked to provide security to the fish landing site facilities.

The askari, Mr Mohammed Mufuta and a porter, Mr Halid Mwanje responsible for guarding and maintaining the facility respectively, were possibly employed by Mayuge District Local Government and should, therefore, be responsible for the payment of their wages. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Do you have any supplementary question, hon. Majegere?

MR KIWALABYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the minister for trying to answer the question because he was not the minister then. However, Mr Speaker, I request for your indulgence; I have one supplementary question which has some subsections.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you know the rules. Just ask the supplementary question.

MR KIWALABYE: It is a supplementary question which has some subsections. 

Mr Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries gave out this facility to the local government. Therefore, I would like the minister to tell us whether there was a Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Ministry of Local Government. What were the terms and conditions? If you have the terms and conditions, could you lay them on the Table? Otherwise, who was supposed to meet the operations, security and maintenance cost?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, a supplementary question arises from your question and a gap in the answer; it is not a new question. That new question you asked is overruled. Just ask a supplementary question. 

MR KYEWALABYE: Honourable minister, on the facility, there is a generator which was supposed to run the ice plant. However, the ice plant is not there. Honourable minister, who “ate” the money for the ice plant?

Honourable minister, you said that Bwondha Landing Site was successful and Bugoto was not successful because there is no Nile Perch. Honourable minister, you know very well that Bugoto and Bwondha are close to each other and they fish in the same water body. How can you say that the other facility survived because there was Nile Perch and another had no Nile Perch? Do you trust your answer, honourable minister? 

Honourable minister, can you tell us about the disagreement of the beach management leadership? 

Further, you have said that the contractor met all the civil and architectural designs required; did you bother to look at the petition in your office dated 17 December 2013, in which the community complained about the items which were not concluded in the contract? 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a copy of this petition.  

Honourable minister, you said that you were looking at a Public Private Partnership; this sounds good but it does not have a timeline for this facility to be operational. 

Lastly, you said that in the handover, you instructed Mayuge Local Government to takeover security; can you instruct them to pay Halid Mwanja, the porter and Mufuta Muhammad, the askari. 

If you instructed Mayuge District Local Government to take over security, then you can as well instruct them to pay those people because Mayuge District Local Government says you handed over the facility without the money for security. 

Mr Speaker, I request that you direct the Committee on Agriculture to visit this facility. Last week, the Speaker was in my constituency and she said that the Committee on Agriculture would visit the site and see how we can make this facility operational.

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a petition from the community of Bugoto Landing Site dated 17 December 2013 which was addressed to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries complaining about the installation of structures in the improved fishing facility by Spencon.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When was that?

MR KYEWALABYE: It was 2013.  I beg to lay the claims by the two people who are guarding this facility, who up to now have not been paid.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to thank my brother for being – I am concerned about our people on the ground. However, the loss of Nile Perch partly caused some of these issues including the one at Bwondha Landing Site. The management at Bwondha kept on limping and they are not working at full capacity. 

Later on, I will come back to present a report on all these facilities because money was passed by this Parliament and most of the facilities are not working majorly due to management issues.

According to the date of the petitioners, the facility was handed over to Mayuge District Local Government in 2012 and everything was listed, new and operational. I think that there was a lot of enthusiasm from the district local government that they could operate it. These included a water pump, treatment and storage facilities, a pier where the docking of the fishing and transport boat would be loaded or offloaded from, fishing, handling shades with work tables fitted with portable water for washing and weighing scales.

Others were administration offices with offices of the fish inspectors and beach management units, secretary, security office, toilets, changing rooms, VIP toilets, internal roads with hard surfacing, thermal power generations, fish-drying areas, fish store, furniture and many others.

I think the district local government lacked capacity to operate such a facility although Mayuge District chose some staff to be trained but still the management let us down.

Honourable member, we can start with your area; we have decided to send teams of engineers to do thorough assessment on the needs and to know which areas have collapsed so that they can be rehabilitated.

We would like them to get the budgets and we will come back here to do a thorough job in the whole country - in all these facilities, 80 per cent are not working, including Nakasongola.

RESPONSE TO QUESTION RAISED HON. MUHEIRWE DANIEL MPAMIZO, MP BUHAGUZI COUNTY, OVER THE ADVERSE EFFECTS OF 18 MONTHS OLD LIVESTOCK QUARANTINE IN HIS CONSTITUENCY DUE TO FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE AND EXTORTION OF MONEY BY LOCAL LEADERS

3.11
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Mr Speaker and honourable members, this question was raised by hon. Daniel Muheirwe on the adverse effects of the 18-month-old livestock quarantine in his constituency due to Foot and Mouth Disease, and extortion of money by local leaders.

Foot and Mouth Disease is a highly contagious viral disease affecting several species of animals - both domestic (which includes cattle, pigs, sheep and goats) and others in the wilderness like buffaloes, deers and others.

Clinical signs include high fever within the first two days and development of wounds in the mouth and feet which heal in about three to four weeks. However, the virus clears off within seven days and the animal is able to recover from the disease. An animal with Foot and Mouth Disease will recover even without treatment. 

To make this very clear to the Members, this viral disease is like a cold in human beings but it has adverse effects more than a cold. However, if it does not spread to the next animal, then it will stop on that one animal and it will disappear. 

Therefore, the Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) virus is able to survive in the saliva, urine and other excretions of infected animals. It can also survive in contaminated materials and the environment for several months under the right conditions. 

Transmission of the virus occurs when infected animals come into close contact with healthy and susceptible animals. Additionally, the spread can also occur when healthy animals are moved in contaminated vehicles and they have contact with people wearing contaminated clothes and shoes, or even when they drink contaminated water.

Therefore, if contact of the infected animals, materials, and people with healthy animals, during feeding, watering or trade is avoided, FMD will not be transmitted. 

Strategies for FMD Prevention and Control

The ministry employs mainly three approaches to achieve FMD prevention and control. They include quarantine restriction, vaccination and sensitisation. With regards to vaccination, given its – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you going to answer the question? Can you answer the question please? The question is on the 18 months of quarantine, the effects and the extortion of money by the local leaders. That is the question.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, because of what I have mentioned above, the Commissioner for Animal Health issues instruction on behalf of the ministry for quarantine restriction. Therefore, this area has been quarantined, as mentioned.

If the above conditions were adhered to, if the quarantine takes one month – because the disease can disappear in seven days as mentioned, then the disease would disappear from this area. Unfortunately, there has been connivance of local leaders and other security agencies and so, the movement of cows has not stopped in these areas. So, the FMD has continued. 

However, recently, we intensified close monitoring and put in place control systems. We are now testing - and I am happy to inform the Member - I do not know whether he is aware that his area is likely to be declared FMD-free. The tests will be out by the Commissioner when concluded.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, any supplementary question?

3.18
MR DANIEL MUHEIRWE (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the minister for trying to answer my question. 

My concern was why the ministry cannot contain the Foot and Mouth Disease for all the two years. Was it a conduit or ploy to make money by your staff? 

Secondly, even when answering the question, he said, “It is likely”. It means even the two years are not enough. It is going to be prolonged and yet he says there is no animal in Hoima and the neighbouring Kikube that has FMD. They are just effects of the neighbouring districts like Buliisa and Kyankwanzi. 

My supplementary questions are: now that you know that the Foot and Mouth Disease spreads through contaminated water and animals moving long distances - maybe in search for water - what are the plans by the ministry to have water for production for those two districts so that those animals do not move long distances in search of safe drinking water and other needs?

Secondly, the animals are moving from different districts to Hoima as a market. What plans do you have to have a holding ground where you can test the animals that are free from disease to be able to continue their journey to the other markets? Thank you.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, I would like to assure the Member that this Parliament budgeted for heavy earth-moving equipment to enable the ministry to construct valley dams and valley tanks for cattle keepers. The machines are coming in this month. Therefore, we will have to start with those very needy areas, including Hoima.

Secondly, the biggest problem in Hoima and Nakasongola was the movement of cows by the Balaalo – the pastoralists whom we chased away from –(Interjection)– but you understand this word. These are cattle keepers who keep on moving without settling in one place. You will recall that I was assigned by the President to get these pastoralists out of the northern region. 

We decided to vaccinate all their animals but they could not let us do so. Some of them came back with the animals which were still infected. They passed through Hoima and that is when we had a problem – (Interruption)

MR MUHEIRWE: Mr Speaker, when a place has Foot and Mouth Disease, the principle treatment could be that we do not bring in more livestock because we shall then prolong the disease. Is the minister, therefore, in order to prove to us that he brought in more animals yet he had quarantined Hoima District? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Even if that is what he had said, it would not be a breach of order. It will be misinformation, which you would rise to correct. 

Please honourable minister, conclude.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, the animals should be moved after being vaccinated and inspected by the veterinary officers. Also, they should be given cattle movement permits. I just gave an example that those did not heed to that and they just moved the animals. 

Some of those areas, including Hoima, were also part of the affected areas. However, we have handled everything now and we are testing because there is no movement in this area. We are finally testing to assure and ascertain ourselves that there is no problem.

For the market, this is a very important question. 

We are going to look at how to gazette specific markets and even movement corridors. We are bringing a lot of changes and we are going to share them with Parliament so that we fight diseases in this country. Disease control is limiting us from exporting our meat; we have a lot of demands for our meat and we have to fight disease.

Therefore, when I bring this to Parliament, please support us so that we get specific corridors for movement of animals, and get zoning for using different Acaricides in different areas and all the measures that we will take to control disease in this country. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have students from Multi-Tech Business School Rubaga, represented by hon. Moses Kasibante and hon. Nabilah Ssempala. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO BAN ALL PONZI AND PYRAMID SCHEMES

3.25
MR MWINE MPAKA (NRM, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to ban all ponzi and pyramid schemes; moved under Rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS over the years there have been fraudulent investment firms commonly known as Ponzi schemes or pyramid schemes like the Global Finance, D9, Ad Pass, One Coin, E-Coin, Enon Funds, Amazon Traders, Busy Coin, Fast Coin, Prosperity Club, Ima Ventures, Excel Web Cops, 99 Traders, Zinc Seven, Fostra World, Development Channel, Beat Pesa, Alliance Global; which are considered fraudulent investing scams that promise high rates of returns with little or no risk to the investors;

AND WHEREAS Ponzi or pyramid schemes operate in a way that money invested by clients is not invested in any legitimate business but is used to pay the people operating the scheme as well as those who invested earlier and usually such fraudulent investment businesses sometimes appear to the people to be genuine and profitable investment;

NOTING that unsuspecting investors recruit new people and the chain goes on and on. Eventually fake investment opportunities always collapse as it becomes unsustainable for those running it to deliver on the promises they have made to the investors, thereby leading to heavy loss of money by the unsuspecting public;

CONCERNED THAT despite several warnings to the public, the Bank of Uganda has issued against investing money in such schemes and urging the public to entrust their investment in licensed investment firms; fraudulent investment schemes continue to come up and afflicting the public;

CONSIDERING THAT even when culprits have been arrested, charged and tried, the losses made by the public have not been made good because usually there is no property to attach and ultimately the unsuspecting members of the public bear the loss;

AWARE THAT there exists licensed investment firms regulated by the Capital Markets Authority and licensed deposit-taking institutions, which are regulated by the Bank of Uganda among others;

FURTHER AWARE that existing licensed investment firms have investment procedures and guidelines with clear mechanism of handling risk during the investment process;

COGNISANT that some countries like Kenya, South Africa and Benin have launched campaigns to sensitise their nationals on the dangers of such schemes and Rwanda in particular has banned the Ponzi or pyramid schemes;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that;

    1. Government freezes bank accounts of the schemes and of the individuals operating the schemes and compensates all the victims.
    2. Government bans and closes all Ponzi or pyramid schemes in Uganda.
    3. Government sensitises the public about the Ponzi or pyramid schemes and the dangers of investing in such schemes.
    4. Government sensitises the public about the investment opportunities offered by licensed investment firms in Uganda.”

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is the motion seconded?

It is seconded by hon. Nayebare, hon. Woboya, hon. Burundo, hon. Mulindwa, and hon. Atiku. Would you like to speak to your motion briefly?

MR MPAKA: Thank you Mr Speaker. A pyramid scheme is a dishonest and usually illegal business in which the money of a latter investor is used to pay the people who invested in first. If the recruit gets 10 people to invest, he/she will make a profit of just a small investment.

Further, the new people become recruiters and each one in turn is required to enlist an additional 10 people resulting into a total of 100 more people. Each of those new recruits is obliged to pay their investment to a person who recruited him/her.

Recruiters get a profit of all the money received minus the initial investment paid to the person who recruited them. The process continues until the base of the pyramid is no longer strong enough to support the upper structure and there are no more recruits and that is when it collapses.

Honourable members, there are several ways to determine that most of these companies are scams or schemes;

    1. It guarantees you high returns with little risk of losing your investment and the general rule that we follow is anything that sounds too good to be true is usually false.
    2. It promises consistent returns regardless of the market condition. Legitimate businesses always experience signs of profit and times of loss.
    3. The investment strategy is normally too complex for the investor to understand.
    4. The company or proprietor running the scheme focuses all their energy into attracting new clients to make investment. Without a flow of new clients, the scheme usually collapses.
    5. Both the old and new investors find it difficult when they try to remove their money. We have seen companies like Global Finance that defrauded over 7,000 police officers and they lied to the police officers that they were upgrading their website when in fact they were planning to close and 7,000 police officers lost their money.
    6. The other technique used by these schemes is getting influential people on board thus providing credibility to the scheme. For example, recently they took a photo with the honourable minister Frank Tumwebaze and posted it saying that “If the minister has joined, what are the rest of Ugandans waiting for?” The minister had to go on his twitter account and try to clear his name and image.

What are the effects of these pyramid and Ponzi schemes?

    1. It can lead to financial loss and economic impairment. These schemes, after several people have lost large sums of money, they lose confidence because of the financial loss. However, most important of all, some of these schemes operate abroad; therefore, a lot of money is siphoned out of the country.
    2. The Ponzi schemes allow people to earn money without engaging in any productive work thus destroying the initiative and idea-generation of young people.
    3. It can also lead to forceful government changes for example in 1997, there was rebellion in Albania which was partially motivated by the collapse of several Ponzi schemes.
    4. It can lead to violence and civil unrest if so many people lose large sums of money. Last week they closed Development Channel and over 6,000 Ugandans lost their money. Development Channel promised that a Ugandan an iPad and $250 and a certificate after six months. After you get that certificate, you are supposed to receive $100 till death.

In the early 2006, Ireland was hit by a wave of schemes prompting a number of violence incidents and calls that were made by politicians to tighten the existing legislation. Ireland has launched a website to better educate consumers to the pyramid schemes and other scams.

On 12 November 2018, riots broke out in Colombia after the collapse of several Ponzi and pyramid schemes.

5. 	These ponzi schemes also led to low GDP.
6. 	Upon the eventual crash of these schemes, it led to increase in crime and drug abuse due to the depression in some severe case. It can actually lead to suicide of the victims.

On the overall, it led to economic inflation due to the unproductivity of the ponzi schemes. 

Now we have had banks like Bank of Uganda that has issued several warnings about these schemes specifically even indicated the several schemes like the OneCoin in 2007. Bank of Uganda issued a warning for Ugandans to stop and those who deal with it were dealing with it at their own risk.

On 29 August 2018, Bank of Uganda issued another warning, and also on 19 December 2011. 

Some central banks have taken serious action like the National Bank of Rwanda which banned D9 and froze the accounts of the owner of D9 a one Smart Protus Magara and banned and compensated all the victims. 

Bank of Uganda has kept issuing several warnings. The problem of this lesfaires attitude of Bank of Uganda is that criminals who operate predatory financial schemes are very difficult for the public to distinguish from the licensed financial institutions.

The licensing authorities, such as the Bank of Uganda however, are in a much better position to separate the wheat from the chaff than the average consumer.

The Bank of Uganda is compromised in its duties as a regulator, it simply states: “buyer beware”, instead of telling the people that these institutions were not licensed thus “it is your own problem if you lose your life savings”.

However, there are some individuals who keep operating different schemes. When one is closed, they open another scheme- Sserwanji Tadeo partially owned D9 Club with Smart Postus, once it closed, he now opened another one called Bitpesa and Questra World.

Kimbugwe Paul was part of Global Finance and amazom, Ariho Dickson was part of D9 Club, Global Finance and Excel Wealth Corps. Bansigaraho Olivia was part of Global Finance and Excel Wealth Corps. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a seconder to this motion. Can I hear from the seconder, the honourable member from Gomba?

3.37
MS SYLVIA NAYEBALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Gomba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to second the motion as stated. The basic premise pyramid of a ponzi scheme is to rob Peter to pay Paul. 

First, the operator pays high returns to attract investors and entice current investors to invest more money. When other investors begin to participate a cascade effect begins.

“A cascade effect” means returns to the initial investor is paid by the investment of the new participants rather than from the profits of the products.

With this scheme, it is very difficult for the investor to get their money out of the investment because of its illusionary type of business.

There is investor exploitation. The operator will simply send statements to investors showing how much they have earned which maintains the deception that the scheme is an investment with high returns yet in real sense, you cannot access the accounts. When you intend to access the accounts, that is when they start tampering with the accounts and in the end the investors do not actually access their money- that is for ponzi scheme.

Likewise, a pyramid scheme is in the same vein though with this one, it is marked as a sales scheme. They sale products and most of these products I would call it- I hope it is not offensive - bogus products. A distributor recruits six sales persons who each pays $100 for a starter kit of products to sell. The distributor then gets 10 per cent of each of the starter kit that he sells.

The distributor also gets a cut of 10 per cent of each product that any of the recruits sells including the additional kit. If they recruit you, you enter in as a salesperson; you brig $100 and buy the starter kit and get 10 per cent. That means for you to get more money, you have to sell what they have given you- half the times the products are not even useful and not needed- you have to sell those products and on top of selling you have to recruit more salespersons for you to benefit.

Therefore, the recruits are told that the fastest way to make money is not by selling products but by recruiting more people to buy start up kits.

The people at the top of the pyramid get commission from everyone in their down line. Usually, the products have such a low margin that it is nearly impossible to make a profit without getting more recruits and we know what then happens.

By the time you are at the top level of the pyramid, you need to recruit two billion people so that everyone can make back their money. At the 9th level you need 13 billion people which is almost twice the population of the earth-making it very impossible and hard hence coming off as a way of draining people of their money falsely. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I stand to support the motion that we ban all the ponzi and pyramid schemes and ban the accounts and operators of those people that are taking advantage of innocent Ugandans. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to ban all Ponzi and Pyramid Schemes in this country. That is the motion I propose for your debate and debate starts now.

3.41
MR JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Mwine Mpaka for bringing this motion. However, Uganda runs a liberalised economy. Secondly, we are just being treated to hearsay; there is no concrete evidence of what - (Interjections) - excuse me. I did not see any concrete evidence; nothing has even been attached to this motion as evidence to show what has been happening in these schemes. Mr Speaker, can I be protected?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members, you will have your time to debate.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would have expected that this motion would have been accompanied with evidence, annexes of what has been happening in these companies, how people have lost money. For example, we are being told that someone had started a scheme, moved out and started another one, how do we know? We need concrete evidence as Parliament on which to move to ban these schemes - banning is a very strong action.

I beg to submit, Mr Speaker, that we have not been given sufficient evidence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you oppose the motion?

MS KAMATEEKA: Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to oppose the motion until I am given sufficient evidence. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers from Mugomba Primary School in Mukono represented in this House by hon. Johnson Muyanja and hon. Kusasira Peace. They are here to observe the proceedings of this House. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)You are welcome. Thank you.  

3.44
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank our brother for coming up with this motion. Much as I will support this motion, I think we need to do more than just banning some of these schemes. Even if we ban the ones that have been specified in this motion, there are many people out there who are very good at coming up with schemes that make others suffer. Therefore, we need to do more than just banning. We need to help our people to involve themselves in more productive schemes. 

I for one recall very well that I was approached very many times to join such schemes but I refused. When they explain to you, you try to figure out – personally, I did not see how the benefits would come, just like it has come out now. It is unfortunate that many Members of Parliament, according to the testimonies I am getting from around me here, were duped into these funny schemes. 

Therefore, as leaders and Government, we need to do a lot more to help our people to be more critical in analysing or involving themselves in some schemes that are productive. Otherwise, I would like to thank our brother for coming up with this motion. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it looks like many of you have been affected by this scheme. That means this debate will not be objective. If you are standing up to debate this matter, please, first tell us if you have been affected by this so that we know what weight to attach your statement. You might want to take your revenge at this moment but we want an objective debate so that this matter is handled properly.

3.47
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Mwine for bringing this motion and I would like to urge members to consider this very important motion. 

I stand here as one of the victims and I would like to declare this, Mr Speaker. I was first lured by one of our former colleagues in the Ninth Parliament; she tried so much but I hesitated. Then, another person who was very close to me came and asked me why I wanted to miss a good opportunity.  I still hesitated and went to the offices of D9 Company on Jinja Road and actually found members of Parliament.

Just as hon. Mwine has submitted in the motion, the temptation to join was irresistible. At first, I put in 20,000 dollars. I mobilised friends and I can assure you that by the time the scheme closed, I had lost close to 50,000 dollars. I had to mobilise this money and pay back friends from whom I had mobilised this money to keep my friendship. 

These schemes are so dangerous. They have broken relationships, killed people’s businesses and people have sold assets. Members were mobilised to also go and mobilise people across the country. Actually, my first mobiliser, the former Member of Parliament was almost lynched in Arua because she mobilised market vendors and people put in money. Nevertheless, I will not disclose her name here but where there is need for investigation purposes, I will submit it. When this scheme was announced dysfunctional, Arua went in flames.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I do support the motion. The chief of this scheme, Mr Magara, was arrested. He actually had guns in his home. This is to tell that it is a well-orchestrated group of people. The retired Maj. Rubaramira Ruranga was one of the promoters. He organised meetings here in Imperial Royale. They mobilised very expensive executive cars and moved all over the streets here escorted by police duping people; that if they joined, they would win a range rover sport. All sorts of luxury cars were paraded in Kampala here.  

It is important for Government to interest itself in this scheme, less the economy can collapse because of the colossal amount of money that was mobilised. By the time Bank of Uganda closed Mr Magara’s accounts in Bank of Africa and Equity Bank, he had more than $10 million. Imagine all that money on an individual’s account, what can he do with that? 

I do support the motion and I would like to invite members to support it and debate soberly. The good thing is that the money on the accounts is frozen and we would like Bank of Uganda to help Ugandans to recover their hard-earned money. This money does not belong to Mr Magara. He does not have anything. The only thing he had was his computer, laptop and the software. The money belongs to Ugandans, which must be returned to the individuals who come out to claim it. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.52
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I definitely have no reservations for anyone who illegally takes away what belongs to another. Whereas I support closure, we must follow the steps of the law. Article 28 of the Constitution clearly stipulates that in the determination of civil rights and obligations, administration of justice shall be followed by a fair hearing of every entity. 

I have no interest in this at all so I will tell you that – I have never invested in any business but we were here one time when the issue of fair hearing forced this Government in courts of law and it was adjudged that Parliament could not grant one a right to be heard. The issue is we agree to everything stated; where business goes bad, someone must be put to book. 

However, internationally, we also must agree that the President of Uganda was here recently launching the African block chain trade in Serena Hotel. It was graced by the entire African Leadership and the World Leadership of the block chain.

I would like to invite my honourable colleagues to draw a difference between the two. It comes in form of chain marketing and block chain investment. Therefore, I would like to agree with everyone that even if it is a bank and it takes away your deposits and does not make them rightly available, it should be closed. Even if it is an investment where you have invested and you are looking for gains and you do not find them there, they should be charged by obtaining money from you by false pretence and that is a criminal charge.

However, in administration of justice, we must invite ourselves to know that a fair hearing must be granted to every single party where an honourable member like he said – a fair hearing entails the following honourable members. I know we shall speak until cows come home but we must listen to both parties not to one party –(Interruption)

MR AKAMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I clearly heard the mover of the motion stating that in most of these schemes, the proprietors are not known. Most of them run online. Many Ugandans have suffered investing their money without even a contract or signing anywhere. For example, is COWI Company that robbed many Ugandans. They do not have offices, they do not have clear addresses and they do not sign anything but just trade mostly online. 

Is the honourable member in order to propose that justice should be given to such schemes that do not avail themselves openly to the public but rather trade behind the scenes? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when there is going to be a case for adjudication, all that is required is not a contract but a complainant. The complainant has a complaint to address to individuals or groups of individuals incorporated or unincorporated.

Now, where the complainant has no recourse to anybody where the person to whom the member to raise the complaint is non-existent in terms of persons suable or capable of being sued that presents a complication. Therefore, in the situation that we are dealing with, if the transactions are online and you have no recourse, you just send money to somebody you do not even know or to a name that you cannot assign a person to or an institution whose legal capacity you are not able to establish - first of all, it is a wrong investment and secondly, you have no recourse.

In such circumstances, where does the duty of care lay in relation to Government amidst competition? I think that is the purpose of this motion.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. I clearly said that I do not object. The issue is that I would like Parliament - and this is where I am backing the proposals of the motion. However, with this clawback clause that Parliament sets up a committee to investigate all these block chains with a view of coming up with proposals that shall be debated on this Floor because it is not one that has been mentioned –(Interruption)

MR MUHEIRWE: Mr Speaker, the procedural matter I would like to raise concerns Rule 93 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. It reads: “Declaration of personal interest in any matter before the House.” 

I have been reliably informed that hon. Muhammad Nsereko is one of the directors and a shareholder in OneCoin. It is the subject on the Order Paper that we are discussing. Can he declare his interests or is he therefore, in order to debate – are we proceeding right, Mr Speaker, to go ahead and debate without him declaring his interests? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I gave guidance at the beginning of this debate because I sensed that there are some victims in this House. I did not know that the other side is –(Laughter)

All I said was that, if you have interest of any kind; let us know so that we can assess the weight. Honourable member, in case you have some interest, let us know so that we can assess you properly.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and my comrade. For sure, I am not a director, promoter or even a shareholder or even related to any company called OneCoin. 

As a matter of fact, you are talking of online business; someone rose up and talked of online business. Online business is broad; you can talk of investment like Alibaba and Facebook. Like Mr Speaker said, just in case you paid Facebook, how would you get redress here? No, I am trying to tell you something that is a reality. The fact is that I rise up here to state clearly that I do not have any vested interest in this. However, I can also categorically say that a committee should be set up to fully investigate this matter because without giving a fair hearing to any business or investment – if you say that a business has no location, someone has risen up and said, “I walked into an office and paid.” Which office did you pay to? We must ascertain that and come up with a fair judgement.

That is my submission, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us debate the motion. What is the motion? The motion is that Parliament passes a resolution urging Government to ban all ponzi and pyramid schemes. In other words, the prerogative will rest with the Government to do all the due diligence and come up with that decision. 

However, Parliament is urging the Government to do that and that is what it is saying. We cannot begin debating something which is not before us. 

Therefore, can we debate this motion? I only want the people who are going to debate this motion and please, declare your interest. (Laughter)

4.03
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am neither a victim nor a promoter but I am a Ugandan. There is no country that has developed with fraudsters in charge of it. All fraudulent systems should not see a day of light. 

Hon. Mwine Mpaka is complaining about fraudulent systems and I would like to support this motion that the system of telling Ugandans, “You sit there” and earn money is very dangerous to this economy. It promotes laziness, and theft because if somebody does not have $10,000, and he simply goes and starts mobilizing it from somewhere - my brother here was saying he was mobilizing colleagues.

Now if you are a serious government, this is the time to support Hon. Mpaka and stop this, ban it- we do not need to know how many they are. Even if they are two or 50, let us ban them. Let us be strict and we only promote a system that is going to develop this country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.05
MR PETER SEMATIMBA (NRM, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Speaker. I appreciate it very much. Mr Speaker, Ponzi schemes the world over are illegal. They are illegal because they pretend to have business models that create revenue and profits - in fact, huge profits! 

However, the keyword here is that they “pretend” that is the operative word. They do not generate any revenue and they do not generate any profits that they feed off each other with the people at the top taking money from the people at the bottom.

Therefore, I stand to support the motion very seriously. I also want to advocate this, Mr Speaker, that as we ban Ponzi schemes in Uganda that we educate and empower the Government institutions that are responsible for regulating financial institutions to make sure that they understand and can look at business models to ensure that they are not Ponzi schemes. 

Also, allow me to clear up something that hon. Nsereko may have misguided us on and that is block chain. These are not Ponzi schemes. It is merely a business tool. It is the new most modern business tool of making sure that businesses are running straight.

Therefore, no one here is talking about getting rid of that technology called “chain blocks”. No one has talked about that, we are talking about Ponzi scheme and that is a different thing. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.07
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion not as a victim but as a Member of Parliament from Karamoja. I did not expect any Member of Parliament to oppose this motion because it is affecting so many Ugandans. 

If someone is talking about Arua and the central regions, where it started how many people were affected? This thing should be stopped. It is only active in Uganda. I was reading it in the news, the Kenyan Government has stopped it; same as Tanzania and Rwanda. 

If Ugandans want to continue doing it, it is going to be very unfortunate. Someone sells bunches of matooke and gets a little money then puts it into business which is not yielding. You keep waiting for months and months and at the end of the day, they tell you the business has frozen. 

Just as my colleague hon. Atiku said, the Government should release this money and they give it to the owners so that people can get back their money. Thank you.
4.08
MR FRED BASEKE (Independent, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Any investment is very good for the country's economic development only if that investment is good. Mr Speaker, there are two studies that have been conducted on Ponzi and the pyramid schemes and I want to tell this Parliament the results of these studies because my colleague there wanted evidence - whether these schemes are good or bad. 

There is a study conducted by Asogwa and others on economies and the relationship between Ponzi schemes and the Nigerian economy and the results of this study showed that there is a strong negative relationship between the growth of the Ponzi scheme and the economy. Every unit increase in the growth of the Ponzi scheme led to a decrease in the economy of Nigeria. There were so many negative consequences as a result of the Ponzi schemes. 

In another study conducted in 2015 by Professor Kant in the West Bengal State of India, the results were not any different. People lost their money, students risked money because they wanted to get quick returns and they dropped out of school and at the end of the day, some of them committed suicide. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, when you look at the evidence from other countries where these things have been operating and has led to a negative development in the economy, as Ugandans, I want to stand and support the motion that we ban these schemes in Uganda. 

Uganda will not be the first country to ban these schemes. There are over 52 other countries in the world that have banned them. We have Albania, UK - we have so many states that have banned them. Therefore, I want to support the motion that Government bans these schemes. I have no interest in them, I am not a victim, but I am just trying to save Uganda. Thank you.

4.10
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I stand here to strongly support the motion. I speak from experience - actually, a previous victim not of this –(Laughter).

Mr Speaker –(Interjections)- Yes a previous one. Therefore, because of experience even with so many friends talking to me to join this other one, I would not because I had learned the hard way. 

In 2008, we had the Dutch International Team. I do not know whether they were sent to Sebei because when they came to the Sebei all our people welcomed it, people sold land, animals and all of it went.

For me that time, I was studying so I took time to join. When they first told me I resisted because they were using what they were calling “Ponzi” and one ponzi cost Shs 880,000 and out of one ponzi that you would invest in, after a month, they would give you profits worth Shs 440,000. 

I said but now how can I really get the 50 per cent out of only Shs 880,000? So, I resisted. However, I joined later on, because most of our people had joined and the first ones were more careful with their investments, some had even constructed houses. So being a teacher, you know how much teachers earn.

I got a loan for two years and then I took everything to them - you know they had restricted us. They told us that we could only have five ponzi. Therefore, I bought five of them. After that, I recruited my husband, that one also paid for five. (Laughter) You can imagine, and we did not even receive any return because before the end of that one month, the ponzi disappeared and I had a loan for two years, which I paid until, I joined Parliament. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, so many people have really suffered. Our people never went to school and they do not have money. Therefore, Mr Speaker, now that I am in Parliament, I would like to tell the Members, that for me ponzi even entered my house; my children were also duped through social media.

However, because I had cautioned them, they never told me they had joined as well. It is only of recent when one of them whispered to me, “Do you know mummy, I lost money “- (Interruption) 

MS CHEKAMONDO: Thank you, my honourable sister, for giving way. Mr Speaker, in 2008 I was the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development and when I got this message in my constituency, the deal was very good that you could not convince anybody against it. The first thing that I did was to go and see the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, who by then was hon. Suruma. I told him that I went to my constituency and found something going on among the people and people are very excited. He told me that it was also there in his constituency and that they had conned people about Shs 8 billion. 

I went back on radio to inform people. I first began with my own relatives at home. I told my brothers-in-law that this is something which is for conning people. People told me: “Honourable member, if you want votes, leave us with our Dutch International.”

Mr Speaker, I tried to convince the people, but the next day, my relatives went and sold their property and paid the money to Dutch International and two days later, they were given Shs 400,000 each. Whoever got the money went back and said: “I even got money yesterday.” Within a very short time, those people came and recruited more people within the community. The same people were given money so that other people might be persuaded when they see their friends receiving money. Those people extorted money; up to now, some people have not yet recovered from the shock –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on information.

MS CHEKAMONDO: Thank you. That was the information. (Laughter)

MS CHEKWEL: Thank you, honourable, for that information. Mr Speaker, if the issue is about evidence, I still have the receipts and in Sebei, we piled the receipts and they are very many. I really want to urge Parliament to urge this Government - it should have come much earlier; but since it has come, I would like to thank the honourable member and I call upon colleagues to support this motion. Thank you.

4.17
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (INDEPENDENT, Tororo North County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: After the Member for Tororo North County, I want only people who are opposing the motion to speak.

MS NYAKECHO: Yes, indeed I am opposing this motion. No, I am not opposing. I am supporting. Why did you confuse me? (Laughter) 

I am supporting this motion with all the strength I have because I remember in the last Parliament, I almost became a victim of these pyramid schemes – and I was actually recruited by my own father. He travelled all the way from Tororo and told me that: “Annet, there is this very good scheme called BF Suma. When you join it, you buy some beauty products like soap and other items and they give you money but you have to recruit.” 

My brother was a manager at Centenary Bank and my father recruited him also. However, somehow I was sceptical so I asked him: “How many points do we have to accumulate to get back our money?” He said: “No, the more money you put in, the more points you accumulate.” However, if you look at the return they would give, it was not satisfactory to me.

Mr Speaker, these people lure people with basic things they feel people need. For instance, they can come with a product and say this is an anti-aging product. Of course everybody wants to grow young. They will give you a gadget which you do not even know whether it works or not. They tell you when you are going to sleep, put it under your pillow. People used these things and they did not even know their effects on their bodies.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my brother for coming up with this motion and I would like to pray that when this opportunity goes to Government to sort this problem, the Government should take it up as a very serious matter. 

Many Ugandans have been duped just as our colleagues here have testified. It is not a good thing. It has robbed very many of us and it is up to us to sort this problem out. These people go to the villages where people are vulnerable and where they know people need to make money. My father stays in the village and when he was presented with that opportunity, he thought this was an opportunity to make money. 

Let us join hands and fight this vice. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister of ethics, is this a matter that touches on ethics? After the Member for Lira, I would like the minister of ethics to say something and we see how to proceed.

2.20
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Mr Speaker, I stand to support this motion. I know you wanted somebody who would oppose it but there is no way I can oppose this motion. I am sorry.

Mr Speaker, fraudsters are many in this country and in fact, if they have been shut along this line, they devolve in another and that is what they do. Even in this House, they are there. However, I would like to assure you that as hon. Annet just said, in the Ninth Parliament I almost fell victim of it because there were colleagues in the House who were convincing me –(Interruption)

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Mr Speaker, I enjoyed the beginning of my colleague’s submission. However, she indicated something very pertinent – that in this House there are fraudsters. We cannot think of protecting Ugandans if we do not begin here. 

Mr Speaker, is she in order to say there are fraudsters here without mentioning names?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the presumption of this House is that all the Members are clean, unless there is proof to the contrary. Therefore, we will operate on that presumption and no statement shall be made to the contrary unless there is sufficient proof. If you have proof, you can continue but if you do not have, please, withdraw that kind of statement.

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I withdraw that statement. I was saying that I was being lured by colleagues in this House to join, and they were saying I should pay some amount of money and that every month they would be paying me over $170. I said: “How?” They were in it but I think it did not take long before they got it rough. I did not join it. 

In this particular case of D9, Mr Speaker, my daughter-in-law joined it and she was given an iPad, which she has. My nephew also came from the constituency and he was invited to come and work but he did not get the proper place where the offices were and he went back. Therefore, I would like to say that this is real.

Mr Speaker, in Lira, there is this organisation called Hands Across Nations which went to schools targeting widows and said they were paying school fees for children who are vulnerable. They have extorted money from the population. The Resident District Commissioner of Lira arrested them but they have godfathers. The moment you arrest them, somebody high up the ranks calls and says: “Release them.” 

Mr Speaker, it is a serious case. Many schools in Lango failed to operate because for a term or two, students were in schools and these people did not pay. When they first went for the meetings, some meetings were in a church near Bombo Barracks. When people castigated as to why they were calling themselves a big organisation yet they hold meetings in a church – later, they came to a big hotel in Kampala with more than 2,000 schools to a meeting which was officiated by big officers. 

Mr Speaker, even the office of Operation Wealth Creation attended the meeting. I remember reporting the matter to some officer but no one took action.

Before I take information from my colleague, I would like to state that these people have big wings in offices that support them and they know what they are doing.  

I would like to thank the honourable member for coming up with this motion. If Government cares about its citizens, as a Parliament, we are going to declare that Government - we know that our population is poor and the economy is bad. In fact, there are people who are really making this economy worse by extorting the little that the people have got. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

2.25
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion for the following reasons:

First of all, the Government of Uganda has not developed legal and regulatory framework for this business. Mr Speaker, there was a block chain conference organised by ICT ministry and I want to say that there is a difference between block chain and these schemes bitcoin and cryptocurrency. Though they are close cousins, you will need an expert to tell you. 

Mr Speaker, these people are smart. If you give them only five minutes, they will convince you. Even this morning in my office, someone tried to convince me to join the scheme. I told him that the matter is on the Order Paper and we were going to ban what “You are doing today.” (Laughter) 

In fact, he has already invested about $3,800 in the business. You can imagine this is a person who comes from your constituency, hon. Othieno Okoth; the young man comes from Mawundo.

Mr Speaker, it is a very serious matter. I have never bought into this because people with faithful hearts like me do not engage in risky business. Every business is risky but this particular business is bad. 

Mr Speaker, most of us are not digital enough yet the business is digital; you have to go online. The development of our cyber space law is wanting. What we have as an equivalent to the cyber space law is the e-commerce signature, computer misuse et cetra.  These people have gone beyond. In Brazil, where they do all kinds of businesses – the Central Bank of Brazil warned that bitcoin and this scheme is a bubble. If Brazil that does a lot of gambling is discouraging its people from getting involved, how about us?

When you read about the bitcoin website on Africa, they state how the President welcomed the block chain; they are happy about that. However, they also say that the central bank has not warmed up. Even when the central bank has not warmed up to the challenge of allowing bitcoin and cryptocurrency, the unemployed youth have not been slowed down and their appetite has grown. Mr Speaker, what are we dealing with?

This Parliament is the only public arena the representatives of the people of Uganda can voice what affects the people. How much do we need our people to be robbed? This Parliament can urge Government to change policies, develop regulatory mechanisms and ban it completely. This is what this motion is doing; to waken up Government. We never know whether there are some ministers who have fallen victims - of course, they cannot speak but they are either affected or infected with this thing. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to give evidence to the honourable member because the Member wanted one. Three pastors from my place came to my office - their leader was arrested. They came and asked for a photo opportunity. I did not know that they were going to post my own photo with them; a selfie. In fact, the guy was using his sensor to show me how advanced he was and they tried to recruit me. I told them “Pastors, I respect you men of God. I give you two years; go and invest and then after two years, we should compare notes.”

Mr Speaker, before three months elapsed, their leader is in jail. I have not had an opportunity to call the pastors but I will make sure that I call them and say “Who was right”. People are using very innocent people, especially those who can speak and are believable to invest their hard earned money and yet we talk about poverty here. There could be other means of investing.

Mr Speaker, I would like clarity - (Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, honourable for giving way. Yes, there is evidence coming out though I would like to see a written evidence.

Honourable member, none of us supports that people should cheat others but, don’t you think that we would benefit better if Government had a strategy to sensitise all Ugandans by warning them about this business; and also tell them that it is very important to be people of integrity who work and earn money rather than earn money in a very cheap and engage in unproductive deals!

MR OBOTH: Thank you. First, the honourable member is asking whether I do not think. I think but not the way you think I should think. 

With due respect, this is one of the ways of getting Government to work. Government is a respondent and it may not be aware - you are creating the awareness here for Government to respond to it. After this motion is carried, if Government does not take action, Government will come back to the same Parliament asking for money to compensate people –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, honourable member. Mr Speaker, hon. Oboth is talking of regulation which is good. The clarification I would like to seek from hon. Oboth is that since Members are saying that it should be banned, wouldn’t it be better to set up an investigation team by this Parliament - (Interjections) 

Mr Speaker, it is very bad to come up with a statement by saying we should ban. I think that it would be better if we first investigate to find out exactly what is happening; which people are there and then move into action. How should we ban them without concrete evidence?

MR OBOTH: Thank you, hon. Gilbert, I rose to speak after listening to the very good guidance from the Speaker that those of you who have had the opportunity to follow this motion and what it is seeks, it is to urge Government.

Why do you want to cause this Parliament to be the one to investigate? Why can’t Government go into the nitty-gritty as its executive role of regulating how business is done in Uganda?

The Speaker, guided and I agree that let it be our role to carry this motion and urge Government to ban it and they will come back and say –(Interruption)

MR AKAMBA: Thank you, colleague for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague that this is the time for Government to bite on this issue. All businesses that are done in this country they are first registered with URSB, Uganda Investment Authority. However, having numerous teams pretending to be doing business in this country without being registered, getting investment licences and they do not even pay taxes - They are criminals and they should be arrested. Government should bite without fear or favour because we cannot condone businesses that are not registered.

MR OBOTH: In conclusion, it is already very complicated that the business is online and more complicated that we have our own people involved in them. 

Somebody talked about liberalisation; but it is not absolute it does not remove controls it only limits the controls and restriction. A liberal economy does not mean a world without restraint.

This motion would need the support of this whole House, those of us who are saying that we cannot ban, let Government give us the due diligence they could have done. I support this motion with all my heart and if you think the heart is deceitful, I support it with all my kidneys. (Laughter)

4.33
MS ROSE AKELLO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaabong): Thank you, so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to declare that I am one of the victims and I speak out of experience, and that is why I was pleading for a chance to tell my colleagues that these schemes are not good they make you poorer than the state you were in.

In 2017, some of our own colleagues recruited some of us into these schemes. We were very many including the former members of the Ninth Parliament. Hon. Atiku has just informed you that he was also a Member –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Whenever members of Parliament are talking we need to be factual. The honourable member said that she was a victim; wouldn’t it be procedurally right for her to mention exactly which scheme duped her? It is very important to be on record other than making a sweeping statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed honourable member.

Ms ROSE AKELLO: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I am speaking the truth because the truth will always set you free. It was a D9 scheme which most of the members were recruited into.

I would like to thank the Member who brought this timely motion on the Floor of Parliament because it has become a very big problem to the members and villages.

Last year in Kaabong District, some people went up to the district and recruited some youth to collect money from poor parents promising that they were going to take their children to school and each parent was supposed to pay Shs 30,000.

They collected more than Shs 20 million from parents until when I ordered them to stop and those people have switched off their numbers and nowhere to be seen and yet the poor parents are lamenting.

It is happening in our country and in our villages, even some members who are denying should know that it is real and it is happening in their villages.

MR MULINDWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. About three months ago, I was invited by someone called Festo to Pearl Hotel and I paid Shs 500,000 to attend training about cryptocurrency. They informed us that even the Bank of Uganda Governor and the NSSF Managing Director had subscribed so I picked interest from that point. I asked whether he was sure of his statement and he said it was true.

I asked to know the regulations that they were following to prove that the Bank of Uganda Governor had subscribed to this. The following day I met the Governor who told me that there was no regulation and it was a fraud scheme. I met the NSSF Managing Director and he advised me not to join it. I was about to put in Shs 300 million.

There is no central bank involved in cryptocurrency worldwide so I would like to thank hon. Mwine Mpaka for coming up with this motion; we need to inform our people before they are cheated. Thank you so much.

MS ROSE AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My prayer is for Government to stand up and ban these schemes in our country otherwise we are going to get poorer. Thank you.

2.44
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we had problems of gambling - no I can never be a victim on this. I have seen such pyramids for almost 30 years. When we were beginning to work, they used to come to institutions and lure young employees who had no idea what they were talking about. They would ask you to find friends and at the end of the day, many people lost money. 

When we had problems with gaming, Government created a law. The Chinese and Indians had put gaming boxes up to the villages. They would say when you put money in the boxes, you would win. This Government came up and put a law and confined the gaming machines in towns. 

Somebody yesterday asked me, “You, honourable members, why don’t you help the vulnerable people?” This organisation called Development Channel which had hired offices in Kamwokya duped people to the extent that some people came all the way from the north; women came with their money they had saved in millions thinking they would be part of this company and own shares for life. I wonder who brought those people. 

We know that there is unemployment in Uganda. So, they used the unemployed youth. They trained them to even convince Members of Parliament. They have trained pastors “to train believers in their churches”. This is the arena and Parliament must help the vulnerable. 

Development Channel was closed but we do not know where else they are going. I thank the honourable member for having brought this to the attention of Government. Many people have been duped. At least, I have heard the Governor telling Ugandans that cryptocurrencies are not yet admissible in Uganda. There is no legislation and insurance. People are keeping money in the virtual world where they cannot monitor what happens. Within no time, many people will cry to Government that they have been duped. 

This has also happened in agriculture where people come, excite the population to grow a certain crop, for instance, moringa and the Government remains quiet. After a while, moringa grows wild and the people do not benefit anything from it.

So, I support the motion. If need be, we should not even urge Government; we should instead say we are closing this business. It will be Government to open it and they will only be allowed to open if they have a law to safeguard our people. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. We are not changing the text of the motion; it will remain that we are urging Government to do whatever is necessary to deal with this thing. 

4.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ETHICS AND INTEGRITY) (Rev. Fr Simon Lokodo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also stand here to support the motion. Unfortunately, it is a manifestation of a total moral decadence in our country. There are people who exploit the innocent and the unsuspecting Ugandans in all ways. This shows you that people have lost integrity, esteem and honesty and they will do anything to get something from you. 

Some people said that there are those who dupe you by pretending they are helping you when actually they are taking even the little you have. They will say, “We are helping you take your children to school. We are helping you to provide your kids with scholastic materials, computers and et cetera.” However, they will take away from you a lot more than what they are deceptively giving you. 

So, I would like to strongly condemn this attitude, spirit, dishonesty and exploitative tendency of Ugandans. Unfortunately, as you have heard, Ugandans themselves have become partners in this exercise.

We use the expatriates and foreigners to be at the apex for such exercise but in reality, we become part and partial of the destruction and exploitation of our own people. It is a pity. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence; as I say this that I have enough information to implicate even some of us in this House for this exercise. We have colleagues who are involved in big money amassing exercises to the extent that even the image of Parliament is tarnished. 

I would like to, at an opportune time, lay on the Table certain figures and persons. I beg that I do not do that now. However, my point here was to declare that the moral fibre of the nation has unfortunately disintegrated and degenerated to the lowest levels. We are selfishly exploiting the innocent and unsuspecting parents out there. We have no shame or fear, not even a sense of guilt to see that we do not hurt others.

Mr Speaker, I strongly support the motion and I would like to be part of Government when it is deciding to ban the pyramid schemes. Thank you.

4.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I join the rest of the House to support the private member for moving this motion urging Government to take action. Commercial banks are controlled by the Central Bank. For the microfinance institutions, money lenders and SACCOs, we passed here a law that established the Microfinance Regulatory Authority to control and supervise them. 

Some of the investment clubs are registered and we know them. We also know that on average, the Internal Rate of Return for our country is between 12 to 14 per cent. We would like to caution Ugandans not to involve themselves in schemes of this nature because they are not right. They are just there to steal from you and you need to be cautious. 

Mr Speaker, we have been sounding this warning. Even the Central Bank put an advert in the newspaper. We have put adverts on radios discouraging our people from joining these schemes. Sometimes, we are surprised, like hon. Lokodo has said, that even Members of Parliament are duped into these schemes. So, we also take this opportunity to caution our colleagues not to go there because they are very deceptive. They can tell you that they are going to make almost 200 per cent profit. However, it is not possible to join a business that will give you a 200 per cent profit in this country. 

So, as Government, we are investigating some of the cases like the honourable member has said. You heard the Investment Minister reported the other time that we arrested one of them who were trying to con people. 
	
However, we continue to request members, in case you get information on which we can base to take action as Government, we will continue to close in on such companies.

Lastly, we have set up- I would like colleagues also to put a distinction between these schemes that are -(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Mr Speaker, on the 21 May 2018, His Excellency the President met the founder of the Binance, the largest cryptocurrency firm. Since we now know that this is a kind of criminal activity going on in the country and it is illegal; and we are going to ban all such activities, has the finance minister been able to guide our ministers and top policy makers to avoid getting involved and duping the entire Uganda into this kind of trickery? The moment you entail His Excellency the President, then it means the entire system will be corrupted.

Therefore, I would like to seek clarification from you whether you are aware that His Excellency met the founder and what advice did you give His Excellency? Thank you.

MR OGUZU: Mr Minister, I heard from the mover of this motion that some of the companies involved in block chain technology are also into pyramid schemes. As far as I know, this year, the ICT minister hosted a block chain technology conference in Serena and block chain technology has wide application in finance, and unique identification of entities and moving ahead with this motion would mean innovation in that area would be curtailed.

What I would like to find out is, there are Ugandans who have been holding their wealth in those technologies, what is going to happen if we ban it? If I have people who have kept money in that technology because it is digital, how are you going to deal with that? Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Friends, let me conclude. The point I was going to make when hon. Ogwal came in was that we should make a distinction between these pyramids and emerging technologies; especially technologies that are impacting on the financing industry, for example, the block chain technologies.

It is true that His Excellency the President met the gentlemen you are talking about and I was there in the meeting. It is true that he opened an Africa block chain conference, which I also attended. These are emerging technologies - the currency is traded on the new stock exchange as we speak now. It is in Europe, but we have not yet appreciated it as a country.

Therefore, the ICT minister is setting up a taskforce to study these emerging technologies and financial solutions in our country. We will continue to study them and see those that are genuine we will adopt them and those that are fake we will discourage and ban them. That is what I am saying.

However, there are those that we know that are not genuine. Do not include the pyramids but these emerging technology, we must study them and those that we find that it is not correct we ban them and allow people to go with that we find to be okay.

As I said, Mr Speaker, we are coming here with a national payment system Bill which will include all these digital currencies and the country will be able to find a probably common way forward -(Interruption)

MR SEMATIMBA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. The information I would like to give the honourable minister and the House is, we are discussing Ponzi schemes today. Ponzi schemes and pyramids can be executed digitally or not. 

Block chain technology is not a Ponzi scheme. It is merely a tool of accountability in the digital world which can be abused or not. To date so far, it seems to be the purest form of accountability for major organisations. It is not what we are discussing today therefore we should not worry about it. It is Ponzi schemes and pyramids that we are concerned about.

There was nothing wrong with our President meeting the people involved in the block chain technology because very soon the globe is going to be running accountability systems based on block technology. That is the information I wanted to give you. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much hon. Sematimba for the information. You have explained in the right accent and members have heard. The two should not be mixed. Today we are talking about pyramids. As Government, we thank the member for bringing the motion and we support this motion and we are going to take action.

On the issue of other technologies including the block chain technologies, we are setting up a taskforce to study the applications and impact on society and we shall make a decision and inform this Parliament. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. We have had a good debate and part of why I extended this is because this debate - I am hoping it has been relayed to the whole country. Those who are able to watch television and if it is relayed directly, it will pass on the information to the general public that we are concerned about this matter because they are affecting people. That is part of why I extended this debate.

The English saying that “It is too good to be true” simply means it is not true. There is no other interpretation. If you say it is too good to be true, it means it is not true. If somebody tells you something that is too good to be true, it is not true. If it is not true, why get into it? If somebody promises you quick money; there is nothing like quick money. It is too good to be true so it is false.

Honourable members, can I put the question to this motion. I now put the question that Parliament passes the motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to ban all Ponzi and pyramid schemes? I put the question?

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO CONGRATULATE AND COMMEND THE RT HON. REBECCA A. KADAGA, SPEAKER OF THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

5.03
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to congratulate and commend the Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, Speaker of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, in accordance with Rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda 2017. It reads:

“WHEREAS the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association is a voluntary association of Members of Parliament with branches in 175 National, State, Provincial and Territorial Parliaments, with a total membership of approximately 17,000 Parliamentarians established to develop, promote and support Parliamentarians and their staff to identify benchmarks of good governance and democracy and to implement the enduring values of the Commonwealth;

AND WHEREAS the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) held an Executive Committee meeting in London between 5th and 9th November 2Ol8 wherein the Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, Speaker of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda was appointed President Designate of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association 2018-2019;

AWARE that the appointment of Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga as President Designate was in recognition of her great contribution
to the attainment of the Commonwealth core values and objectives including but not limited to empowering women, strengthening diversity and inclusiveness and engaging with young people;

FURTHER AWARE that the appointment of Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga as President designate has raised the visibility and respectability of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda as a
Vanguard and promoter of all the objects of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association;

RECOGNISING that due to the goodwill and confidence that the Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga enjoys in the Commonwealth, the Republic of Uganda has continued to benefit as demonstrated by Uganda's recent selection as host of the 64th Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference to be held in September 2Ol9;

COGNISANT of the efforts of the Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga in deepening Parliamentary democracy and strengthening the voice of the sovereign States in determining their own affairs in which pursuit she has been locally and internationally recognised through various awards such as-

1. 	The Black History Month (which is the inaugural award to the African Speaker of the Year) at the London Political Summit, 2Ol8 organised by Ring for Change Foundation in collaboration with the London Metropolitan University at the British House of Parliament, Portcullis house, Grimond Room in Westminster, London.

2. 	The first female Uganda Law Society member to open a law firm and indeed, hold the noble office of Speaker of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.

APPRECIATING the efforts of the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga  in keeping Uganda's flag high at the national and International level;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:

1. 	That Parliament collectively congratulates the Rt Hon Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, Speaker of Parliament of the Republic of Uganda upon the merited appointment as President Designate of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association 2018-2019; and being awarded the distinguished accolade of the African Parliamentarian Speakers of the Year Award received at the London Political Summit in 2018.

2. 	That Parliament appreciates the efforts of Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga in constantly holding high the flag of the Republic of Uganda and raising the visibility of the Parliament of Uganda as the vanguard of constitutionalism, State sovereignty, deepening democracy, women participation and international relations.

3. 	That Government and Parliament of Uganda collectively support the Rt Hon Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga during her tenure as President of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, especially in the organisation of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference, 2019.”

I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Seconded by the Member for West Budama South, Member for Busiki County. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the accolade, which we are talking about is here. However, with your guidance, I will be restrained to lay it at Table because it will be owned by Parliament. I would rather you see it as evidence of what we are talking about and request the owner, if she wants to hand it over to the House to do it herself when she is around. What our Speaker has been able to do, the excellent work that she has done at the international forum is on behalf of the Parliament of Uganda. 

Therefore, we the Members of Tenth Parliament, which is presided over by the Rt Hon. Speaker Rebecca Kadaga, are extremely proud that the demonstration of excellence that she has been able to show at the international forum, she has been able to show that the Parliament of Uganda is not only developing but has matured in carrying out its mandate as an institution of Parliament.

The excellent performance of the Rt Hon. Speaker at the international arena as I said has deserved her designation as President of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association of the current season and to be the first awardee of the prestigious accolade in London summit recently.

This is a powerful testimony, Mr Speaker, that we may not recognise it but at the international level, Uganda is not taken lightly. The performance of Ugandans in every debate that goes on at the international arena is normally taken very seriously and a voice of Uganda has been heard.

Therefore, for this reason Mr Speaker, I would like Parliament to collectively congratulate the Rt Hon. Speaker for the excellent performance she has been able to demonstrate outside on our behalf and to request the Government to give a special support to the institution of Parliament and Rt Hon. Speaker Rebecca Kadaga during her tenure of office.

I know that there are many ways that Government can do that but one of the ways as a Parliament is to give our best when we are organising the forthcoming conference, which is going to take place in September 2019.

Mr Speaker, it is not a secret that a committee has already been set up and sub committees are already working towards that conference we are talking about, which will take place in September 2019. I think the House needs to know that I am the Chair of the spouses subcommittee. In case you know anybody who is coming with a spouse, I will take care of that person.

I would like to end by saying that the Rt Hon. Speaker has raised the bar so high that we have to sustain it as a Parliament. Wherever you go, whether at the continental or international level, when you stand in that platform to speak on behalf of Uganda, we must speak to demonstrate that this is a quality Parliament and the calibre of people who come here deserve to be applauded. 

Therefore, I call upon Parliament to support this motion to congratulate the Rt Hon. Speaker for the excellent achievement she has done for us. She has made us proud and I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving us the opportunity to collectively congratulate her. I beg to move.

5.15
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion with the view that this Parliament finds it appropriate to congratulate and commend the Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, Speaker of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. 

I have been privileged to be the seconder, to have been in this House for my second term and to have been in the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, where the Rt Hon. Speaker has been a very active member. She was appointed the President Designate. She held the position of the Chairperson of the Commonwealth Parliament of the whole Commonwealth, 170 flags standing, leading the women. 

Mr Speaker, the CPA started way back in 1911, as the Empire Parliamentary Association. That organisation was charged to propose good governance, democracy and human rights. The patron in 1989 was and still is the head of the Commonwealth, Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II. 

President Designates are always elected in a Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference. For the Ugandan case, as it would be for Madam Speaker, was a unique one. I think she is one of the few who have been appointed by the executive committee. 

Uganda has got the privilege to host the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference that will be here in September 2019. It is a privilege for Uganda to showcase what we have during this conference. There will be over 52 Speakers from across the Commonwealth countries. There will be several Members of Parliament. Over 2000 people are planned to converge for this conference, including, we, the Ugandans. 

Many times, I have been equally privileged to witness the display of Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga’s leadership. During the Commonwealth, nobody in the Commonwealth Parliament feigned ignorance of her attributes on matters that touch Pan-Africanism and the passion of what Uganda stands for. 

In 2013, we were in South Africa and in the Commonwealth, they were trying to smuggle a clause equivalent to what they did in Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU), where we were seated country by country. I remember at that time, we were with hon. Jim Muhwezi, hon. Rosemary Seninde, hon. Betty Amongi, hon. Elijah Okupa, hon. Christine Abia and the Speaker. We faced a challenge. People wanted to re-define what human rights is. As a country, we put up a strong stand against inclusion of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender (LGBT) and other human rights that can be embedded to guide the activism of human rights in the whole world. 

Recently, we saw what happened in the IPU. The Rt Hon. Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga, does not fear to stand up for what she believes in. I found out that she is a very courageous person and little wonder, her courage and bravery to pursue what she believes in has led her to be the first female Speaker in Uganda, the first female lawyer to open a law firm to operate in Uganda. I am sure it has led her to be the first female Musoga to be the Speaker of Uganda, the first female Speaker from Eastern Uganda and the first person from Kamuli to be Speaker. 
Mr Speaker, to be the first of everything can only tell us that it takes courage and bravery. It takes resilience, commitment and patience to seize opportunities when they show up.

I found that the appointment and the designation as President and the accolades that she was awarded have come at the right time to only demonstrate her strong will and recognition in the international arena. 

It is also an inspiration for us all as leaders in this Parliament to look beyond where we are. I am sure when she was in Kamuli, Namasagali where she went to school, nobody knew that she would be recognised internationally. Here we are paying tribute and commending her for what others have seen. We are not saying anything new. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I beg to support that this Parliament finds it convenient and appropriate to commend and congratulate the Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga for the award and recognition which has been bestowed upon her. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, for presenting this motion and hon. Oboth for seconding it. I see a second seconder but he has not signed a copy of the motion that I have. I guess I will just read him among the debaters. 

Honourable members, the motion that I propose for your debate is for the resolution that Parliament congratulates and commends the Rt Hon. Rebecca A. Kadaga, Speaker of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. That is the motion I propose for your debate and it starts now. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Ogwal for bringing up this motion and hon. Oboth for seconding it.

I rise on a point of procedure. When I look around, the Members of Parliament that are here are really few. I think this is a motion that the House would like to give justice. Would it be procedurally right to let this motion be debated on Tuesday next week? I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we have time to finish with this motion.

5.25
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion that this House resolves to congratulate and commend the Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, for the award of the accolades and also for being appointed the President Designate of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association.

I support the motion because it is a rare occasion. Out of the 17,000 parliamentarians who constitute this association, for the Rt Hon. Speaker to emerge, it is unique to be recognised and appreciated for the good work she has done and continues to do. It is evidenced that Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga has been at the forefront of promoting the core values of Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. For instance, without doubt, she has been at the forefront of deepening democracy, promoting human rights, promoting international peace and security, tolerance, respect and understanding; promoting freedom of expression, separation of powers, rule of law and good governance. 

Wherever the Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga represents our country, our flag is always high because of her courage, resilience and determination. I speak this with authority because I was on her IPU delegation and it was an opportunity for me to see and witness how she articulates issues at any international arena. A person who is appreciated by everybody and liked by most of the international leaders - Uganda stands out to be the beneficiary of her good work. Wherever she shines, Uganda shines. 

It is on this note that I would also like to state it for a fact that Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga was not only the first seasoned woman lawyer but she was also the first woman lawyer to open up a law firm in Uganda, to be the Speaker of Parliament of Uganda and indeed, again she is the first female Speaker of Parliament from East Africa to be appointed President Designate of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association.

On that note, I would like to urge and invite colleagues to support the motion that the Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga be congratulated and commended by this Parliament. I support the motion.

5.31
MR MOSES KIZIGE (NRM, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this motion moved by hon. Cecilia Ogwal, commissioner and senior legislator. When the Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga was elected to Parliament for the first time in 1989, I had the privilege to be a member of the Electoral College that elected her. I was the Secretary for Youth Affairs in Bugabula County. The Resistance Council at county level were part of the Electoral College. I am happy that as a voter from Kamuli, I voted for the Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga for the very first time. 

It took her less than five to six years and by 1995, her potential had been realised by the Chairman of the National Resistance Council (NRC) and she was assigned to the position of Assistant Chairperson NRC. In the absence of the Chairperson, who was the President and the Vice-Chairperson, Hon. Haji Moses Kigongo, on several occasions, she chaired the NRC.

Upon her election to Parliament by the people of Kamuli in 1996, the Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga became Minister for Regional Co-operation and later, served as Minister for Communication and Transport and also served as Minister for Parliamentary Affairs in 2001. 

In 2001 -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you relevant to the motion? The motion is very specific; please, address the motion. It is not about the entire curriculum vitae of the Rt Hon. Speaker, which is very elaborate but it is about the motion.

MR KIZIGE: I would like to appreciate the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga for her contribution to this Parliament. I would further like to appreciate the Government of Uganda who has on several occasions supported delegations of Parliament to international conferences like the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. If we were not represented effectively, we would never be elected to these responsible offices.

I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker and other members of the delegation; not only in the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association but also in the IPU. I would like to talk about her position as President Designate. It is very important when you are serving in that position as a country, to see the opportunities that Ugandans can take in the Commonwealth and in international offices. 

Therefore, as we prepare to host that conference, among the several committees, we should have a committee to look at the opportunities that will be available and look at positions where we shall position Ugandans to take offices, maybe permanent positions in the Commonwealth.

I would like to correct one record. The honourable colleague, hon. Oboth said she was the first Speaker from Kamuli District. Kamuli District has been a house of Speakers. Hon. Adonia Ngobi, the first Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda after independence was from Kamuli just like hon. Alexander Waibale, the Chairman of the National Consultative Council. So, we are proud of the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga and I support the motion. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker. I am also from Kamuli. (Laughter)

5.35
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Through you, I stand to support the motion moved by hon. Cecilia Ogwal and seconded by hon. Oboth. 

The appointment of any Ugandan to any organisation helps to profile our country especially at this point where the image of our country has been badly shattered by events that have been happening in the recent by-elections. 

The international media has been awash with murders, various forms of human rights violation and the like. This particular appointment and the accolades that the Rt Hon. Speaker has attained facilitate the positive building of the image of our country. 

We are a country that is still associated with Idi Amin, 30 years after he left power. We are a country that is not so talented; we are not like Nigeria that has many professional players. We are not South Africa or Kenya with many athletes. So, our leverage can only come through appointments of this nature. 

In the recent past, we had Ugandans appointed to the International Criminal Court, appointments to the International Court of Justice; the Rt Hon. Speaker is being designated to the President of the CPA. That makes us proud as a Parliament, as a country and even Busoga as a sub-region. We take pride in the fact that one of our own is reaching such accolade.

Mr Speaker, I support the motion. It is a deserved recognition and we are setting a very good precedence that whoever attains such level of professionalism and commitment will be recognised and awarded by this institution in this country. 

Therefore, it is a culture that we need to promote and it is against that background that I support the motion. 

5.38
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion for the resolution of Parliament to congratulate and commend the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, Rebecca Kadaga. 

Looking at the number of States, about 175 countries and looking at the way our Speaker was given that position, this automatically makes us very happy and proud. There are many countries, which wanted this position to go to them but Uganda was given the mandate.

Therefore, as a country, we are very proud. About two weeks ago, we appreciated the Rt Hon. Kadaga for standing firm and speaking for the country. Today, we are grateful that we are thanking her for attaining that position. This has made us, as a country, very happy. On behalf of the Acholi Community and Amuru District specifically, we are grateful. We pray the good Lord continues blessing and protecting her. 

That day, I prayed to the good Lord that she should rise further to the highest position. I am happy that today, she was given the Presidency over 175 States. I pray the good Lord helps her to come to Uganda to help us when time allows. You know everything is in God’s plan. 

Therefore, I congratulate the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament and I pray the good Lord continues protecting her. Thank you.

5.40
MR DENIS LEE OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join in supporting the motion moved by hon. Cecilia Ogwal. 

As a young man, I knew Commonwealth as a symbol of neo-colonialism. However, if today we have people from Africa, particularly from Uganda, being elevated to such leadership positions in Commonwealth as it is the case we are debating, I feel proud. 

The current stature of the Rt Hon. Speaker we are talking about will come with responsibilities. There are things we will be doing that could reflect badly as she sits and leads in that office. My appeal to the nation and Government is that if we want her image not be dented, we should be able to act in a way that is in compliance with the customs and practices of the Commonwealth. 

It is also my expectation that the Rt Hon. Speaker will be able to use her position to realign Uganda to what other Commonwealth countries are doing so that, as a nation of Commonwealth, Uganda does not lag behind.  I, therefore, support the motion before us. Thank you.

5.43
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in congratulating the Rt Hon. Speaker Rebecca Kadaga for having attained such a position. It was on merit but behind her is our country. So, we are as proud of her being Ugandan. 

This is an opportunity for us because such an opportunity has got a lot to learn from. Positions go with responsibilities. Therefore, we expect from this position our country, East Africa and Africa at large will get the opportunity to benefit. On a personal note, she is a role model to many Ugandans, especially the girl child. 

I would like to join the rest in congratulating her and wishing her the best. As Members of Parliament, we take it as very important because we are Members of this Parliament that is being spearheaded by her and the Deputy Speaker. I would like to say that we are proud that both the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker have spearheaded Parliament and wherever they go to represent us, we get very good feedback. We made the right choices of having hon. Rebecca Kadaga and yourself – Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah – as the heads of Parliament. Thank you.

5.45
MR IBANDA RWEMULIKYA (NRM, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Mr Speaker, allow me to add my voice by thanking my senior colleague, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, for the motion. I am really proud to be a Ugandan and I am proud to be in this august House. Allow me congratulate the Rt Hon. Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga, for raising our flag high. This is something that the Parliament of Uganda and our country should be proud of. 

I would also not fail to thank you, Mr Speaker, because I have not been part of those delegations that go but we usually know what happens there. You make Uganda proud as the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of this country. 

I would like to thank the Speaker for the spirit of Pan-Africanism because when she is out there, she defends the values of Africa and all the delegations that have gone have made Uganda proud. I pray that God continues guiding and giving her wisdom and the country should take an opportunity to benefit from the position she is holding today. 

God bless the Parliament of Uganda. God bless our Deputy Speaker and God bless our Speaker. I say this for God and my country.

5.47
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to join others to appreciate and congratulate the Speaker, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, for attaining that level. I urge all the leaders in this Parliament and all of us that wherever we shall be, we should keep the Ugandan flag high and visible. I would like to appreciate her, as a woman, for attaining that level in this Tenth Parliament. 

I wish her God’s blessings and she should keep working higher and higher. May God bless her. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.48
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join my colleagues in congratulating the Speaker for being elected the President Designate of the CPA for the year 2018-2019. These international accolades and recognitions do not come easily and we know that the Speaker has worked hard. She is a true role model and leader. 

We are truly proud of our Speaker and Deputy Speaker because you have stood firm. We are proud of you for raising the flag high because we know that whenever you speak in international fora, everybody knows that we have quality leaders in Uganda. 

The Rt Hon. Speaker has defended human rights strongly, especially the rights of women and children and for that, we are very proud of her. As my colleagues have said, she has also stood firm in the defence of the social and cultural values and norms of the people of Uganda and she has clearly articulated what we stand for as Ugandans. In spite of what other people want us to copy and take on, she has stood firm and has been an example of what we need to be as leaders; that we need to stand for what we believe in. We need to firmly defend the socio-cultural values and norms of our people. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.51
MR PETER SEMATIMBA (NRM, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to join my honourable colleagues in congratulating the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga on attaining that position, especially bearing in mind that it was not a lottery but something that was based on merit, which is a reflection of her quality as a leader at that level. 

I would like to congratulate her as an individual but also to congratulate us as Ugandans because she represents us and what we are capable of. 

May God guide her in maintaining her consistent defence of African values, clear leadership and her incredible work ethics in making Uganda and the world a better place. I also pray that God helps her to continue being the great role model that she is to us as parliamentarians, Ugandans and especially for me who has only daughters. I pray that she continues being an incredible example to my daughters, so that they too can get to the highest level. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. Honourable members, this is an important motion and I congratulate hon. Cecilia Ogwal for bringing it up. It is recognition of one of our own for doing the best in her capacity to deliver and have Uganda recognised to take this position as President Designate of the CPA.

Madam Speaker draws her strength from this institution. (Applause) She does not draw her strength from anywhere else, except this institution. Therefore, we should be her back-up. What we do must make her go while knowing that she has a solid group of people doing what they are sent here to do. 

Let me say this. Internationally, the average number of laws that are passed by Parliament is between 80 and 140 in one year. I communicated earlier on this. For us to give respect to our Speaker, let us also perform as a Parliament. Let the citizens of this country also sit in small places and pass this kind of resolution, giving us accolades because we have passed laws on matters that affect their lives. 

Honourable members, if we show up with three, four or eight Bills, of which most are financial when the rest of the world is passing between 80 to 140 Bills in a year, then we are not giving the Rt Hon. Speaker the support she needs to go and shine all over the world. Therefore, we need to fill our duties here and do the best we can as parliamentarians, committees of Parliament and as a Parliament, so that we can support our activities outside. 

That is the only call I can make based on the recognition that has been made for the Speaker. Otherwise, she has achieved a lot on her own. Imagine if she goes there with Parliament having passed 100 Bills, she would be stronger in her communication knowing that we are doing things that support her. 


I also support this motion if I was allowed to debate it. This motion is well deserved but I think we should do better to support the Speaker of this Parliament and achieve the communication I made earlier about how we process Bills. That is the only way we make the Speaker even stronger in terms of work all over the world.

Honourable members, I now put the question to the motion for a resolution of Parliament to congratulate and commend the Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, Speaker of the Parliament of Republic Uganda. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the next business on the three Bills, which are on the Order Paper, will not be handled. The only business we could handle is item 10, which we are also not going to handle. However, there is a matter that we had already agreed should be handled from the Minister of Public Service.

5.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Mr Speaker, you recall that Parliament at its Second Sitting of the Third Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda held on Wednesday, 21 November 2018, hon. Cecilia Ogwal raised a concern over the delayed payment of retirement benefits to former employees of the East African Community (EAC). The Speaker referred the matter to be handled by the Ministry of Public Service and report back to Parliament on 28 November 2018. 

The defunct EAC comprised of Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania and it collapsed in June 1977, which affected the employees of the EAC. As a result of the collapse, the Government of Uganda accordingly made amendments to the Pensions Act, Cap.281 to protect the pension rights of her nationals who served in the EAC by enacting Decree No. 6, 1978. 

The Government of Uganda also signed the East African Mediation Agreement, 1984 with the former partner states for which member states assumed responsibility for settlement of pensions and other terminal benefits for its respective citizens.

In 1992, Government started making payments of terminal benefits to employees of the former EAC. On 8 February 1996, Government of Uganda constituted a committee under the chairmanship of Mr Adrian Kigo to draw up the register for all the ex-EAC employees and determine those so far paid and those to be paid, agree on payment procedures including the level of principal payments and interest thereof of the verified claims.

Mr Speaker, an inter-ministerial technical committee was also constituted by the Government of Uganda. Its report outlined the benefits accruing to former Ugandan employees of the EAC and attendant liability of Government.

The amendment of the Pensions Act, Cap 281 Decree No.6 1978, had an effect on recognising the previous pensionable service of the ex-EAC employees for purposes of the Act. As a result, the EAC employees who by 30 June 1977 qualified for pension in accordance with the EAC laws; the Pensions Act, Cap. 11 were paid their pension arrears.

Mr Speaker, those who worked for less than 10 years qualified for a one-off payment. Other ex-employees who had served for more than 10 years qualified for a gratuity and a monthly payment. This has since been paid to the beneficiaries.

The problem was that the pension law of the former EAC, which was being implemented by Crown Agents Uganda put qualifying age for pension at a minimum of 10 years of service, which is consistent to the Ugandan pension law. 

After getting the one off payment, the ex-employees of the EAC who had not made the 10 years of service petitioned court urging that the collapse of the EAC amounted to abolition of office and therefore, they should be considered for monthly pension even if they had not served more than 10 years as provided by law.

Mr Speaker, court heard the case last year and ruled that the collapse of the EAC could not amount to abolition of office. The judgement is in line with the Mediation Agreement signed by the former employees of the defunct EAC. This in essence, meant that the ex-employees of the EAC who did not work for a minimum of 10 years did not qualify for monthly pension.

Despite the judgement, some of the former employees of the EAC resorted to petitioning other organs of Government on the same matter. Mr Speaker, I remember meeting the group with you in your office.

The objective of this information paper is to respond to the issues raised by hon. Cecilia Ogwal and provide a report on progress so far made by the Ministry of Public Service and Government in general on the retirement benefits of the former employees of the defunct EAC.

Progress made

Government cleared all verified pension liabilities of the ex- employees of the EAC, which totaled to Shs 45.5 billion approximately. The one-off lumpsum of employees who served less than 10 years was also paid. 
 
The ex-employees of the EAC who had served for at least 10 years and above were paid gratuity and their monthly pension is being paid. Meanwhile, those who are still alive, a total of about 616 earn regular monthly pension under the Ministry of East African Community Affairs. The figure they earn in total is Shs 175 million. 

Mr Speaker, the last group that are benefiting from the verified outstanding gratuity are the former employees of the EAC Airways and were paid by the Ministry of East African Community Affairs in the Financial Year 2017/2018 and this Parliament had allocated Shs 31.3 billion.

Any former employees of the EAC who have not been paid should be advised to report to the Ministry of East African Community Affairs for verification and subsequent payment.

Regarding the Daily Monitor publication of 1 November, 2012 Government instituted a suit against those implicated and some of them have been convicted.

In conclusion, I request you, Mr Speaker and the August House, to note the information provided, that is the progress so far made concerning the payment of terminal benefits of the ex-employees of the former EAC.

Note that only ex-employees of the EAC who had served for a minimum period of 10 years qualify for both gratuity and monthly pension. 

I would like us to note that those ex-employees of the EAC who had worked for less than 10 years qualified for a one off payment that is gratuity and Government has settled all the verified gratuities.

Our ministry is still encouraging any unpaid claimants to submit their claims to the Ministry of East African Community Affairs for Government to take decision on the matter. 

Government instituted a suit against those implicated in the investigation on the mismanagement of pension funds and some of them have been convicted. 

The Director of Public Prosecutions is still prosecuting some pending cases and the matter is in court; it might be prejudicial to restart it at the Floor of Parliament. I beg to submit.

6.06
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for the response. However, it is averting the core issue. We are now concerned about the fact that there are many employees of the former EAC who have not been paid. Those who qualified to fall in the category of pensioners are not receiving their money; those who should have been paid a lumpsum have not been paid and you are aware that petitions have been laid to this Parliament, which have been handled personally by you, Mr Speaker.

In paragraph 5, point 7 you admitted that the Daily Monitor newspaper exposed the scam on the 1st November, 2012 and that the Government has instituted a suit against persons concerned. 
However, you ended up paying fraudsters. Do you have a list of them? The Daily Monitor did you a favour by exposing the photographs of those who were fraudulently paid and one of them happens to be somebody we knew very well in our community called Engineer Herbert Akora married to my own cousin.

He died a long time ago but his picture appeared as one of those who received the pension; who received his money. You have the information and what have you done about it?

It is not only people from Lango sub region who are asking for this money. It is all over Uganda; can you answer those questions.

It is true that the Ministry of Public Service is a custodian of the records of these employees. How could the fraudsters access the files, remove the photographs and go through your system, make claims and get paid? Thank you.

MR KARUBANGA: Thank you, hon. Cecilia Ogwal. You said many who have not been paid are still at large and yet, they qualify. I stated that the Government released money for the last financial year and paid all those who had been verified and indeed, some of it was taken back to the Treasury, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

Given the fact that there was fraud detected in the earlier payment, it is not only members of the former EAC, even for the other pensioners across Government, our ministry embarked on a verification exercise and that was aimed at dealing with the ghosts.

Whoever was verified was paid and they have an association; there is a record. According to the verification committee, nobody should come out and claim that they have not been paid unless they are a ghost.

You talked about how these fraudsters accessed the records; that is why in the statement, I said that the Director of Public Prosecutions is investigating. Fraud comes in many ways but what is important is that it was detected and some of those who were involved have been prosecuted and some cases have been investigated.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, I would like to seek some clarification. In the document that you have given, you did not attach a list of those whom you have paid.

It would be good for you to give us the list of the pensioners whom you have paid district by district so that verification would be easy for all members of Parliament because we have these complaints across the country. Very many people are complaining that they worked but their money has never been paid to date.

MS KAMATEEKA: Honourable minister, you claim to have paid everybody but having taken so long, some people passed on like the example that hon. Cecilia Ogwal gave. 

Don’t you think that it would be proper for you to give us the list of those people whose terminal benefits you have paid completely, those who are on the pension list and those who have passed away and whose relatives you are trying to verify so that you can pass on their benefits? When can you give us those details?

MR ABALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the report. On the issue of verification, I am sure of two people from my constituency and all have died. They came to the Ministry of Public Service more than five times but they were not helped. You are now telling us that anybody who has not been paid is a ghost. However, I am aware of the two people from my constituency. One of them was John Elwalu. I am sure of that name and that is why I would like you to help us understand the dynamics involved at this stage. Some of these people worked and yet, they have never been paid.

I would like the minister to tell us that the two people I talked about who claimed they have not been paid are ghosts. I do not know whether I am right. What is important is that those two from my constituency were not verified but they worked in the EAC. They left Jinja in 1991 and even there is evidence in the building of the EAC that they worked there. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR KARUBANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think most of these comments are talking about the same thing. First of all, I would like colleagues to note that the payment of gratuity and pension has been centralised. That is why in the statement, I kept referring to the Ministry of East African Community. I also mentioned that there is a full register of beneficiaries as of June 1977 for both categories: those who had clocked 10 years and those who were below. After that, of course, the number started reducing. I gave you the chronology of how Government has been paying.

Hon. Olanya said he wants a list. The list is available. Actually, we also have a book but it is a very big one and the copies are very few. At the Ministry of Public Service, we have a very big book. It is a full register. The Ministry of East African Affairs also has a register. You can check them. We can also give you the list of those who have been paid, for example, last financial year. The only problem is that when fraudsters access these lists, they will go and con some of these people. 

It would be better, if you know of any one complaining, that person comes to either the Ministry of Public Service or the Ministry of East African Affairs. If that is the case, our offices are open and we are there to serve.

MS KAMATEEKA: Honourable minister, you cannot tell us that the lists are so big that you cannot avail them to Parliament. For example, I used to sit on the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and these people used to come to the committee with the list of the people who had not been paid so that we could verify them. I would like to agree with you that the lists are there. Bring a copy and lay it at Table and then, we can accept that. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, is the honourable minister in order to say this list cannot be availed and instead, if the Members want them, they should go and check the register in the Ministry of East African Affairs?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, even if that point of order had not been raised, I was going to ask you to bring a copy of that list whether or not it is the size of this Parliament. We will squeeze it to be on the Table so that this information can be seen. (Laughter)

MR KARUBANGA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I will bring a copy and lay it here. However, it might be difficult to avail all the Members with copies.

This is about those who passed on. As I told you, we have a register. We can give you the list of those who have been paid, who are alive and the beneficiaries of the deceased who have been paid; that is, those who possess letters of administration. The information is there and I will lay it at Table. 

I think what hon. Abala said is the same thing. You said those people from your constituency have been coming to the Ministry of Public Service. However, at the Ministry of Public Service, it was only verification and it involved capturing of the biometric data that would be sent to the Ministry of East African Community for payment. If you have anybody who claims not to have been paid, we are ready to handle that case. I beg to submit. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I think the minister should share with us his problem because he is still new in that ministry. He does not know what has been going on before. In my hands here, is a letter written by a man called Salvatori Ovura Ogwal. The letter is dated 16 November 2018. That is ten days ago. This man has been in and out in telling the story how he goes to the office of the minister and the minister refers him to the commissioner. The commissioner also refers him to - it is a full story. 

The letter is written to the Speaker and that was less than ten days ago. Yet, you are telling this Parliament that there is nobody other than fraudsters who have not been paid. You are telling Parliament that everybody has been paid including those on the pension and lumpsum lists and that those who are claiming not to have been paid are fraudsters.

Can we say this man is the latest case? I will give you more. A former Member of Parliament called Abura who represented Moroto County then, which is now Alebtong, is now bedridden. He is also pursuing his payment which, up to now, has not been paid. It makes me feel more pain when you say everybody has been paid except those who are fraudsters. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to plead with the minister to find an avenue of reaching out. He can use us, Members of Parliament. I am willing to bring my lot in a bus, offload them in your office at your expense so that you pay them before they go back home. You are the one who have been holding their money.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, this matter should be handled with finality. I even have a former State Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Hon. Henry Okello Makmot has been coming to my office. These are not ordinary citizens of this country. They served and they are owed money.  We do not expect this kind of people to come and we classify them with the fraudsters you are talking about. 

Honourable minister, this is what you now have to do. There is a specific number we are talking about. The list of the people who were employed by the time the EAC was dissolved in 1977 should be there. I do not even know why you need repetition because they were people who were employed and there has to be a list of them. So, what do you need to verify? This process of verification is how you are including ghosts into the system. 

These people were employed. They had identity cards, which had their names. They had a list of people who were employed in Uganda by the EAC. Therefore, what is there to verify? Just pick that audit and deal with it and pay people so that people are paid. 

If you are saying it has been decentralised, can you prepare this together with the Ministry of East African Cooperation and come and tell us exactly what it is you are saying so that we handle it in finality because both the Speaker’s Office and my own office are receiving these people on a daily basis coming to say they are owed money.

Some of the monies are not much. In fact, the category of the people who are coming to my office, their total payment is about $16,000. Is that too much for this Government to raise that money and pay these people and they go home?

Therefore, honourable minister, this statement arose from a question; it is not your own ministerial statement. We would like you to come back with a ministerial statement when you are ready with all the information. Come and brief us when you are bringing that list. Come with a statement, lay that list and give us a statement so that we can comprehensively deal with this matter and conclude it such that it never comes again. Please, do that for us. Thank you very much.

Honourable members, we have done very well today. It is now 6.30 p.m. On the Order Paper, we have three Bills that have already been brought and we should have handled them today but we were not able to. On the business to follow, we have nine Bills. 

Clerk, I am directing you to issue those letters that I talked about earlier for three days before they can  make any- so these letters should go out tomorrow to all the persons in charge of these particular Bills that are pending; so that we can come with them on the Order Paper. (The Clerk rose.)

No, what I am saying is the three are already on the Order Paper. There are nine on business to follow. I am now directing that you issue a final letter to the persons with the exception of these three, which are already on the Paper; the nine and any other that is not yet on the Order Paper or business to follow, issue this letter to all the ministers in charge of these Bills and all the chairpersons in charge of these committees that these Bills will be activated on the Order Paper and they will be processed from next week. Therefore, that letter goes out tomorrow.


Honourable members, thank you very much. The House now stands adjourned to Tuesday at 2 o’clock. Thank you.

(House rose at 6.26 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 4 December 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 
