

Wednesday, 16 November 2016

Parliament met at 2.55 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, members of the Cabinet, honourable members of Parliament, I would like to welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. Please, join me in welcoming students of Ebenezer Christian High School, Bulenga represented by hon. Medard Ssegona and hon. Seninde. They are here to observe the proceedings. We also have ten staff from the parliaments of Ghana and Zimbabwe; you are welcome and thank you for promoting regional cooperation. (Applause)

Honourable members, during the recess, I carried out a number of activities. I will not report on all of them but I wanted to speak about my visit to Kasese District and to request that the Government fast tracks the establishment of an international airport there. I know it is part of the National Development Plan. Kasese is a meeting point of Virunga, Rwenzori, Queen Elizabeth and Kibale national parks. If we did what the Zimbabweans did and have flights directly into the national park, I think it would help.

I would like to ask the Rt Hon. Prime minister that although it is already in the plan, if it could be fast-tracked, it would make economic sense and create employment for our people.

I also would like to inform you that on 11 October 2016, we had the International Day of the Girl-Child. We hosted the children here in this Parliament and they held a session of their own. Among many things, they came up with some resolutions requesting for Government support, policy changes and I will be asking the members of the Uganda Women’s Parliamentary Association to formally lay the resolutions at the Table. However, in summary, they wanted Government to encourage maintenance and support of the girl-child education, improve the National Budget putting into consideration gender equity in favour of the girl-child to facilitate their education. Government should enact laws to protect the girl-child victims of sexual offences especially in their pursuit for justice in the courts of law.

I also received a petition from the East African Community Youth Ambassadors Platform; it is a group of youth allover East Africa who are working on issues of integration. Their main reason for coming was to request that a slot be created specifically for them in the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA) so that they can effectively represent the other youth. Therefore, I will be presenting that petition to the committee on Rules because in May next year, we shall be conducting elections for the EALA.

The third matter, on which I would like to communicate, is the petition by the Uganda Women’s Network. They came here to petition Government and Parliament to engender the composition of the Independent Electoral Commission. They noted that in the last term of the Electoral Commission, only two women out of the seven were commissioners and they say that, that was not in consonance with objective number six of the National Objectives and Principles of State Policy.

I passed on the petition to the head of state but I also wanted to inform you and the same will be laid here for consideration of this House. 

Thank you very much. A few Members had some issues to raise.

3.01
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Madam Speaker, mine is about the Kasese airport you talked about. In Kanungu, we equally have a small airfield and tourists use it but it is not of a good standard. Therefore, if we could look at it and combine it with that of Kasese and they are worked on together, maybe our tourists who come to see gorillas would enjoy it more. From seeing the climbing lions, they just fly to Kanungu and see the mountain gorillas. It is in Kayonza sub-county. I would, therefore, wish that you could also look at that. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, for representing the interests of your voters. 

3.03
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Madam Speaker, my matter concerns Energy for Rural Transformation Project (ERTP). I first thank you for allowing the Members of Parliament to go for recess in order to monitor Government programmes and projects, as well as performing our social obligations.

Madam Speaker, my matter concerns ERTP Phase III. You are all aware that the World Bank funds this project and it covers most districts in Uganda. This project covers 21 districts in the country.

However, as all Members are aware, most districts and even municipalities are not yet connected to the national grid. Kashongi County is among those counties that do not have even a single pole of electricity in this country.

The ERTP Phase III was planned to commence in early 2017 under the World Bank project. It is unfortunate that the funding was secured but it has been given a condition by World Bank that the Government of Uganda must first compensate people who will be affected by the line. 

This is going to affect the project implementation. This may not only affect those areas but the Government project as well. I would like to make a prayer that this Parliament compels Government so that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development can expedite the payment of the beneficiaries for this project to start soon and enhance the growth of Uganda. If we do not do that, it is going to affect what we normally call “kisanja hakuna mchezo” we must work hard to implement this project so that Ugandans are connected to the national grid. Thank you, Madam Speaker.


THE SPEAKER: We may have to establish whether we have budgeted for that money so that we can – minister, do you know whether we budgeted or appropriated that money?

3.06
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is true that we have a challenge of funds required to do compensation before these projects commence. For example, under rural electrification, we have a bill of Shs 400 billion for compensation alone. We need to reach a stage as leaders of this nation and make a statement to our people that probably, if you need this power you have to forego something, because the poles need to pass through your garden for you to access this power.

On the other hand, the good news that I would like to inform colleagues about is that now a decision has been made by Government, that all sub counties of Uganda in the next two years will be connected to the grid. 

We are looking for funds so that we connect the remaining 287 sub-counties. We have secured funds for the four remaining districts, and we are only remaining with 287 sub-counties. That will be done in the next two years. It is true we do not have the money for compensation but we are working around the clock to get it. 

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to know from the honourable minister if I can give an example of my district. You see poles passing through the sub-county but people are not connected. Do these poles in the sub-county mean connection when people do not have power? That is not enough - we need to see power beyond the poles. Thank you.

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The clarification is in regard to Amuru District. At the moment, the power line going to the district has been switched off because the line that is running is affecting somebody’s forest.

Besides it is being rationed, so there is still a very big problem between the rural electrification and the owner of the forest. This thing has to be rectified because people in Amuru District have stayed without power for a very long time. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you. According to our Vision 2040 and specifically, our manifesto for the next five years, our plan is to make sure that we increase access to electricity from now 20.5 per cent to 40 per cent. However, for us to do this, we must first of all get this power to where people are going to tap from. We are going to transmit this power to the sub-county through poles; you cannot get it there through any other means. 

After which we shall be tackling Phase II, we will be looking at whether it is possible to connect to the households because we know, for example, that it is very hard for the  poor in the village to pull power from the pole to their houses. Phase II will tackle how best we can take this power to the households. 

3.10
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South,Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning Lake Victoria. 

Madam Speaker, I draw your attention and that of the honourable members to the problem on Lake Victoria, currently. Two years back, billionaires, local and foreign were given space on Lake Victoria where they put their cages but almost 50 per cent of Lake Victoria was taken over. The little space on the water was also invaded by a team from Rwanda using small fishnets. As we speak today, they have even reached as far as Katosi.

I am here sent by the people from Mukono South who benefit from the lake, and I know many who are enjoying services from Lake Victoria are crying. Since we went to campaigns, there is no order on the lake. I, therefore, call upon the concerned ministry- (Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I can see honourable members of Parliament seated in the corridors of the chambers as if there is no more space to the extent that they are plucking out microphones because they are seated away from them. But when you look on both sides, there are empty seats with microphones that could be used properly. Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is the Speaker who is responsible for the sitting arrangements and the Speaker allowed them there. (Laughter)

MR MUYANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is against this background that the people of Mukono South and others have sent me to bring this as a matter of national importance. I have tried to call police but they have done nothing and I think this is the right forum to have this addressed. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, hon. Muyanja, for giving way. Madam Speaker, what the Member is raising is a matter of great public importance. The largest lake in the country and Africa has been privatised and taken over by individuals yet this is a national resource. Imagine, from his statement, that even people from as far as Rwanda are approaching Katosi to take away this lake as we look on!

Madam Speaker, if I heard it very well is Government aware that Lake victoria is held in trust on behalf of all Ugandans and by giving it to a few people to monopolise it; to put cages and own the lake, it is an affront to the Constitution of this country?

Can we get a statement from Government here and now about the position of privatising the lake? In 2006, it generated a lot of heat during the political campaigns and Government denied it, but now a Member is telling us that the lake is being privatised. People own it and it is inaccessible to the public.

Madam Speaker, fortunately, we have the Vice President as well as the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business and his deputy all seated in the House today. Before we proceed on any matter, can Government inform us as a country about the current status and position of Lake Victoria?

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Sometime back, it was even an editorial commentary in the New Vision. We had crater lakes in Kabarole given away to a private investor. These crater lakes have been serving the local communities for a very long time and now, these local people cannot access water. They cannot get fish because the private investor has not only taken over Lake Victoria but has also gone for the crater lakes. This could be the trend throughout the country if we do not arrest it as early as possible.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, the same trend is catching up with us in the Mountains of the Moon in Kasese District where Lake George is also being taken, and the salt lake industry is being privatised. The local people are worried about their only source of income. We want to know because this is the information on the ground and the people are not happy about it. They are worried that they are being denied their livelihood. 

As the statement on Lake Victoria comes on the Floor, we would also like to hear about these other places where people have issues of Government privatising the lakes from which the people derive their livelihoods. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, can we know whether we have the lake or not? (Laughter)

3.18
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, at least, I know that Lake Bunyonyi is in the hands of the people of Uganda. I take the comments made by colleagues seriously. It is true that wetlands, lakes and rivers are really the property of the people of Uganda and the Government of Uganda is in charge on behalf of the people of Uganda. 

I will, therefore, ask the minister responsible to make a statement tomorrow to respond to these concerns that have been raised by the honourable members.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We, therefore, expect a statement on Lake Victoria, Lake George and the crater lakes in the rift valley – on all the lakes? Okay, a statement on all the lakes in Uganda. Thank you.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, the issue of caging on Lake Victoria is not a new matter. I expected the Prime Minister to tell the country and Members of Parliament because it is not new in the House. It came up in 2006; didn’t it? It has been there and we have been talking about it. It is not something new that the Prime Minister tells us that somebody will come and give information later.

THE SPEAKER: No, some Members were not in this House at that time. They, therefore, need the information.

3.20
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a matter regarding the Chinese investors in the name of Tibet-Hima Industries Consortium, who apparently are supposed to be investing in the copper mining industry in Kilembe but the contrary is happening. We understand these people actually closed the shop at the mining factory because they were not able to pay the firm which they had sub-contracted to mine on their behalf and they got disagreements. 

Apparently, they are just operating the machine shop, which is fabricating the manhole covers in the foundry and they are recycling the Kilembe Mines scrap in the furnace. That is the business they are engaged in. They are also selling Uganda’s hydropower at an average of Shs 500 million per month. They are doing timber treatment and also collecting rent from the housing estate at Kilembe Mines. All these are besides the principal business that they came for, which is mining. 

Worse still, the working conditions are really appalling because people are going underground without protective gear. They do not have medical insurance and are paid Shs 6,000 per day. When somebody falls sick, they even deduct from that Shs 6,000. 

Therefore, I would like Government to interest itself in the matter of these investors - because I know that we are borrowing a lot of money from China, yet these Chinese are selling our own hydropower to us. We are borrowing from them the money that has come from our hydropower. It is the money that has come from the manholes covers, which they have fabricated from Kilembe using our own scrap as well as the income they are getting from the treatment of timber. As if that is not enough, they are even collecting rent from our own houses. 

Can Government, please, interest itself in this matter? If these people are not doing what they came to do, they should pack their bags and leave. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Did we donate to the Chinese, Prime Minister?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is true that some of the people who say that they are investors turn out not to be genuine investors. This information is going to be investigated and the Government will take the necessary actions to ensure that investors who come are, indeed, investing. This House will be appropriately informed.

3.23
MR GODFREY KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am here because I am the Shadow Minister for Regional and Foreign Affairs.

The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, as at 31st December 2015, is very clear. For those who have copies, look at Article 210 on Page 170. It provides that Parliament shall make laws regulating the UPDF, particularly regarding the deployment of troops outside Uganda.

Madam Speaker, as I speak now, the radios, especially in Congo that are shared with Uganda, cross-border radios or the airwaves, are relaying information to the effect that we have our troops in Congo,  Eastern DRC and in particular, Beni. About 5,000 of our troops have been cited at the Beni Airport. What are they doing there without parliamentary approval? Such illegal deployments are major causes of hostility between regional governments and it is the communities around borders that get affected the most. 

Madam Speaker, this is a critical matter of national importance that I ask Government to subject to further evaluation and investigation. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, are we there or not?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I am not aware. Contrary to what my colleague has said that Uganda has 5,000 troops stationed in Beni; I am not aware of that information. So, if you have any information, make it available and Government will follow it up.

3.32
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent public importance pertaining to the deplorable state that the people of Bududa are in now. We are normally synonymous with natural disaster. However, this time round, it is manmade.

Madam Speaker, Uganda Wildlife Authority(UWA) on 9 and 10 November 2016 , just last week – some staff who were trigger happy were shooting in the air, others with rudimentary pangas and slashers, were slashing crops that have matured and due for harvest in the sub counties of  Bumayoka and Manjiya in Bududa.

When the Woman Member of Parliament for Bududa and I had engagements with the leadership of Ugandan Wildlife Authority personnel, at the regional offices, little did we know that they were hoodwinking us in convening these meetings as the slashing of these mature crops was going on. The claim by UWA was that the “Wanaichi” have encroached on the national resource which we all value, Mt Elgon National Park.

Madam Speaker, far from the truth, the challenge of encroachment on that national park is the creation of UWA because they go extorting money from the citizens and the then, they allocate to them these plots to grow crops, which are not perennial. However, when these crops mature, they have perfected the art of going back again to extort money from the people. 

What they do is -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, intimidating actions of cutting gardens scare the rest of the farmers into contributing huge sums of money to UWA in order to save crops from being cut. We have had running battles between UWA and the community. This culminated into directives, courtesy of His Excellency the President to the Prime Minister, who should by now have had efforts in place to nip in the bud these disastrous actions. Madam Speaker, up to now, we are still waiting for the Office of the Prime Minister, which is deliberately dragging its feet to address this challenge.

UWA is not above the law and we would not want the people to be provoked to the extent that they take the law in their hands.  My prayer is that something drastic should be done by the relevant line ministries –(Interruption)

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I would like to give the august House is that there are bigger problems than even the gardens.
 
When you look at Bududa and the surroundings, the whole of Mt Elgon area; there was a plan of resettling people but up to now, these people have not been resettled. We have just been in a meeting with UWA. They are requesting Government to expedite the resettling of the people.  This was done long time ago when we had the calamity in Bududa, you all know but nothing has taken course. This is just a small symptom of a bigger problem.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in relation to UWA, Prime Minister, during the recess, there were two publications in the New Vision, that rangers killed some Ugandans in the national parks. First, they killed seven and later they killed another seven. It was a big headline. I do not know whether anybody has been arrested in relation to the killings of those civilians. We would like to know what is happening. Hon. Bafaki -

3.32
MR GORDON BAFAKI (NRM, Kazo County, Kiruhura):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a matter of national importance surrounding posting and transfer of head teachers.

Madam Speaker, whereas I appreciate the effort by the Ministry of Education and Sports in posting and transferring of head teachers, as has been done recently, you recall that some schools in Uganda are hard to reach and that Government has not gazetted some of these hard to reach schools in this category. Civil servants in such schools do not get the 30 per cent special allowance for hard to reach schools but are paid on standard rates of the easy to reach schools. 

Madam Speaker, before these new postings of head teachers, many schools had caretakers acting as head teachers. Selection of many of these caretakers is done in consultation with and in recommendation of the school governing bodies. Not only that, some caretakers have been proved to be working effectively and efficiently towards the achievement of goals of these schools.

Madam Speaker, our Government schools have different foundation bodies and, therefore, they have different governing bodies. Some are church founded, mosques and others founded by the communities. 

Madam Speaker, I request the Minister of Education and Sports to clarify on the following issues of national importance:

    1. Who is a caretaker?
    2. Was the recent posting and transfer of head teachers done in conformity with interest of the school governing bodies?
    3. What are the criteria of a caretaker to become a substantive head teacher?

Madam Speaker, you recall that the Education Service Commission Regulation 2012, Statutory Instrument 51(22)(4), states “Where an acting appointment has been authorised by the Commission,  the acting appointment shall be for a period not exceeding six months, after which the acting officer should be considered a substantive appointment to the post.” 

Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR BAFAKI: Madam Speaker, allow me submit before the House that many Ugandan civil servants have been serving in acting positions for a long time. To my surprise, they have not been given the chance to be substantive head teachers. I have a complaint from one head teacher of a school in my county. Actually, in this category, even after being recommended by the Permanent Secretary for accelerated promotion, nothing has been done. However, the ministry has opted, instead, to transfer him without even consulting the Board of Directors. It is a very dangerous trend.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is better if you write to the minister with the details: the name of the person, the school and the sub-county so that they can answer. You identify the person you would like them to help you with.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE UGANDA CANCER INSTITUTE BILL

3.36
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to report back, following instructions from the august House given to me yesterday, 15 November 2016, concerning the assent by the President to the Uganda Cancer Institute Bill, 2016. I have had consultation with His Excellency the President and I would like to inform this august House that the Bill will be returned before the end of this week. That is the report, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Are you saying that the Act will be in our hands by the end of the week? 

DR RUGUNDA: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. The chairperson of the Committee on Health should take note. The Act should be here by the end of the week.

MR SSEWUNGU: Procedure, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: On what?

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, the procedural matter I am raising is on the previous matter we had here from hon. Margaret Rwabushaija about Bridge schools. I remember vividly that the Member raised matters concerning Bridge International Schools. 

Madam Speaker, after the matter was raised here, no due diligence was carried out. What is happening now is, a ministry official visits a school and tells the head teacher that the school needs to be closed. The head teacher would inform the Commissioner that they had no letter in connection with that matter and that is when the Commissioner hands over the letter to the school. 

Madam Speaker, the issue of these schools was raised in this House but there is a problem about them. The news is running everywhere in the country. When you are going to close a school, there are steps you follow.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are in breach of our rules. You are not supposed to bring this matter in the same session. We have had a debate here on this matter. If you like, you can make a formal motion to reopen the debate.

MR SSEWUNGU: I am on procedure, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: No, you make a formal motion to reopen the matter. We had a debate here and made resolutions. You cannot discuss it again in the same session. That is what our rules say.

MR SSEWUNGU: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR KASIBANTE: Procedure, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Procedure on what? (Laughter)

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker, I raised a very important matter of national importance yesterday, regarding the brutality that is being meted on the street vendors in Kampala and the Government never responded to it. Even yesterday, as I was raising it, the people were being harassed. There is a lot of uncertainty as far as the issue is concerned. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can we direct the Minister for Kampala to come and answer the question raised yesterday about the treatment of the vendors in Kampala.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO US $210.0 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK (IDB) TO FINANCE THE UPGRADING OF THE RWEKUNYE-APAC-LIRA-ACHOLIBUR ROAD PROJECT

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay proposal to borrow up to $ 210 million from the Islamic Development Bank to finance the upgrading of Rwekunye-Apac-Lira Road Project.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, the proposal is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO GUARANTEE LINES OF CREDIT US $10.0 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK (IsDB) AND  US $ 16 MILLION FROM THE ARAB BANK FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN AFRICA (BADEA) FOR LINES OF CREDIT TO UGANDA DEVELOPMENT BANK (UDBL)

3.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati):  Madam Speaker, I wish to lay a proposal for Government to guarantee lines of credit $ 10 million from the Islamic Development Bank and $ 16 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development for lines of credit to Uganda Development Bank Limited.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SDR 17.1 MILLION (US $24 MILLION EQUIVALENT) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO SUPPORT EASTERN AND SOUTHERN AFRICA HIGHER EDUCATION CENTRES OF EXCELLENCE PROJECT

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati):  Madam Speaker, I wish to lay a proposal from Government to borrow $ 24 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank to support Eastern and Southern Africa Higher Education Centres of Excellence Project.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SDR 78.5 MILLION (US $110.0 MILLION EQUIVALENT) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO SUPPORT THE UGANDA REPRODUCTIVE, MATERNAL AND CHILD HEALTH SERVICES IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I would like to lay a proposal of Government to borrow $ 110 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank to support the Uganda Reproductive, Maternal and Child Health Services Improvement Project in Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

REPORTS OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL FOR VALUE FOR MONEY ON URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE COMPONENT OF THE UGANDA SUPPORT TO MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT (USMID) PROGRAMME AND SELECTED NON USMID INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Bahati, can you assist and lay these papers, please?

3.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati):  Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table the reports of the Auditor- General for Value for Money on the Urban Infrastructure Component of the Uganda Support Project to Municipal Infrastructure Development Programme for the following selected projects:

    1. Fort Portal Municipal Council for the financial year 2013/2014 and 2014/2015
    2. Hoima Municipal Council for the financial year 2013/2014 and 2014/2015
    3. Arua Municipal Council for the financial year 2013/2014 and 2014/2015
    4. Lira Municipal Council for the financial year 2013/2014 and 2014/2015
    5. Gulu Municipal Council for the financial year 2013/2014 and 2014/2015
    6. Jinja Municipal Council for the financial years 2013/2014 and 2014/2015, 
    7. Kabale Municipal Council for the financial years 2013/2014 and 2014/2015, 
    8. Soroti Municipal Council for financial years 2013/2014 and 2014/2015
    9. Mbale Municipal Council for financial years 2013/2014 and 2014/2015
    10. Tororo Municipal Council for financial years 2013/2014 and 2014/2015
    11. Mbarara Municipal Council for financial years 2013/2014 and 2014/2015
    12. Entebbe Municipal Council for financial years 2013/2014 and 2014/2015
    13. Moroto Municipal Council for financial years 2013/2014 and 2014/2015
    14. Masaka Municipal Council for financial years ended 2013/2014 and 2014/2015. 

I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. All those are sent to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for perusal and report back.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

3.47
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Under Article 6 of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, as amended, the official language of Uganda is English and the second official language is Kiswahili. May I, therefore, know from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister what action he is going to take on the government ministries, departments and agencies that are codenaming national campaign messages in other languages? I can give examples: “Tulambule”, “Tulumbe” - and yet Article 6 of the Constitution is clear; it should either be in English or Kiswahili – (Laughter) 

3.48
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, I agree with my brother, hon. Obua, that the official language is English and the second language is Kiswahili. However, it is also true to say that the purpose of language must be to communicate to the people. Therefore, while accepting that constitutional position, it is also right that Government departments, agencies and any entity that may wish to communicate can use other forms of communication and languages in order to ensure that the people targeted get the messages.

3.49
MR JAMES NIRINGIYIMANA (NRM, Kinkinzi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister about the charges for the connections of power in case one has a service pole. We have many service providers, like UMEME and Ferdsault in Uganda that are licensed and instituted by the Government to provide those services. However, while UMEME is connecting the Ugandans in some areas at Shs 98,000 Ferdsault in its areas of service like in Kanungu where I come from, Kisoro, Rukungiri and some other areas is connecting people at Shs 620,000 when the Government of Uganda has provided a service pole.

Hon. Prime Minister, when is the Government harmonising those charges because they are all Ugandans under the same arrangement? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the operators of power distribution have an agreement with Government. I wouldn’t have expected such described disparity between Umeme and some of the people and companies concerned. If that is the case, it is a matter that Government will take up and ensure that this gross described disparity is addressed.

3.51
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister is about the Uganda Wildlife Authority conflict and its management. I would like to find out when Government will implement the presidential directive of degazzeting the boundaries at Mt Elgon National Park and how far Government has gone on the Maluku resolution. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you attended that meeting; what progress has Government made since then to resolve that conflict between the communities and the Uganda Wildlife Authority? This is also in a bid to protect our environment. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, one of the main problems in the Elgon region stretching all over the Elgon mountain has been complete visible demarcation of the boundary between the national park and the wanaichi. Last week, we had a meeting involving some of the leaders from the Mt Elgon region and we also involved the leadership of UWA. We agreed that there was going to be more expeditious demarcation of the boundaries and that should be able to remove the cause of the problems and misunderstandings.

3.53
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, about two months ago, the President directed that no foreigners should continue to involve in retail business and the Prime Minister re-echoed the same directive. I would like to know what steps Government is taking to weed out these foreigners – the so-called investors. 

What steps is Government taking to get rid of these scavengers who are scavenging on the people with small businesses who are suffering? We would like to know the guidelines and practical steps which should be published to all Ugandans to know that these people are being weeded out. If they are investors, they should be investors. I would like to know, Mr Prime Minister. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the responsible departments of Government; trade, immigration and the like have been advised to ensure that the law is passed so that genuine investors are protected and quack investors are indeed not allowed to masquerade. 

3.54
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to ask the Prime Minister a simple but very important question about Ngora Water Project. It has become a story. As we talk, there is a water crisis in Ngora, Nyero and Kumi Municipality. For a long time, we have been told that we are waiting for the signing of an agreement on this water project with the World Bank but it is now almost six months with no proper answer from Government.

I wish to ask the Prime Minister when we are starting this project because we have a water crisis in Ngora. I thank you so much.

DR RUGUNDA: The honourable member is advised to make specific contact with the minister in charge of water to get the specific details of the project.

3.56
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am very grateful to the Government because Kanungu has greatly benefited from the tree seedlings programme. However, it is unfortunate that our people have not received the money for the tree seedlings that they supplied about a year ago.

It has also been unfortunate of recent that some of them are now being taken to prison. There are four people imprisoned so far. 

Can the Prime Minister help us expedite the process and make ready the payments of these suppliers so that they are able to pay their loans in the bank and also pay school fees for their children? I thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: This matter is very well known to Government, which has already instructed NAADS through the agriculture minister to ensure that all verified tea seedlings are paid for. The programme for payment is supposed to be immediate.

3.58
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda North County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I went to a forex bureau two weeks ago and exchanged the dollar at Shs 3,300. A week later, I exchanged the dollar for Shs3,500 and then yesterday, I exchanged at Shs3,580. This afternoon, I have exchanged the dollar at Shs3,620 – this is very worrying for this economy.

Mr Prime Minister, is Bank of Uganda still in charge of managing the exchange rate in this country? I thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Bank of Uganda is definitely in charge –(Laughter) - but the Bank of Uganda cannot artificially fix the exchange rate. This depends on exactly what we were discussing yesterday when the finance minister presented his paper on the state of the national economy. 

The pressure on the shilling is a reflection of the various challenges that the economy is facing. Many colleagues made good proposals but as the finance minister said, the answer is to ensure that we increase exports so that we can get more dollars, add value and export what will bring dollars into the country. 

Therefore, strengthening the economy will make you exchange the dollar perhaps at Shs 3,000 next year. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Ojara Okin comes, I would like to announce that Parliament is conducting training for the MPs on the use of iPads at the ICT Resource Centre at Development House. The training started on Monday and will end on the 25th. Honourable members are urged to participate in the training to acquire all the necessary knowledge.

4.01
MR OJARA OKIN (Independent, Chua West County, Kitgum): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I have one question for the Prime Minister. 

The Prime Minister is aware that in 1999, Uganda signed the Rome Statute in which they agreed to actively participate and abide by the statute providing for the International Criminal Court.

There has recently been a heated debate in the African Union where governments that signed the Rome Statute threatened to withdraw from the ICC and South Africa, Namibia and Zambia are examples. 

We would like to know from the Prime Minister about the position of Uganda as far as their involvement with the ICC is concerned. If Uganda is going to withdraw, what is going to happen to the Dominic Ongwen case before the ICC? Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is true that Uganda is a founder member of the ICC and it is also true that Uganda has been concerned about the conduct of affairs by the ICC. 

Uganda and her sister African countries under the umbrella of the AU, is reviewing its position with regard to ICC. Uganda’s position will be the collective position that we, as African countries, will take on the matter. With regard to details of the cases, the Attorney-General will be able to tell us how to handle it.

4.03
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Can the Prime Minister tell us about the ratio of Uganda’s debt today vis-a-vis the GDP? (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: The Minister for Finance yesterday presented an exhaustive paper which had many significant figures and ratios that describe the performance of Uganda with regard to debt and other issues.

I will not give you the numbers off hand because I will need to consult the responsible minister so that the figure that I give you is factual and authoritative.

4.04
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Mr Prime Minister, aware that wildlife affects the communities that surround game parks negatively in terms of destruction of crops and lives, among others, and also aware that there is a gap in the Wildlife Act, when is Government coming with an amendment to that Act to provide for compensation of victims?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I do not have specific information as to when that amendment is coming because Cabinet has not discussed it, to the best of my knowledge. 

However, this is a matter that can be pursued with the minister responsible.

4.05
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, there is crop failure for the last two seasons in very many areas of the country. There is already famine in some communities and citizens of Uganda are dying. Many years after independence, tax collection is going down; we do not seem to see any stance of an early warning from Government; it is business as usual. We see hand-outs in some places when others are dying of hunger. 

What Government programme do you have to avert this glaring and looming disaster because it seems the earliest we shall get a good crop will be next year in July. What plan does Government have in form of a proactive measure to ensure that Ugandans do not face a human disaster? 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, as you may recall, only yesterday, you tasked Government to come with a comprehensive statement on issues of strategic tasks and plans of ensuring food security in the country; and we are going to do this on Thursday, as you directed. 

A team of ministers responsible and the Minister for Relief and Disaster Preparedness are already working on the requisite statement. It is not true that Government has just been seated; far from it. Actually, if you want, H.E the President is leading the campaign to sensitise the people of Uganda on improved methods of agriculture in order to produce more food. 

Secondly, ministers have been in different parts of the country and tomorrow, another team of political leaders and technical leaders are being launched to go out to the districts to explain to the wanainchi the methods of improving agriculture. 

It is true there have been limited supplies of food in some areas where people are very desperate. We know that this is a very short term measure – it is not the solution. It is nevertheless necessary that some resuscitation in terms of food takes place so that people can survive in order to be able to produce more. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Model First Funders School, Kanungu District represented by hon. Karungi and hon. Baryomunsi.

Can you stand up? There they are from Kanungu. (Applause) 

Also join me in welcoming students and teachers of Trinity High School Lugaga Kabulasoke in Gomba represented by hon. Rwakoojo and hon. Nayebale. You are welcome. (Applause)

4.09
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. One time in this House, we had an extensive discussion on gambling machines in our rural communities. Some local governments even took an initiative and followed up on what we discussed here. Unfortunately, in some cases, and I am speaking for Nebbi District, we have Indians who have persisted saying they have the licence to operate these machines in our rural communities. 

I would like to ask the Prime Minister what Government is doing to strengthen the local governments to make sure that these machines are removed from the rural communities. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the honourable member’s concern is widely shared in this House and definitely in Cabinet. You may be interested to know that this has also been a matter of discussion by Cabinet, by coincidence, only this morning. The Minister of Finance has been tasked to review this problem and come out with concrete proposals for consideration on how to provide a remedy. 

4.10
MS OLIVER KATWESIGYE (Independent, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, on 20 July, you instructed the Minister of Finance to follow up on the matter of the tea factory that was pledged by His Excellency to the farmers of Buhweju. You told them to follow up the matter and report to us. 

Up to now, they have not reported to us and we do not have any information on that matter. I went ahead to write to them but I have not received any information. Mr Prime Minister, do you have any information for us?

DR RUGUNDA: Honourable member, I share your concern. I have further instructed the Minister of Finance –(Laughter)– he will give you and the House information about the matter tomorrow. 

4.12
MR REAGAN OKUMU (Independent, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise an issue with the Prime Minister concerning setting standards and failing to fulfil them. Government set standards for service delivery but at the end of the day, they undermined those standards which they put in place. 

For example, Madam Speaker, I have four areas in view. First, Government set standards for local governments to have a specific number of staff but in turn, Government failed to provide the necessary resources for the local governments to recruit staff. Most local governments in Uganda now are operating below 50 per cent of the staffing they should have.

Secondly, Government set standards in education giving the classroom pupil ratio, teacher ratio, housing ratio – this was set by the Ministry of Education. As we speak, in the country side, the local governments, in some cases, have a 1:155 toilet student ratio. Classrooms are at a ratio of 1:90; 1:140 and that ratio is too high. 

The third area is health; Government still set standards as to what should be provided at every health centre – health centres II and health centres III. In turn, they have failed to provide these services to the local government. Year in, year out, the Auditor-General raises concerns blaming local governments for not having met the standards and yet the centre has not provided the resources. 

The fourth and the last question to the Prime Minister is that it is important to have a good relationship especially with the people who support us in areas of service delivery. The United States is a super power and they have a big contribution to Uganda. They have had a major election but to date, we have not heard our Government congratulate Mr Trump for having won the election. Is that – 

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, our standards are going down; that is not how we ask questions. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I think I should start with Trump. I think Uganda was one of the first countries to congratulate Trump on his election. 

Secondly, the general point that hon. Reagan Okumu has made about Government setting standards and not fulfilling them – actually Government set standards with the intention to obviously fulfil them. However, as you very well know, sometimes resources do not come as expected and consequently, resources may not, in some areas, reach as was planned and therefore service delivery may be undermined.

Resources are just one aspect but there are a number of other parameters, which I will not go into now. Nevertheless, the point is well taken and Government will endeavour to ensure that the targets set are indeed fulfilled. 

4.16
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my question to you is on e-banking, especially mobile money services. To what extent do you cater for Ugandans who may lose money? For example, if a Ugandan has mobile money on his phone and he or she died with the money still on the phone – a Ugandan who loses his phone with mobile money still on the phone and does not claim for the same sim-card, to what extent do you make sure that such monies remain in the economy and do not just vanish into thin air?

DR RUGUNDA: Well, I think hon. Baryayanga is assuming rather too much about my expertise in mobile money. (Laughter) Suffice it to say that the Bank of Uganda is in charge and is regulating this sector.

4.17
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In 2007, during CHOGM, Government constructed buildings, which have remained incomplete; they have never been handed over to local governments. In Masindi, we have such a structure. Actually we have been waiting for the Government to hand over that structure – if at all it was the Government that constructed it. 

I would like to find out from the Prime Minister: what plans do you have for those buildings because they were not within the district local government plan.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is quite interesting that there was a sub-centre of CHOGM in Masindi. I was not aware –(Laughter)- but hon. Bintu and I and other responsible government officials can review that matter and see the next correct step to take.

4.19
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In 2011, when the Mityana and Masaka highways were about to be constructed, land titles were taken away from the landlords with land along those roads. The roads were constructed and completed. Some years have now passed but landlords have not gotten back their land titles; some have died while those still alive cannot even access loans from banks. When will the Government give back titles to the land owners? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nakawunde, they were compensated but their title deeds have not come; is that what you are asking? 

MS NAKAWUNDE: Yes, they were compensated and the land titles taken but they have never returned them.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I am glad that the wanainchi were paid and the Ministry of Lands and the Ministry of Works should expeditiously ensure that the wanainchi recover their land titles.

4.20
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, two months ago, I asked about the fate of the LC I elections in the country. As I speak, in the villages all over the country, there are some cases that are put to this level that were being handled by these LC I authorities.

In Lugazi Municipality, I have a land case where the former First Lady, Miria Obote, is threatening to displace over 200 families in three villages and these issues would be handled by the LCs I. However, you can go to a village and nobody is ready to give first-hand information. What is the fate of the LC I elections?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, of course the issue of land and evictions has come fairly often to this House, rightly so because it is a common problem. I think it is our duty to ensure that the law takes it course and that we sensitise the population about their rights. However, my advice is that, let the law be followed to ensure that the case in Lugazi area is resolved.

THE SPEAKER: No, Prime Minister, that was subsidiary; the major one is: When will the elections be?

DR RUGUNDA: Yes, that is true; I did announce in this House about two months ago that LC I elections will be held in January. That position still stands.

4.22
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is good that the Prime Minister is ending on that note. In fact, I am rising on the point of – the law requires the Electoral Commission commissioners to be appointed three months before the expiry of the commission. Now that by tomorrow, Dr Kiggundu and group will be vacating office, when is Government appointing new electoral commissioners? This is because if we are to handle elections in January, we do not have electoral commissioners as of tomorrow. When are you appointing the new electoral commissioners?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I expect the Electoral Commission to be appointed any time now. (Laughter)

4.23
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as a citizen of this country and a Member of Parliament, I am pleased with the statement of Uganda Government on the construction of the Standard Gauge Railway. My question is about the former River Nile transport system from Namasagali to Masindi Port on the Nile to Butyaba to Panyimur, Rhino Camp, Obongi to Nimule.

The plan of the Republic of Uganda and the East African countries is to extend the railway line to South Sudan, from the east (Tororo) via Gulu, Nimule to Juba; and remembering that the former East African Railways that Harbour Network of Railways operated was partly augmented by the Nile water transport system, which I described here. What is the programme of the Government of the Republic of Uganda to help the people in the Nile Valley, beginning from Kamuli through the Nile, including Obongi up to Nimule? What are you doing about the Nile Valley, Rt Hon. Prime Minister? Are you going to provide any alternative for this part of the essential economy? 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the connection between Kamuli and Obongi has not been forgotten by Government. In fact, as you know, Government has already provided one or two ferries to ensure that the people travel on Lake Kyoga. The critical idea is to modernise water, road and railway transport. As we do this, all the systems may be improved and others may give way. The most important point here is that the wanainchi should have affordable and efficient means of transportation. 

4.26
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Section 2 of the Prisons Earning Rate, Rules 2001 indicate that Grade A labourers in the prisons (the skilled) get Shs 500 a day. Grade B (semiskilled) get Shs 250 a day and then Grade C (the casual labourers) get Shs 100 a day. 

I am aware that these monies are actually very instrumental in helping our prisoners as they reform to help their families, but this money is very little. The question I have for you is: within what timeframe are we revoking this section to help the prisoners earn a better pay than what is already there? I thank you.  

DR RUGUNDA: I am not aware of any process that is reviewing this. However, the point is what is being considered and the Minister of Internal Affairs will reveal the matter. 

4.28
MR GODFREY WATENGA: (Independent, Lutseshe County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Following the Government decentralisation system, there were a number of sub counties that were created. Up to now, these sub counties do not have operational offices. A case study was carried out in Bududa District where sub county workers were locked out by the land lords because of failure to pay rent. I am, therefore, seeking clarity from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister on the plans Government has on this matter. Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I agree with the honourable member. It is true that this matter has not been adequately addressed and it is a question of cash flow issues. As resources become available, these areas will be addressed so that they are properly housed. 

4.29
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what currently seems to be a very serious problem is the crisis caused by climate change, which is affecting the livelihood in Uganda. For quite a number of years, Government has been talking about responding to this matter in a more appropriate manner. Can I be given an answer as to why Government has not undertaken the soil analysis in Uganda so that we finally find a modest way of responding to the food crisis in Uganda, which is deep climate change? 

Two, prior to our coming here, the Office of the Prime Minister was distributing tractors. Can I know what policy is in place over the usage of these tractors because they are being personalised? The other day when we met in the Office of the Prime Minister, they said the tractors belong to the Prime Minister and the books of accounts were presented but there are no tractors. We cannot see the operations. This is the time we receive very little rain and we need capacity to open land so that we abstract the calamity on the ground. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, on the question of soil studies, the country has a reasonable picture and capacity of knowing the soil qualities in different parts of the country. That is the basis on which Government has been through the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) and others have been advising. 

On the question of tractors; it is true tractors were given out a year or two ago through the Office of the Prime Minister by Government mainly to communities that had been affected by the war and other conflict situations. This was to enable the communities utilise those tractors to increase production. We have received some reports and problems of management and already some of our members of staff have intervened in those situations. We will, therefore, appreciate getting more specific information so that we deal with that situation.

4.32
MR GEORGE WILSON KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Madam Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. I have two concerns which always perturb my mind. One is the connection from Kawengo Landing Site to Apac District. That connection desires a ferry. I do not know whether Government has ever thought about it. I would like to interest the Prime Minister and the entire Government in that connection because it is the shortest connection to the North from the centre. 

My friend from Obongi also mentioned the concern of developing the central area of this country by constructing a road from Nakasongola through Bbaale - my constituency, Kamuli, Kaliro up to Pallisa. I would like to interest Government in this connection because at the moment, there is only one outlet to the east from the centre. If you do not pass through River Nile, then you do not have an alternative route to use. 

I would, therefore, love to interest Government into that connection to look at the possibility of connecting Nakasongola – Bbaale - Kamuli to Pallisa and eventually to Mbale. Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, those are good points. I think all of us are interested in the shortest route to the north from the centre. I do not see the Minister of Works and Transport here but definitely with this discovery, I will be able to ask the Minister of Works and Transport to explore this shortest connection, which has been ignored in the past.  

Another route to the east; again this requires further exploration and study so that if there is a positive response from the studies, Government can take the requisite action. 

4.34
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have had a serious drought in western Uganda. As a result, people have realised that tree planting is very important. As of today, I have enormous requests for tree seedlings from our people but I cannot trace any viable quantities of tree seedlings. What can we do as Government? What Government plans are in place to ensure that we provide communities with enough tree seedlings to cover the available areas? Secondly, what is the state of the tree fund? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Please allow me to add onto what hon. Ngabirano has said; can we know about the national tree planting day?

DR RUGUNDA: Yes, I agree with the Speaker and hon. Ngabirano. Tree planting is very important and we must do it. In fact, Government will have to spend some money, specifically to assist people with seedlings. At the moment, the expenditure on seedlings has been focusing on perennial crops like coffee, tea and cocoa, among others. However, I think this point you have raised is a valid one. 

Nevertheless, I would like to encourage colleagues - we can really generate seed beds ourselves instead of always relying on the centre to provide. There are some tree seedlings that we can produce locally, perhaps using our forestry officers and other people, to be able to encourage the population to produce so that we can accelerate tree planting.

On the question of a tree planting day, I know the minister responsible has been considering this matter, but it is right that Parliament and the country should be informed about this. Therefore, I will ask the minister responsible for forestry, environment and water to make a statement on the matter.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have exceeded 45 minutes. However, in that time, we have asked only 25 questions. We borrowed this from the House of Commons but they use the 45 minutes to ask 60 questions, and they are all answered. The problem with us here is that we have preambles; we first build a foundation and then take five minutes to ask the question.

I would like to ask the Clerk to upload the House of Commons Prime Minister’s Question Time today and send it to the Members’ iPads, so that they can see how fast the questions are asked, so that we reduce on preambles and have more Members ask questions. If you take five minutes to submit your question, you need to know that you are taking other people’s time. Therefore, I would like the Clerk to send today’s question time in the House of Commons to the Members’ iPads so that they can see how the whole thing works. It will help us and give more Members opportunities. 

4.38
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for labouring to inform the country using Members’ questions. However, Madam Speaker, there are so many issues that keep coming up here during the Prime Minister’s Question Time and it is unfortunate that the Prime Minister just casually responds to matters. The Prime Minister says that the ministers responsible should take charge but we see no ministers coming to respond to these questions. 

I do not know how long Members of Parliament will keep airing out their views and concerns from the public when nobody seems to be taking serious interest in these matters. May I just take this opportunity to remind the Prime Minister that when we were closing Parliament, during the Prime Minister’s Question Time on 5 October, there were so many undertakings that the Prime Minister made and he assured us that the responsible ministers would brief Parliament when we come back from recess. I am not surprised that some of those questions are still coming up because Members need answers. 

The issue that was raised by an honourable member about the International Criminal Court (ICC) was one of the issues that we raised here and you said that you were coming with a statement on the Floor of Parliament. Today, it is the same question that has been asked and the response is still “a statement”. The issue is that we are considering withdrawing from the ICC and yet we have cases there. What will the fate of the cases and the people that we took there be when as a country we pull out of the same court? You said that we would have a brief.

I would also like to remind you about another issue that was brought up still on the same day. Ugandans wanted to know the criteria used in coming up with a national candidate to these international bodies and I gave a very elaborate background to that matter. You committed that the minister in charge would come and give Ugandans information in regard to the issue. However, to date we have not had anybody coming up with any statement.

There was an issue that regards our performance at the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) and the strategic goals of Uganda, so that Ugandans can benefit from it. You said that you were going to tell the minister to come and brief Ugandans on how we are doing as country in regard to AGOA and the specific strategic goals that Ugandans can attain. Some of these issues break the spirit of some Members to keep asking questions. 

A Member asked a very serious question, Rt Hon. Speaker, about the economy and the interest rates. We just brushed it off and left it go. We do not know that the higher the exchange rate goes, the greater the implication on the economy and welfare of your people. It has an implication on the way of life of our people. You just said that the economy is healthy and yet everybody is aware that as a country, we are not doing well. I am not surprised that there is therefore an outcry from the entire population of people dying of hunger. We needed something better - at least a statement telling us what measures we are taking as a country to ensure that we avert the situation of the interest rates.

We also asked - I think this will be able to help us answer the question about the disasters that we are having now and the meagre resources. You even committed Government to come up with a statement on the status of the Contingency Fund. If we find out the status of the Contingency Fund, we will then be in a position to know whether the country will be able to respond to the disasters that we are having.

Look at that famine disaster that we are experiencing as a country! I heard that many people in Isingiro are now calling the posho that they are being given, “the Ecweru cup of posho”. They decided to even go to the subcounty headquarters to cook and eat it from there. We are having cries from Teso, the northern region and other parts of the west. As a country, how prepared are we? 

Remember, the Prime Minister had said that they were coming back with information as soon as we return from recess. We have waited; we thought that we would see this come up as the first issue to welcome us from recess, but there is nothing apart from the borrowing that we are still going on with.

Madam Speaker, the issue of the Electoral Commission is not something that we just have to talk about and it ends there. The Prime Minister has just assured us and has been assuring us that by January, we shall be having elections of LCI chairpersons. Kiggundu and his commission have taken 14 years without fixing the issue of elections of LCI chairpersons. Their term is expiring tomorrow. For now, we do not have any commissioners. I wonder how ready we shall be with a commission which is not yet in place. Do you think that we can fix it tomorrow or the other day and then they carry out the elections of LCI chairpersons by January?

Some of us here are in court with pending election cases and we are expecting by-elections very soon. Who is going to save the country in ensuring that these elections are carried out in a free and fair atmosphere, with a commission that will have been appointed maybe three days to the election? We should look at these issues as a country. When people go into an election with an electoral commission that is not fully prepared and they mess around with an election, there are people who take it as a matter of life and death and we might see chaos coming out of this.

Therefore, as a country, let Ugandans know how this electoral commission will be put in place and whether this time we are going to see a really independent Electoral Commission.

Madam Speaker, the other issue is the one that hon. Reagan Okumu raised, the issue to do with service delivery and the human resource that we have at our local governments. As a government, we are hurrying to create more administrative units that are sucking a lot of money from Government and therefore little is done on service delivery. If we think that we do not have enough resources to equip the few districts that we have - I will call them few - why are we hurrying to create more when we cannot even equip the ones that we have in terms of human resource?

Human resource has a direct bearing on service delivery. May I ask that for purposes of giving our people real services, we go slowly on creating more administrative units. This is because the more we create, the higher the cost of administration goes and this affects the cost of service delivery?

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the President for his campaign for improved methods of farming in terms of irrigation. However, as a country, as we go towards becoming a middle-income country-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, I am not sure of what is going on. I do not know whether you are opening the Prime Minister’s Question Time again for him to answer more questions.

MS KIIZA: I am just wrapping up these issues, summing them up-

THE SPEAKER: What will happen after that? Will he come and speak to them?

MS KIIZA: I am doing this so that he takes more interest in knowing that these are matters of serious importance. As I said at the beginning, these are matters of a serious nature but they are swept under the carpet.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that I thank the President for that campaign. However, as we go towards a middle-income economy, I wonder whether the jerrycan irrigation scheme will take the 72 per cent of the people who are employed by agriculture to a middle-income economy. We should be talking about mechanizing of agriculture so that we talk about real modernization of agriculture. This has been a Government plan for the Modernisation of Agriculture (PMA). However, in advancing the PMA, we are still going back towards the Stone Age era. I really do not know whether as a country we are going to save our population with the jerrycan irrigation scheme.

I would like to advise the Prime Minister to talk to the President of the Republic of Uganda to reconsider the position of using irrigation through jerrycans. He should possibly consider using the natural resources that we are endowed with, like the rivers, to create large scale irrigation schemes that can help our people to get out of poverty.

Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Those who were asking whether I am also asking the Prime Minister questions, you should read Rule 34(5). It will tell you under which circumstances I arose to speak on these matters. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Before the Prime Minister comes up, I want for the record to inform the country that there is one serving member of the electoral commission. Therefore, it is not entirely empty, and she is a lady.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that very timely information on the electoral commission.

Madam Speaker, I want to make a few comments on what my sister, the Leader of the Opposition, has said. I do not think it is fair to castigate the honourable ministers for not responding to issues I talked about as we were going for recess and we only reopened yesterday. The ministers will come to respond to the issues as we promised.

Secondly, I have nothing to add to the issue of ICC. This is because I would like to have an authoritative statement from the Attorney-General of Uganda who is currently out of the country.

Thirdly, President Museveni has been championing modernization of agriculture and transformation. You very well know Mubuku in Kasese District is one of the best irrigation schemes. I thought my sister would start with that as a modern way of irrigation but she went straight to the jerrycan. Let us be fair and objective when we are talking about these matters. 

President Museveni was in Kabale and he showed the whole country solar powered irrigation by the peasants -(Interjection)- That is true! More bulk water pumping and solar irrigation schemes are coming up, championed by Government and by the President- (Interjection) - This is kisanja hakuna muchezo and transformation.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of the Contingency Fund, as you very well know this budget did not provide for contingency funding and as a result, there has been a shortage of resources to purchase emergency food. However, Government will ensure, and Parliament should ensure, that contingency funds are part and partial of this coming budget.

On the last couple of comments, I did not take the issue of the exchange rate lightly; it is very important. I did not think that I should bother this august House with another long statement after the honourable minister responsible for finance yesterday spent so much time giving one. Let me also say that the exchange rate is just a window that tells us what is happening in the economy. Therefore, I think we should not spend too much time repeating information that has already been given. About service delivery, the points were taken, and as I said, we will stick to ensuring better service delivery. 

Finally, I think Kiggundu and his team have done a good job and they have now retired. The issue of fixing LCI elections is not their problem; it was a budgetary matter. Now that we have the funds ready, come January the new electoral commission with the remaining old member will be able to sort out those matters.

However, let us give credit where it is due. As I said, I expected my sister, the Leader of the Opposition, whose area has one of the best modern irrigation schemes in the country, to have come with that as an example of what Government is doing.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us go back to item 4(b).

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING, AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT)(Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. From the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, I beg to lay on the Table the Uganda National Housing Policy, May 2016. 

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee of Physical Infrastructure for perusal and report back. 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES ON SAND MINING IN KALUNGU, MPIGI AND WAKISO DISTRICTS

5.56
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Alex Byarugaba) (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Committee on Natural Resources I wish to take the opportunity to present a report that emanated from the hard work we undertook during the recess, as directed by your office, with regard to concerns of this House on the issue of sand mining in the areas as mentioned earlier on.

Madam Speaker, prior to 2010, sand mining in Uganda was largely on small scale and was characterised by the use of rudimentary tools such as spades, hoes and wheelbarrows for extraction. However, the period between 2005 and 2010 has witnessed a tenfold increase in construction activities, hence a higher demand for sand. As a result, sand mining has increased in areas such as the Lwera Wetland, and the use of advanced technology has also been on the rise in the wetlands. 

The plenary sitting of 18 August 2016 noted with concern some of the negative consequences of the increased sand mining activity. These include destruction of breeding and spawning grounds of fish that has resulted into the decline of stocks, and ultimately affecting the country’s fish exports and environmental degradation of wetlands, among other issues.

Madam Speaker, you did refer the matter to the committee for further investigation. Pursuant to Rules 147(e) and 177(a) and (e) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Committee on Natural Resources therefore presents this report as a summary of its findings and recommendations to the House for consideration. I will not go into details of the scope of the work; you all have copies on your iPads.

Sand Mining in Wetlands 

It was of concern that a number of investors owned land titles in Lwera Wetland, which is prohibited in the country. The number of investors mining sand and their identity remained unclear. Also noted were the discrepancies in issuance of the titles. Further to that, it was alleged that locals do not easily obtain land titles as compared to foreigners, in this case suspected to be Chinese nationals.

Environmental Degradation and Reduction of Fish Stock in Lake Victoria 

As a result of the methods used in extracting the sand, Members reported that the topography of Lwera had been distorted and that mining had caused the formation of open pits. The degradation of wetlands ultimately resulted into reduced fish stocks in Lake Victoria since the wetlands are a breeding ground for fish. 

Members also inquired whether sand mining was being carried out by Ugandans or foreigners. They further inquired if such investors had indeed acquired licences to come and mine sand and whether they had paid the US$100,000 which they are supposed to deposit as investors in the country. They further inquired if there was any mechanism in place to ring fence sand mining to be a preserve for Ugandans.

Eventual Use of Sand 

There was concern raised whether there was any sand being exported for glass manufacturing despite the public debate on limiting the exportation of minerals without any value addition. It should, however, be noted that although there were other concerns raised, especially about fish, this committee did not investigate them since they are outside its jurisdiction. 

Terms of Reference

In line with the issues raised in the House, the committee was directed to investigate the above allegations and report back to the House in October 2016. The committee, therefore, set the following as its terms of reference in order to execute this assignment - if you do not mind, I will skip those ones.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, Members can read them.

MR BYARUGABA: The terms of reference are in (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e). You can also read the methodology; it is clear. However, it is also important to note that amongst these other methods, we also had consultative meetings which were held with the following stakeholders: 

    1. Abomugisha Peter 
    2. Aqua World (U) Ltd
    3. Birungi Simpson 
    4. Capital Estates
    5. Kalungu District Local Government
    6. Lukaya Sand Dealers
    7. Lukaya Town Council
    8. Mango Tree Group Limited
    9. Ministry of Agriculture, Animal, Industry and Fisheries
    10. Ministry of Internal Affairs
    11. Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development
    12. Mpigi District Local Government
    13. National Environmental Management Authority
    14. National Planning Authority
    15. Seroma Ltd
    16. Tesco Industries  
    17. Uganda Investment Authority
    18. Uganda Revenue Authority
    19. Wakiso District Local Government 
    20. Zhongs Industries Limited

We had limitations, which are clearly indicated there. I will take you to No.2, which is the background on sand mining in Uganda. It is a historical perspective of how sand mining has been done in this country. You can read that yourselves. 

Areas of Focus 

In this investigation, as articulated in the terms of reference, emphasis was placed on sand mining in Lwera Wetland, and around and within Lake Victoria. 

Sand Mining in Lwera Wetland 

Lwera Wetland is a permanently water logged area that forms part of the greater Katonga wetland system bordering River Katonga and Lake Victoria. It is located in the districts of Mpigi and Kalungu. At an altitude of 1,158 metres above sea level the wetland has an area of about 237 square kilometres and drains directly into Lake Victoria. The Kampala-Masaka Highway crosses through the wetland and is the main access route to the wetland where the sand mining is currently taking place.

The sand in the wetland developed on sediments deposited more than 60 million years ago. Below it are a couple of profiles derived from historical depositions that accompanied changes in the lake’s area over the years since its creation. The most recent activity is traced to 1962 when Lake Victoria water levels rose by four metres, resulting into inundation and deposition of large deposits of sand from the lake into Lwera wetland. Similar actions are forecast in 2022.

Although sand mining had been carried out in the wetland on artisanal or small scale basis for more than 30 years, the sand borrow pits were until 1997 restored by inundation following the El Niño rains of that year. 

In the past, sand miners used rudimentary tools such as spades as I had earlier on indicated. However, recently, sand mining technology has been upgraded to the use of excavators and heavy machinery. The technology upgrade was driven by an increased demand for sand by the construction industry, which made sand mining a very commercial and lucrative undertaking. From 2013, sand miners started using sophisticated technologies, as earlier indicated, particularly dredgers that extract massive volumes of sand in a short period of time; just one scoop fills a lorry.

Sand Mining in Lake Victoria

Lake Victoria is Africa’s largest fresh water body with a surface area of about 69,000 square kilometres. It is a major economic resource that is crucial for the development of agriculture, fisheries, tourism, trade, transport and communications, water, energy and industry.

The Lake Victoria basin in Uganda has many wetlands systems. These include Kirinya wetland system, Nakivubo Wetland, Kinawataka Wetland, River Rwizi wetland system, Lake Mburo/Nakivale wetland system, Lake Wamala wetland system, River Katonga wetland system, Lake Kijanebalola-Bukoora wetland system, Sango Bay-Musambwa Island-Kagera wetland system, Nabajjuzi-Nakaiba wetland system, among others.

The wetlands within the Lake Victoria basin possess a lot of biodiversity which is a major source of tourism attraction, purifies effluent discharge before it enters the lake, has fertile soils that are a major cause of encroachment, and lately possesses commercial sand deposits. In the past, sand was mined mainly at its shorelines. However, with the advancement in technology and the introduction of dredgers, sand mining is now being undertaken within the lake directly as witnessed around Bukasa in Wakiso District, just a few miles from here.

Best Sand Mining Practices

Some of the best sand mining practices that will promote sustainable use of sand resources include:

    a) Conducting Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs).
    b) Display of EIA certificate at sites.
    c) Undertaking regular environmental audits. You will read the rest; they are quite a number.

Committee Findings and Recommendations

The committee made observations that are explained under their respective terms of reference. Where appropriate, recommendations are made. 

Term of Reference No. 1: Investigation into the Status of Sand Mining in Lwera Wetland, Legality of Operations, ownership of Titles and Nationality of Persons Involved 

Under this term of reference, the committee sought to establish the number of companies mining sand within Lwera Wetland; the nationalities of persons involved in this activity; whether indeed the miners held land titles within the wetland; whether the companies carrying out sand mining had fulfilled the necessary requirements authorising the mining of sand; and if procedures for award of permits, licences and addenda were adhered to. The committee consequently finds and recommends as follows:

1. Status of Sand Mining in Lwera Wetland

According to the ministerial policy statement delivered by the Minister of State for Environment on 23 August 2016, records from the sites visited by the committee, additional documents submitted by the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) on 3 November 2016, and the information presented by the district local government leaders, it was established that Lwera wetland has at least 24 sand mining sites, as highlighted under Annex 2.

According to NEMA’s statement of 3 November 2016, of all these sites, only four, namely Registered Trustees of Masaka Diocese, River Katonga Investments Ltd, Seroma Ltd and Parkson Honkong Investment Ltd, have valid permits. Two sites, namely Aqua World and Capital Estates, have been issued with restoration orders. Seven sites namely Birungi Simpson (Kamaliba Village), Birungi Simpson (Nabyewanga Village), He Sha Duo Company Ltd, DMW Uganda Limited, Zou Yunyan, Lukaya Sand Dealers and You Jing Shu have had their activities halted. The permit of Tesco Industries was also cancelled but later waived. Three sites, namely Abomugisha Peter, Zhongs Industries and Mulongo Kato, have completely no permits. The status of the seven remaining sites is unknown. This, therefore, implies that the wetland has sand miners regulated by NEMA and the majority are illegal.

The current situation in Lwera wetland also reveals that there are miners excavating sand under the guise of fish farming. These include Aqua World (U) Ltd and Capital Estates. Others such as Birungi Simpson and Seroma Ltd were all issued permits to extract sand after which the ponds created would be used for fish farming. The idea was for them to extract sand after which the pits would fill up with water and fish farming would be started.

The committee notes that although the miners had carried out environmental impact assessments, the companies still have to obtain permits from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) under rule 14(1) of the Fish Aquaculture Rules of 2003, which clearly provides that no person, institution, organisation or establishment shall engage in fish breeding without a permit issued by the Chief Fisheries Officer.

Although there is a provisional letter permitting Aqua World to undertake fish pond and cage production in Lwera, this letter, dated 6 February 2014 for a period of one year, is currently invalid. Monitoring reports by MAAIF indicate unsuitability of the site, inexperience of personnel among a host of other shortcomings on the Aqua World site.

Capital Estates possesses a certificate issued on 28 September 2016, a day before the committee’s visit. I think they learnt of our visit in one way or another and they acquired a certificate; I do not know how. This document was initially not submitted to the committee, which casts doubts on its authenticity. Furthermore, the ministry did not provide evidence of the application process for this permit and the site does not appear in any of its monitoring reports. 

In addition, the list that was submitted to the committee on 28 October 2016 contained companies which were issued certificates before the dates expired; for example, company No. 40, Bunakanda Cage Fish Farming Project, was issued a certificate on 12 November 2016 (there is an attachment). This, therefore, raises issues of the authenticity of this list. There is a lot of doubt about those certificates.

While appearing before the committee, MAAIF stated that possession of a wetland permit from NEMA does not exempt prospective commercial fish farmers from obtaining a fish farming permit issued by MAAIF, rather this is treated as evidence of having carried out an environmental impact assessment, which is a requirement for obtaining a permit for commercial fish farming. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries further advised that the Lwera Wetland was completely unsuitable for fish farming because of encumbrances in its drainage, which hinder easy flow of water out of ponds and the fact that sand mining interferes with fish ecology. This, therefore, implies that the fish farming in Lwera should not be permitted by MAAIF after all. However, to the committee’s dismay, the ministry went ahead and issued fish farming permits to Capital Estates and Aqua World Uganda Limited.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should cancel the fish farming permits issued to Agua World (U) Ltd and Capital Estates with immediate effect. It is completely against what they told us and admitted that Lwera Wetland is not suitable for both sand mining and fish farming. 

2. Nationality of Sand Miners

It was established that sand mining in Lwera Wetland was being undertaken by both Ugandans and foreign investors. Out of the 11 sites visited by the committee, only four companies belonged to non-Ugandans; these were Zhongs Industries, He Sha Dou, Lukaya Sand Dealers and Mango Tree Investments.

3. Ownership of Land Titles within the Wetland

Article 237(2)(b) of the Constitution of Uganda, provides that Government or a local government shall hold in trust for the people and protect natural lakes, rivers, ground water, natural ponds, natural steams, wetlands, forest reserves, national parks and any other land reserved for ecological and touristic purposes for the common good of the citizens of Uganda. 

The Constitution, under Article 237(2)(b), created a public trust for renewable resources such as natural lakes, rivers and wetlands vesting them in the state to hold and protect for the common good of all citizens of this country. However, the committee established that the companies and individuals as listed here below possessed land titles issued after 1995 in Lwera Wetland. The list is there and the companies are: Zhongs Industries Ltd, 59.4 hectares; Seroma Ltd, 199 hectares; John Ssebalamu, 256 hectares; Lukaya Sand Dealers, 72.9 hectares; Samuel Kakande, freehold register, 116.7 hectares; Tesco Industries, 40.5 hectares; and Peter Abomugisha is the smallest land holder with 14.4 hectares.  

Madam Speaker, Section 44(6) of the Land Act, Cap 227, explicitly restricts Government or any local government to lease out or otherwise alienate any natural resource. It is further important to note that the Solicitor-General has opined that-

    a) the continued issuance of certificates of land titles in wetlands by the Uganda Land Commission, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and district land boards is illegal as it is contrary to Article 237(2)(b) of the Constitution, Section 44(b) of the Land Act and Statutory Instrument No.153-3 of the National Environmental Management Act;

    b) the continued surveying and allocation of plots in wetlands, river banks and lakeshores is illegal, as it is also contrary to the National Environment(Wetlands, Riverbanks, Lakeshores Management) Regulations, No.153-5;
    c) the Environment Impact Assessment Certificates that have been issue in wetlands illegally can be cancelled by the Executive Director of NEMA;

    d) Government is not obliged to pay compensation for land titles in wetlands issued after the 1995 Constitution as they have been issued illegally contrary to Article 237(2)(b) of the Constitution and Section 44(1) and (4) of the Land Act. The Commissioner for Land Registration is authorised to cancel land titles issued in error, illegally or wrongfully.

Despite this advice, the Uganda Land Commission and the district land boards have consistently perpetuated an illegality with impunity, issuing land titles in wetlands. While appearing before the committee, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development informed the committee that:

    a) Cabinet had approved operating guidelines and criteria that will be used in the cancellation process and they need to set up a wetland fund. The criteria approved by the policy committee on the environment includes the following:

    i) The certificates proposed for cancellation should have been issued after 1995;

    ii) Certificates of title for cancellation should include those arising from subdivisions of the original, that is, the mother land titles created after 1995; those straddling both wetlands and open water bodies, those straddling both dry land and open water; and those straddling both dry land and wetland.

    b) The ministry awaits the development of a wetlands atlas on the whole country. However, the committee notes that the wetlands atlas published in 2015 to guide the process covers only Kampala, Mukono and Wakiso districts. Therefore, when the cancellation exercise commences, it will not cover the entire country because most of it is not mapped under the wetlands atlas.

The committee further observed that some of the leaseholders had violated conditions of the leases and had not applied for change of land use. The land leased to Mr John Ssebalamu, for instance, was intended for cattle ranching while land belonging to Pastor Samuel Kakande was restricted to farming, both of which are now used for sand mining under the guise of fish farming.

Recommendation 

The committee recommended that the Commissioner Land Administration should cancel the titles issued in Lwera Wetland, and the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should report to Parliament within three weeks on the progress of the cancellation of these titles. 

4. Legality of Operations 

Adherence to activities in the Certificate of Approval of Environmental Impact Assessment

Madam Speaker, the committee noted that Aqua World (U) Ltd was issued a Certificate of Approval of Environmental Impact Assessment by NEMA to establish fish cages but instead they illegally engaged in commercial sand mining. However, after receipt of environmental improvement notices and seeking guidance from NEMA, the company obtained a permit for sand mining. After all, they had already done what they had wanted to do.

Zhongs Industries Ltd was also issued with a Certificate of Approval of Environmental Impact Assessment for sand mining. As part of the conditions of approval,  particularly  paragraph 1.0 (iii), the company was expected to apply for and obtain a wetlands resource user permit from NEMA so as to carry out commercial sand mining in Katonga wetland system. However, the company lacked a wetland permit and was, therefore, illegally mining sand. Huge amounts of sand have so far been extracted.

Recommendation 

The committee wishes to recommend that NEMA should halt sand mining activities being undertaken without a Certificate of Approval of Environmental Impact Assessment and also institute a legal action against the companies immediately.

Abuse of Sand Mining Permits Issued by NEMA

The committee established that NEMA regulated 14 sand miners in Lwera Wetland through issuance of wetland resource user permits each costing a mere Shs 100,000. Under Annex 2, you will see it.

Salient genetic conditions contained in the wetland user permits issued by NEMA to sand miners in Lwera Wetland included but are not limited to:

    a) restoration of sand borrow pits;
    b) no sale of wet sand;
    c) mining at least 200 meters from Kampala-Masaka Highway on both sides;
    d) seeking authorisation from Uganda National Roads Authority(UNRA) for connecting feeder roads to Kampala-Masaka Highways;
    e) mining at least 200 metres from the protected zone of Lake Victoria;
    f) permits may be withdrawn or cancelled when conditions are violated.

However, the committee found out that most companies had violated their permit conditions. They included the following:

1. He Sha Duo Company Limited

The committee found out the following on this company:

    a) A number of sand borrow pits were not restored raising safety risks because they were filled with water and overgrown floating weeds. You would not even recognise that there was water if you are not careful;
    b) No environmental impact assessment was undertaken for its dredger.

The next page depicts some coloured pictures and they have been uploaded on your iPads. They come out clearly when you look at them in colour.

2. Capital Estates

    a) The company established fish ponds within 200 metres of the Lake Victoria protected zone. In other words, it flouted the other regulation of having no activity within 200 meters of the shoreline of a protected zone.

    b) It also erected permanent structures in the wetland. They are there in the pictures.

    c) They also transported wet sand, contrary to the conditions in the permit. This risked the lifespan of the roads. 

3. Lukaya Sand Dealers

The company-
    a) Was mining sand from within 200 metres of the Kampala-Masaka Road, risking the safety of the road by weakening the stability of the road and making it prone to flooding. Any time it rains, water floods the road. It becomes part of that wetland when it rains.

    b) They had also encroached on the road buffer zone by 20 metres. They are about to dig under the road looking for sands.

    c) They were transporting wet sand. 

    d) They had not restored the sand borrow pits.

    e) They did not undertake an EIA for their dredger.

4. Birungi Simpson’s Site

The committee found out that - 

    a) The sand mining is taking place within 247 metres of Lake Victoria protected zone. 

    b) The company is transporting wet sand, and heavy trucks ferrying sand have made community roads impassable, contrary to condition 2(ii) in one of its permits.

    c) While permit NEMA/RB/LS/WT/381 under condition 3(iii) required that the sand pits excavated for sands be transformed into fish ponds within two years from date of issuance of the permit, there was no such evidence of such an undertaking, given that MAAIF had not yet approved the project.

    d) Suitability of the site for fish farming had not yet been ascertained and ponds were overgrown with vegetation due to stagnant water at the site.

5. Aqua World Uganda

The committee found out that - 

    a) The site had open pits within 200 metres of Lake Victoria protected zone.
    b) There was a non-water borne toilet (pit latrine) in a borrow pit. 
    c) The fish farming permit was violated because the company is now engaged in commercial sand mining activities instead of fish farming.

6. Tesco Industries Ltd

The committee found out that-

    a) Sand mining is being undertaken within 200 metres from Kampala-Masaka Highway, weakening the stability of the road and also making it prone to flooding. 
    b) The company has encroached on the road buffer zone by 140 metres. 
    c) The site had unrestored sand borrow pits.

7. Seroma Ltd

The committee found that- 

    a) Sand mining activities are taking place with open and unrestored sand borrow pits; 
    b) the company installed a dredger without undertaking an EIA for the equipment.

The committee also noted that Peter Abomugisha and Zhongs Industries Limited were mining sand illegally without wetland user permits.

The committee also noted that among all the companies that had failed to comply with their permit conditions, only Tesco Industries Limited was sanctioned by having its permit cancelled. However, the permit cancellation has since been waived pending compliance to NEMA directives as agreed in a meeting between NEMA and Tesco Industries. The meeting was held on 9 November 2016.

National Environment Management Authority also issued notices to Lukaya Sand Dealers, He Sha Duo Company Limited and Zou Yun Yan to show cause as to why their permits may not be cancelled. Through the office of the Director of Public Prosecution, criminal proceedings were instituted against 17 persons for violating conditions of their permits and degrading Lwera Wetland.

Recommendations

The committee wishes to recommend as follows:

a) 	National Environment Management Authority should cancel all permits whose conditions have been violated by companies or individuals as indicated above.

b) 	National Environment Management Authority should issue restoration orders to these companies and ensure enforcement of these orders within one month by way of procedure, because immediately after that if they fail, NEMA will have to do it but at the cost of those companies.


c) 	National Environment Management Authority should, through the Ministry of Water and Environment, report to Parliament on the progress of the restoration of all those other areas within three months.

d) 	National Environment Management Authority should institute legal sanctions against all companies and individuals who have violated the conditions of the permits as provided for in the National Environment Act and National Environment (Wetlands, Riverbanks and Lakeshores Management) Regulations.

Irregular Issuance of Addenda to Wetland User Permits

The committee noted with concern that NEMA irregularly issued addendums or variations to Aqua World (U) Ltd and Seroma Ltd wetland user permits, permitting them without prior environmental audit and subsequent environmental impact assessment to inform the variance in permit condition. 

The committee observed that Aqua World (U) Ltd on 26 July 2016 wrote to NEMA seeking guidance on how to mine sand on its site given the change in interest from fish farming. National Environment Management Authority, instead of granting guidance on how to acquire a sand mining permit, issued the company with an addendum permitting sand mining on 23 August 2016 without prior environmental audit and subsequent environmental impact assessment to inform the variance in the earlier permit condition. The addendum is valid until 12 September 2017. They asked for guidance and instead of guiding them on what to do, NEMA simply told them they did not need guidance and allowed them to start sand mining.

It should be noted that the addendum was issued 23 days after seeking guidance and 15 days after the issue of an environmental improvement notice. The time was insufficient to undertake comprehensive assessments and consultations to inform the issuance of an addendum.

The committee further noted that NEMA had issued, on 14 June 2016, an addendum to Seroma Ltd’s sand mining permit, permitting use of dredging machines. This was done without prior assessment of extraction capacity of the machines and whether they were likely to have any adverse impact on the wetland. The committee observed the machines installed on site. The addendum was issued on 22 July 2016, only five weeks after issuance of the permit, and it is valid until 14 June 2017.

Recommendations

The committee wishes to recommend as follows:

a) 	National Environment Management Authority should, with immediate effect, stop issuing addendums to wetlands or lake-user permits without prior independent environmental impact assessment or environmental audit for alternative equipment or activities.

b) 	National Environment Management Authority should ensure that Aqua World (U) Limited and Seroma Ltd undertake independent environmental impact assessments for sand mining and the dredging equipment respectively, and report back to the committee within three months from the date of presenting this report.

c) 	Parliament should pass a resolution strongly condemning NEMA for its failure to effectively carry out its mandate as stipulated under Article 245 of the Constitution and section 5 and 6 of the National Environment Act, Cap 153.

Inadequate Scrutiny Of The Sand Mining Methods

Two major mining methods were observed in the mining sites visited by the committee. This included the following:

1. 	Dry pit mining - Pits were excavated on dry wetland beds with bulldozers and loaders.

2. 	Wet pit mining - Hydraulic sand extraction units and bulldozers were used to extract sand from below the water table. You can see those photographs. If they are in colour, they come out very well. 

The committee further observed that sand mining technology was used without adequate scrutiny by NEMA. This poses the risk of extracting sand beyond its regeneration capacity. 

Recommendations 

The committee would like to make the following recommendations:

    a) Effective December 2016, NEMA should ensure that sand miners undertake independent assessment and acquire certification of sand mining technology.

    b) National Environment Management Authority should develop capacity to guide on appropriate sand mining methods. 

Term of Reference No. 2: Investigation into the Status of Sand Mining in Lake Victoria, Legality of Operations and Nationalities of Persons Involved

Madam Speaker, the committee sought to find out whether there was any sand mining taking place within Lake Victoria, the nationalities of the persons involved and the legality of these operations. 

The committee found out the following: 

Status of Sand Mining in Lake Victoria 

Sand mining within water bodies is relatively new in Uganda. It is largely being spearheaded in Lake Victoria by Mango Tree Group Limited, a company owned by Chinese nationals. Although Mango Tree Group had been issued with a licence to build a shipyard, the company is now engaged in sand mining under the guise of clearing Lake Victoria’s waterways. All these figures are illustrations. 
        
Legality of Operations

Adherence to activities in the Certificate of Approval of Environmental Impact Assessment 

Mango Tree Group Ltd was issued with a Certificate of Approval of Environmental Impact Assessment for ship building activities and a shipyard. While purportedly on test runs, the company’s ship caught fire and was damaged but they did not inform NEMA of any malfunction as required under paragraph 5(xxxiii) of their Certificate of Approval of Environmental Impact Assessment.  

The committee noted that the company has never received approval and certification for its environmental impact assessment for sand mining. The committee was informed by NEMA that this application was still under review. For them, it is not a matter of mining in a wetland but not directly in the lake.

Secondly, the company had no permit to use the lake and was illegally mining sand in Lake Victoria under the pretext of clearing the navigation route from Bukasa to Port Bell. 

Recommendations

    a) The Minister of Water and Environment should stop sand mining in water bodies with immediate effect until NEMA issues guidelines.

    b) National Environment Management Authority should institute legal sanctions with immediate effect against Mango Tree Ltd as provided for under the National Environment Act and regulations 36 and 37 of the National Environment(Wetlands, Riverbanks and Lakeshores Management) Regulations, 2000.

Illegal Dredging of Sand in Lake Victoria

Madam Speaker, on 4 May 2016, the Minister of Water and Environment issued a river dredging licence under Section 4 of the Rivers Act, 1907 to Mango Tree Group Ltd to dredge the shores of Lake Victoria. The committee observed that the Rivers Act does not apply to lakes but rather to rivers Aswa, Kafu, Kagera, Katonga, Muyanja, Nile, Semiliki, Sezibwa and any other that may be added to the Fifth Schedule of the Act. He went ahead and applied the Rivers Act on Lake Victoria - that was the minister.

Recommendation

    a) The Minister of Water and Environment should, with immediate effect, revoke the river dredging licence issued to Mango Tree Group Ltd.

Term of Reference No. 3: Investigation into Sand Mining Encroaching on Kyewaga Central Forest Reserve

The committee observed that the sand mining being undertaken in Kitinda Village, Katabi Subcounty, had encroached on Kyewaga Central Forest Reserve in Wakiso District. The site belongs to Aka & Bino Fish Farming Project, which was permitted to undertake fish farming. The company was engaged in illegal activities as it lacked a wetland user permit to mine sand. 

The project was a cause of nuisance to residents as a result of vibrations from huge trucks ferrying sand. It damaged access roads and cracked houses and walls as reported in a complaints document that was submitted to the Wakiso District Local Government on 22 August 2011.   

Following violation of conditions in the permit regarding sand mining rather than fish farming and encroachment on Kyewaga Central Forest Reserve, NEMA cancelled the project’s Certificate of Approval of Environmental Impact Assessment but of course after the huge damage had been done. On further inspection of the site, the committee noted that some of the ponds that had been dug for fish were now being backfilled with murrum, as evidenced in those pictures. You can see the photographs.

Recommendations 

Madam Speaker, we would like to recommend as follows:

a) That National Forestry Authority should issue restoration orders to Aka & Bino Fish Farming and report to Parliament within one month.

    b) National Environment Management Authority should institute legal sanctions with immediate effect against Aka & Bino Fish Farming Project as provided for in the National Environment Act and regulations 36 and 37 of the National Environment (Wetlands, Riverbanks and Lakeshores Management) Regulations, 2000.

Term of Reference No. 4: Establishing Measures for Regulation and Management of Sand Mining in Uganda

Madam Speaker, following the growth of the construction industry in Uganda, demand for sand rose, thereby attracting a number of local and foreign investors into sand mining. This necessitates guidelines, regulations, coordination of lead agencies, routine monitoring, enforcement and physical planning. Below are the findings and recommendations regarding regulation and management of sand mining in Uganda.  

1. Sand Mining Regulations

Article 244(5) of the Constitution of Uganda provides that sand commonly used for building or similar purposes is not a mineral. The Constitution however mandates Parliament in Article 244(6) to regulate the exploitation of any substance excluded from the definition of a mineral when exploited for commercial purposes.  

In accordance with Article 244(6), Parliament passed the Mining Act, 2003, which clearly categorises sand into two categories:

    a) As a building mineral - If it is mined by a person from land owned or lawfully occupied by him or her for his or her own domestic use in Uganda for building, or mined by a person for his or her own use for road-making; and

    b) As an industrial mineral - If it is commercially mined by a person for use in Uganda. Therefore, it is for you and me to decide.

It is on this basis that the Auditor-General noted that there are no regulations for the mining of sand, clay, murrum and stone quarrying used for commercial purposes contrary to the Mining Act. As a result, Government cannot levy royalties on sand mining activities. Failure to levy royalties on commercialised sand materials means loss of revenues to the national treasury. 

Recommendations 

Madam Speaker, we would like to recommend as follows:

    a) In line with section 2 of the Mining Act, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development should issue regulations for the exploitation of sand as an industrial mineral in Uganda within three months. By stating three months, I thought we were being a bit too generous. 

    b) The Minister of Energy and Mineral Development should develop and publish an atlas for minerals, including sand, in Uganda.

2. Sand Mining Guidelines

The committee observes that lack of guidelines makes monitoring of sand mining by local governments difficult on issues such as adherence to buffer zone limits, extraction depth, volumes extracted and management of violations, among others.  

Recommendation

We would like to recommend as follows: That NEMA, in consultation with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, should develop national sand mining guidelines by April 2017 and the guidelines be disseminated to licensed sand miners in the country.

3. Sand Extraction Limits

The committee observed that:

a) 	Wetland and lake permits issued for sand mining by NEMA only demarcate boundaries of extraction. With the exception of Aqua World (Uganda) Ltd and Seroma Ltd, where extraction was prohibited beyond four metres, other sites lacked guidelines on excavation depth. Whereas NEMA advised that the excavation depths should not exceed four metres, it does not have scientific backing for this limit. Some were as deep as 15 metres, just next to Lake Victoria.

b) 	National Environment Management Authority does not monitor or record excavation depth by the different miners.

c) 	While NEMA recommends fish farming as one of the restoration measures, the authority has not consulted with MAAIF, which is the competent authority on fish farming. Hence, during its consultative meeting with the committee, the Fisheries Department of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries submitted that fish performs best in ponds of depths ranging from 1.5 metres to two metres and strongly advised that Lwera wetland was not suitable for fish farming due to its nature of drainage. 

d) 	Sand mining technology is continuously evolving and NEMA lacks capacity to certify the technology to establish extraction volumes. All sites lacked measuring equipment and records of how much sand had been extracted. Hence, it was difficult to determine how much sand has been mined for commercial purposes. This poses the risk of extracting sand beyond its regeneration capacity. The Mango Tree Ltd dredger, for instance, has the capacity to dredge up to a depth of 20 metres and extract 1000 tonnes of sand a day from Lake Victoria. We were told that at that rate, there will be no sand in Uganda in the next 10 years.

e) 	National Environment Management Authority lacks a detailed cadastral map indicating areas with commercial sand deposits. A cadastral would be a basis for setting extraction depth and volumes. Consequently, in May 2015, NEMA issued a permit (NEMA/RB/LS/WT/410) to You Jing Shu to undertake sand mining on Plot 26 Block 149 in Lugalama–Kamuwunga Village, Kyamulibwa Parish, Bukulula Subcounty in Kalungu District. Unfortunately, the developer was unable to attain commercial deposits on the land hence the abandonment of the site.

Recommendations

Madam Speaker, we make the following recommendations:

    a) Cadastral mapping be undertaken to establish areas with sand deposits that are viable for commercial sand mining by October 2017.

    b) National Environment Management Authority should issue sand mining permits based on evidence that sites have commercially viable sand deposits.

    c) The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development should undertake a comprehensive study by October 2017 to establish the regeneration rate of sand in Uganda.

    d) National Environment Management Authority should ensure that sand miners undertake independent assessment and acquire certification of sand mining equipment.

4. Statutory Instrument Banning the Transporting of Wet Sand

During the Budget Speech of the 2015/2016 financial year, the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development informed the country that the Minister of Works and Transport was to issue a statutory instrument banning the transportation of wet sand. This was aimed at controlling overloading of sand transportation trucks, which are prone to axle overloading that seriously damages roads. 

The committee, however, noted that to date, trucks are still ferrying wet sand on the Kampala–Masaka Highway as was the case across other roads in the country. Having heard the noise that we have been making as a committee, they have now resorted to transporting sand at night when perhaps the Ministry of Works and the police personnel are not around to stop them.

Recommendation

The Minister of Works and Transport should issue a statutory instrument banning the transporting of wet sand by January 2017. I think this is being a bit too modest. It should be earlier than that because issuing a statutory instrument should not take such a long time. Anyway, that is our recommendation.

5.  Restoration Orders

The committee observed that a number of restoration orders and improvement notices had been issued to mining companies by district local governments as well as NEMA. However, these were largely ignored by mining companies, particularly regarding demolition of permanent structures in wetlands; for example, in October 2015 Capital Estates was ordered to demolish permanent structures in form of concrete pillars that were constructed in the wetland but to date, they still exist.

The committee notes that the increasing degradation of the environment through sand mining is exacerbated by failure to take legal action against miners that violate the restoration orders. Despite being required to enforce restoration orders under section 70(1) of the National Environment Act, NEMA had not enforced any restoration orders. 

Upon examination of copies of the restoration orders submitted, the committee found that NEMA does not specify, as required under section 68(2)(f) of the National Environment Act, any penalties which may be imposed if the orders are ignored. More importantly, the committee notes that the National Environment Act does not provide for express penalties to environmental offenders. 

Recommendations

    a) In line with section 9.2, objective 1 of the environmental and natural resources subsector articulated in the NDP II of restoring degraded fragile ecosystems, a restoration and rehabilitation Bill be presented before Parliament with the view of mitigating the effects of the rampant environmental degradation. This should be as soon as possible.

    b) National Environment Management Authority should, within three months, enforce all environmental restoration orders that have not been complied with by companies or individuals degrading the environment, as provided for under sections 68 and 70 of the National Environment Act.

    c) National Environment Management Authority should institute legal proceedings in courts of law against all non-complying sand mining companies or individuals by January 2017.

    d) In line with section 94 of the National Environment Act, the NEMA board and policy committees should advise the minister responsible for finance to prescribe sand mining as one of the activities that require performance deposit bonds. The refundable performance bonds for sand mining should take effect at the beginning of Financial Year 2017/2018 and will be essential in financing restoration activities.

    e) National Environment Management Authority should enforce the demolition of permanent structures erected by Simpson Birungi, Capital Estates and Aqua World (U) Ltd in Lwera Wetland. 

    f) There is urgent need to amend the National Environment Act to provide for express penalties for environmental offenders.

6. Restoration Plans

Madam Speaker, the committee observed that sand mining permits issued by NEMA require that decommissioning and restoration plans be submitted to the authority at least three months prior to decommissioning of any of the project components or as prescribed by the relevant lead agencies. 

National Environment Management Authority advises mining to be carried out over large tracts of approved plots in a span of time ranging between one and five years while the restoration of the mined area is only given consideration three months prior to decommissioning. The committee observes that this period may be inadequate to comprehensively plan restoration activities for mined areas, which is aggravated by the fact that the extracted volumes are unknown and not periodically regulated during the course of the mining project. 

The committee further observed that mining sites had abandoned areas or pits on their sites that had not been decommissioned or restored at all. The committee also noted that none of the companies reported to have submitted any decommissioning and restoration plans to NEMA.

Recommendation

Restoration plans should be submitted to NEMA at inception of the project and continuously updated throughout the project’s life. This will ensure commitment by miners and ease monitoring by NEMA and other lead agencies.

7. Coordination of Lead Agencies

i) Licensing

I will not go into licencing but rather to the recommendations therefrom. 

Recommendations

a) 	National Environment Management Authority should, with immediate effect, require all companies owned by foreigners to attach their investment licenses to their project briefs, environmental impact assessment statements and environmental audits.

b)	We recommend that lead agencies should coordinate their licensing processes to enhance synergies required for regulation of sand mining and other investors within the country. 

ii) Compliance Enforcement

The committee was informed that NEMA did not share copies of wetland or lake permits, sand mining guidelines and restoration notices with local governments and local leaders, as indicated in their correspondences. The committee noted that this adversely affected the monitoring and coordination of sand mining activities. Therefore, local governments and local leaders were not aware which companies were authorised to undertake mining in their areas of jurisdiction. 

During the committee’s consultation meeting at Lukaya Town Council offices, for instance, it was reported by Kalungu District Local Government that Seroma Ltd was not among the companies that had been permitted to undertake sand mining in Lwera and yet the company had earlier on attained its Certificate of Approval for Environmental Impact Assessment to undertake sand mining on 14 June 2016, a copy of which was submitted to the committee by NEMA.

Recommendations

a) 	National Environment Management Authority should, within two months, avail copies of all lake and wetland user permits for sand mining for the last five years to all district local governments as a means of ensuring regular monitoring, tracking of compliance and reporting.

b) 	The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should establish a conditional grant for district environmental inspection in Financial Year 2017/2018. This would increase funds for environmental monitoring in local governments.

c) 	The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should report to Parliament within six months about the establishment of the conditional grant for district environmental inspection.

iii) Routine Monitoring

a) 	The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should establish a conditional grant for district environmental inspection in Financial Year 2017/2018.

b) 	We also recommend that NEMA should undertake monitoring of sand mines at least once every two months. 

8. National Physical Development Plan

On this, we recommend that the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should report to Parliament within three months on the progress made in the development of the National Physical Development Plan.

Term of Reference No.5: Establishing the Socio-Economic Impacts of Sand Mining in Uganda

Madam Speaker, a number of socio-economic impacts have arisen from sand mining in Uganda. The committee particularly set out to investigate the uses of sand mined in Uganda, impact on fish stock, local content, employment, levies, sand exports, taxes collected from sand mining and community relations. 

Below are the findings and recommendations.

1. Uses of Sand Mined in Uganda

The committee observed that the sand mined in Uganda is mainly used for building homes and infrastructural works within Uganda. It was also asserted by the sand miners that the sand mined was used in on-going infrastructural development projects such as the Kampala–Entebbe Express Highway, Karuma and Isimba hydropower dams. Companies were also bidding to supply sand for the expansion of Entebbe International Airport. We were also informed that some of the sand actually goes as far as South Sudan.

2. Impact on Fish Stock 

The committee noted that although it was an undisputed fact that fish stocks were reducing in Lake Victoria, there was no scientific study to entirely attribute the reduction of fish stocks to sand mining. 

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries however asserted that sand mining destroyed critical fish breeding and nursery areas, particularly wetlands, thereby interfering with the food web. Removal of sand harvested millions of fish eggs, and the sound by the dredging equipment interfered with ecology. The ministry condemned sand mining activities undertaken under the guise of aquaculture fish farming as it is detrimental to the sustainability of the fisheries industry in Uganda.

Recommendations

a) 	National Environment Management Authority should, with immediate effect, institute legal sanctions against illegal sand miners as provided for in the National Environment Act and National Environment (Wetlands, Riverbanks and Lakeshores Management) Regulations. 

b) 	Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries should carry out further studies to ascertain the impact of sand mining on fish stocks and management of fish breeding areas as well as instituting measures in the interim to protect fish breeding grounds. 

3. Local Content

The committee observed that local people were being pushed out of the sand mining industry by the introduction of hydraulic and mechanical equipment or units. 

The committee notes that the equipment used is highly capital intensive and cannot be afforded by local people. As a consequence, most local people are excluded from the lucrative sand mining business. Also, a few local investors involved in sand mining were not fully complying with the existing laws.

All foreign mining companies that the committee interacted with had no local shareholders. They are clearly indicated in the following table and you can read them. 

The committee, in October 2016, noted that a compliance assessment by Uganda Investment Authority was undertaken on all investment licences issued to sand mining investors. It was established that there is growing public concern about the involvement of foreign investors in sand mining activities. Sections of the public asserted that sand mining should be a preserve of local people.

Recommendation

Sand mining permits should be ring-fenced for only local investors.  

Employment

The committee observed that at most, mining sites employed about 10 people mainly to operate equipment, offer security and administrative services; otherwise, the majority were non-Ugandans. 

Recommendations

a) 	The Directorate of Immigration and Citizen Control should regularly undertake impromptu inspections of all foreign owned companies so as to ascertain the legality of the immigrants. We found out that the majority are non-Ugandans without work permits. Actually, in one place, Mango Tree Limited, we were told that they had 65 people but on the payroll, they had 23 people and out of the 23, 14 were non-Ugandans. The next day, immigration rushed there and found 27 illegal immigrants. Therefore, it is that bad. 

b) 	The Directorate of Immigration and Citizen Control should automate their records for easy access and real-time regulation of all foreigners within the country.

c) 	The Directorate of Immigration and Citizen Control should set up stringent measures to ensure that foreigners issued with visitor’s visas should not engage in any employment in Uganda. 

5. Levy or Assessments 

You can read that for yourself but our recommendations on this are:
a) 	Local government authorities should allocate adequate funding for environmental inspection.

b) 	Uganda Revenue Authority should guide on how to assess levies for sand mined. 

6. Exportation of Sand

The committee noted that sand is not a restricted export in Uganda. The Minerals (Prohibition of Exportation) Act, Cap 147 only prohibits exportation of copper.

The committee established that as of 14 October 2016, 42 companies registered with URA (Annex 5) had exported 63,380 kilogrammes of sand worth Shs 11.5 million in the period 2012–2016. Destinations included Kenya, Canada, France, Tanzania and United States of America, among others. 

The committee was informed by URA that the highest quantity was 15,000 kilogrammes exported by Rolax International (U) Ltd in 2013 to Kenya while the least quantity was three kilogrammes exported by Tullow (Uganda) Ltd to Great Britain. It is important to note that from the list presented to the committee by URA, none of the exporters was involved in sand mining.

7. Taxes from Sand Mining 

During the period July 2013 to October 2016, URA had so far collected total taxes of Shs 14.9 billion from 13 licensed sand mining companies. Collections were received in form of income tax, domestic tax and customs payments.

The committee observed that while issuing permits, NEMA does not require tax clearance certificates from prospective sand miners. As a consequence, many sand miners are not captured and tracked by URA.

Recommendation

In accordance with the Income Tax Act, NEMA should require a valid tax clearance certificate from sand miners before issuance or renewal of wetland or lake user permits.

8. Community Relations 

The committee noted tensions building up between communities living in Kamaliba fishing village with Birungi Simpson, Aqua World (U) Ltd and the LC III Chairperson Nkozi Subcounty. 

Residents reported to the committee the following:

a)	Birungi Simpson intimidated the populace through anonymous calls. He threatened to have local people evicted, and through his sand mining activities he had removed a community road leading to Kamuga Primary School. Hence primary school going children had to trek longer routes to Kamuga. Residents were beaten and some disabled;

b)	Aqua World (U) Limited had heavily deployed security operatives that threatened local residents; and

c)	Mr Lubega Paul, LC III Chairperson of Nkozi Subcounty, threatened to have local leaders of Kamaliba fishing village imprisoned on a regular basis. Every time he was there, people would scamper for their safety.

During the inspection of Kamaliba Fishing Village, the committee-

a)	witnessed hostile relations between residents and the manager of Birungi Simpson’s site. In actual fact, in that particular area, people cried and knelt down and said, “You mean there are Ugandans who are also there to fight for us? We thought the world had ended for us.” That is what they told us;

b)	stopped a brawl between LC III Chairperson of Nkozi Sub-County and LC I of Kamaliba fishing village during our visit; and

c)	witnessed police deployment at Aqua World (U) Ltd sites.

Recommendations

a)	The Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) and the District Security Committee of Mpigi District should, with immediate effect, convene a meeting between sand miners and residents with the aim of ensuring harmonious co-existence.

b)	Government security forces should refrain from providing protection to private persons and property as was witnessed at the Aqua World site where they were threatening and intimidating the wanainchi.

c)	The District Police Commander of Mpigi should, with immediate effect, investigate the complaints of intimidation and harassment of the residents of Kamaliba and report accordingly to the relevant authorities. 
d)	The Resident District Commissioner and the CAO should ensure that the community road, which was blocked by Birungi Simpson, is opened and restored to enable the children access the only primary school in the area. 

Conclusion

In conclusion, the committee notes that sand is a resource that is important for the country’s construction industry. However, its exploitation should be sustainable and not detrimental to the environment. Sand miners should be regulated and guided so as to ensure that sand will meet today’s needs as well as those for future generations, without jeopardising the development of other sectors such as fisheries.

Whereas the findings in this report are based on the districts of Mpigi, Kalungu and Wakiso, the committee notes that this is largely the case in the entire country. We only lacked time.
 
Madam Speaker, in light of the findings and recommendations herein, the committee recommends that the House adopts this report for improved management of sand mining in Uganda. I beg to move. (Applause)

I also wish to lay on the Table the minutes that formed our conclusion.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson, and members of the Committee on Natural Resources. We thank you for the work you did expeditiously. We thank you for sacrificing your recess because you stayed here when other Members went to their constituencies.

Honourable members, this report touches the Ministry of Internal Affairs; the Ministry of Energy and the minister is here; the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development; Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; and Ministry of Water and Environment. If you wish, we can proceed with the debate. I am in your hands because the people who I want are not here except hon. Lokeris. You cannot come in early; you have to wait for the Members’ comments.

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Given the magnitude of this report and the problem as well as the very many recommendations concerning many ministries - I can see only two ministries represented, the Ministry of Local Government and Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. We need ministers from the ministries of water, finance, lands, internal affairs, education, works because the roads are being closed, and defence. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I do not know if it will not be procedurally right for us to debate this very important report either tomorrow or on Tuesday because as you can see, we have a terrible problem as though we have no leaders or a government. Therefore, I beg that if you find it proper, we get another day as we internalise this big report. Thank you.

MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is no guarantee that on any one given day, we will have all these ministers. Considering the interest that this report has generated and the number of Members of Parliament who may want to express their opinion on this report, wouldn’t it be proper to start now and continue on any other day? I beg to submit.

MR DENIS OBUA: Madam Speaker, this is a very important report, touching on a number of sectors and Government ministries. I would like to propose that owing to the fact that most of the ministries mentioned are not here, your Chair uses the powers conferred upon you to direct the Prime Minister to ensure that the ministers who should be present to answer to issues related to their departments are here either tomorrow or next Tuesday, and we debate this report. That is my humble request. 

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, listening to this report, it makes one feel as if this country is a public toilet. Therefore, I want the ministers to hear the comments about their sectors from the Members of Parliament. 

I am, therefore, directing the Ministers of Internal Affairs, the Minister for Water and Environment, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to read this report today and then we shall debate this matter tomorrow. It is very important, so we must debate it tomorrow. Prime Minister, please ensure that your team is here tomorrow. 

6.16
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Most obliged, Madam Speaker. I must express my personal regret and disappointment in the attendance from this side. We were in Cabinet this morning with everybody and we even closed Cabinet early in order for all of us to come here. Unfortunately, we are not here. Therefore -(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Allow the Prime Minister to speak, please. 

GEN. (RTD) ALI: I am really sorry but I fully agree with what you have said. Indeed, this report has touched me and I must thank the chairman and his team for making a thorough and in-depth report. 

Madam Speaker, I request that we summon our ministers here on Tuesday so that they do not have the excuse of one, not coming; and two, not reading the report. They must read this report. I have it on my iPad and, therefore, they should also have it. Madam Speaker, I request that you allow me to bring them on Tuesday. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, debate will ensue on Tuesday next week. Let the ministers get ready and we should have a fully-fledged debate. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 6.17 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 17 November 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 
