Wednesday, 25 November 2015

Parliament met at 3.28 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. On a happy note, I would like to inform the young Members of Parliament and members of staff who are still of child bearing age that we now have a facility. I think it is the first in the north of the Sub Saharan region where children can stay while people are working. We opened it yesterday and I commend Members to use it. It has also been a requirement in the Commonwealth and the Inter Parliamentary Union. I think we have done our duty now and accomplished that.

Secondly, in the public gallery, we have a delegation of the Uganda National NGO Forum. They are here to observe proceedings this afternoon. You are welcome.

We also have Her Excellency Mogens Pedersen, Ambassador of Denmark to Uganda, and Mr Charles Magara, Senior Programme Advisor, Governance, at the Embassy of Denmark. You are both welcome.

The third guest is a senior advisor at the Royal Norwegian Embassy, Ms Nadia El Ouargui. You are very welcome to attend our proceedings. Thank you very much.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a request by Government to borrow $200 million from the Eastern and Southern African Trade and Development Bank (PTA) for a revolving foreign exchange facility to stabilise the exchange rate. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, if you can allow me to make a comment on the Order Paper. I want to comment on item No. 6, the Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011. We have been making progress on this Bill through the committee, but we recently passed the retirement policy in our country and there are two or three items that we would like to incorporate in this Bill. I, therefore, request your authority that we do further consultations for at least two months and then we come back to the House with it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a request that we give them some additional time. I also know that Members are actually busy and would not probably be concentrating here. Let us give them that time since it is their Bill; they come back to us when ready and we complete it. Thank you. 

The loan request will go to the Committee on National Economy for scrutiny and report back.

3.34
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table reports of the Auditor General on financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2014 for the following entities and projects:

i) 	The Electoral Commission.
ii) 	Energy for Rural Transformation Project II (funded by the Government of Norway).
iii) 	Uganda AIDS Commission.
iv) 	Equal Opportunities Commission.
v) 	Uganda Wildlife Authority.
vi) 	National Housing and Construction Company Limited.
vii) 	Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Limited (UEDCL).
viii) 	Judicial Service Commission.
ix) 	Justice, Law and Order Sector (JLOS) Swap Development Fund.
x) 	Uganda Human Rights Commission.
xi) 	The Uganda Embassy in Riyadh.
xii) 	The Uganda Police Force.
xiii) 	Office of the Prime Minister.
xiv) 	Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities.
xv) 	Fuel Marking and Quality Monitoring Programme (FMQP).
xvi) 	Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives – Second Trade Capacity Enhancement (TRACE) Project.
xvii) 	National Council for Children.	
xviii) 	Uganda Prisons Service.
xix) 	Atomic Energy Council.
xx) 	Training Health Researchers into Vocational Excellence in East Africa (THRiVE) Project in Makerere University.
xxi) 	Interconnection of Electric Grids of Nile Equatorial Lakes Countries (NELSAP) Uganda.
xxii) 	Uganda Nurses and Midwives Council.

I beg to lay, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Commissioner Akol. All those are sent to the Committee on Public Accounts for perusal and report back.

Honourable members, yesterday I informed you that we are going to have a visit from a head of state this week. I am going to make an amendment to the Order Paper so that the Government can brief us on what the expectations are when the head of state of the Vatican comes to Uganda this week. I will make that amendment and when they are ready, we shall move.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

3.38
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY AND KAMPALA (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Madam Speaker, on 10 November 2015, the KCCA (Amendment) Bill was tabled on the Floor of Parliament. The Speaker referred this Bill to the relevant committee to review and make necessary consultations and report to the House.

Madam Speak, I am yet to appear before the said committee to discuss the proposed amendments as is the requirement under rule 118(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, pursuant to rule 71(4) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I do propose, with your guidance, that this august House defers the motion to a later and appropriate date to allow the usual parliamentary procedure and process to go on in the handling of Bills. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The matter will be deferred until the committee informs me. What is your position, chairman?

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Col (Rtd) Fred Mwesigye): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I concur with my minister. In order for the committee to come out with a report that will promote and foster a healthier relationship within KCCA, the committee has embarked on a consultative process that requires a bit of time. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: In that regard, that item is deferred until further notice.

MS EKWAU IBI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg your indulgence at this point in time. Now that the committee is going to begin the consultative process and the minister has requested for the Rules of Procedure to be suspended –(Interjections)- What I am interested in is: What then happens to the process of nominations that have already taken place? Should we now imagine that the processes will continue as if nothing -

THE SPEAKER: The minister has not placed any injunction on those processes. The activities will continue just as they have done with the nominations. 

Honourable members, I want to notify you that we are going to make an adjustment to the Order Paper to bring up item No.8 before we go to item No. 5. Item No. 8 is a motion for a loan request. Can the Minister of Finance present.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO SDR 54.4 MILLION ($75 MILLION) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION TO SUPPORT THE REGIONAL COMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAMME (RCIP) PHASE V

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a proposal to borrow up to $75 million from the International Development Association to support the Regional Communications Infrastructure Programme – Phase V. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: That request is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back. However, take into account that on some of these days we will not be working, but it will go there. We are closing tomorrow until 16th December when we shall come back for the budget.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, this loan request was sent to the committee and the committee has a report. They are ready to report.

THE SPEAKER: In that regard, what were you presenting? This is confusing my work.

MR BAHATI: We are sorry, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, why do you put here “Minister of Finance”? Where is the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy or his deputy? (Mr Werikhe rose_) Is that the chairperson?

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, I am a member of the Committee on National Economy. We looked at the report and we are ready to present it. My chairperson is not around but I am standing in for him. I am aware that the report is ready.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. There is always a transitional period in this world. Is it procedurally right for hon. Werikhe, who is now our Minister of State for Industry –(Interjections)- It does not matter; do not under-grade us the Bagisu. We have got our own now here and he cannot act as a committee chairperson anymore. 

We from the mountains are happy that we now have a minister; is it procedurally right that you make our man be a committee chairperson when we are here? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: The honourable member is still a member of this House. He has not yet been sworn in and, therefore, he will continue sitting there until he is sworn in. A member of the committee will stand in for the chairperson and the vice-chairperson.

3.44
MR MICHAEL WERIKHE (NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): Madam Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to SDR 54.4 million from the International Development Association (IDA) to support the Regional Communications Infrastructure Programme.

The Committee on National Economy considered the request by Government to borrow up to SDR 54.4 million ($75 million) from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to finance the Regional Communications Infrastructure Programme in accordance with rule 166(2)(b) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, the methodology is as usual. I think I might not spend time on that. 

Background

The Regional Communications Infrastructure Programme has been rolled out in countries in East Africa and Southern Africa since 2007 through a phased approach, with specific infrastructure investments and enabling environment reforms adapted to the individual country and sector context but set within a coordinated regional framework. 

The East and Southern Africa region is now relatively well connected on the coast via submarine cables. However, landlocked countries like Uganda still lack reliable and affordable access to this international capacity. There are also limitations as regards domestic connectivity, though these have started to be addressed to some extent in Uganda through development of the National Backbone Infrastructure (NBI). 

Performance of the National Data Transmission Backbone

The Government of Uganda through the National Information Technology Authority of Uganda (NITA-U) is implementing the National Data Transmission Backbone Infrastructure Project whose major objective is to connect all major towns and government agencies within the country onto a high speed optical fibre cable based network. 

This project is being funded by two bilateral credits totalling to $106,590,305 from the Exim Bank of China that were approved by Parliament in 2007 and 2008. The project is being implemented in three phases and the costs of each phase are shown in table 1. 

Phase 1 of the project connected Kampala, Mukono, Jinja, Bombo and Entebbe and 27 government ministries and departments to a 198km network of optical fibre. Phase II of the project was completed with a total of 1400.73kms of optical fibre cable connecting Busia, Tororo, , Malaba, Kumi, Soroti, Lira, Gulu, Elegu and all those towns as listed. 

Benefits Achieved under the Project 

Once the NBI/EGI project is completed, the following benefits shall be derived:

i) 	The installation of the NBI has provided Government with seamless and secure communication amongst Government institutions. It is now possible to efficiently share information with 94 Government entities and departments. 

ii) 	The NBI will provide high speed connectivity throughout the country to all major towns and district headquarters to enable the provision of e-government services such as e-health, online education, e-tax and integrated financial management systems to all the districts and towns. 

iii) 	The NBI will be utilised to extend connectivity to schools, institutions of higher learning and hospitals to enable these institutions access high speed internet bandwidth at reduced costs and enable them harness the benefits of connectivity to global communications infrastructure such as access to online health and education services, and promote innovation in the science field, among others.

iii) 	The NBI will offer high speed internet bandwidth to the business process outsourcing centres that will be implemented by NITA-U across the country to provide jobs to the unemployed youth and generate revenue for Government.

Project Linkage to Country Strategy

The project is in line with:

i) 	The Uganda Vision 2040 and the National Development Plan 2015/2016-2019/2020 that emphasise the development of ICT as one of the key tools to spur socio-economic transformation of the country and improve efficiency and effectiveness in delivery of services to the people.

ii) 	The ICT Sector Strategic and Investment Plan (ICT-SIP) 2015-2020. 

Project Objectives 

The development objective of this project is to support the Government’s efforts to – 

i) 	Lower prices for international capacity and extend the geographic reach of broadband networks (the connectivity development objective); and

ii) 	Improve the Government’s efficiency and transparency through e-government applications. 

Project Beneficiaries

It is envisioned that this project will benefit a wide spectrum of beneficiaries. Citizens and businesses will benefit through more affordable and accessible telecommunications services and enhanced public service delivery. Rural underserved populations, both men and women, in the north-west, north-east and south-west of the country are specifically targeted by the expansion of the NBI. 

Three new links will be established in rural areas underserved by private operators: a north-western route through Kamdini, Pakwach, Arua, Yumbe, Moyo, Adjumani and Nimule with links to DRC and South Sudan; a south-western link connecting Kasese and Mpondwe also linking to DRC; and a north-eastern route connecting Soroti and Moroto. 

The ICT sector firms will benefit from an improved legal and regulatory environment and open access to NBI. Within the Government, nearly all Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) will benefit from improved quality and lower costs of connectivity, improved efficiency of day-to-day operations through use of electronic platforms and communications, cost savings by leveraging shared infrastructure for data storage and service delivery, and enhanced ICT skills through training programmes.

Project Components

The project comprises of the following four components:

1. 	Enabling Environment ($3,000,0000, IDA) 

This component aims to support the capacity of MICT and the National Information Technology Authority, Uganda (NITA-U) to review, develop and implement relevant ICT policies, strategies, laws and technical regulatory fireworks to support a modern and vibrant ICT sector. 

2. 	Connectivity ($34,000,000, IDA and $2,000,000, Government of Uganda) 

This component aims to connect additional underserved regions of the country to the NBI and create new links to neighbouring countries. 

3. 	E-Government Applications ($35,000,000 and $5,000,000, Government of Uganda) 

This component will finance carrying out a programme of activities to set up foundational and enabling shared platforms for e-Government including:

    a) development and establishment of appropriate ICT technical standards; 
    b) setting up a cloud-based infrastructure in the existing national data centre;
    c) supporting the implementation of elements of the National Information Security Framework;
    d) supporting the establishment and management of Government data integration;
    e) developing shared services;
    f) implementing an e-procurement system at selected MDAs;
    g) deploying selected e-services.

4. 	Project Management ($3 million IDA and $3 million Government of Uganda) 

This component will finance project management and coordination including procurement, financial management, monitoring and evaluation, and environmental and social safeguards management.

Project Cost and Financing Arrangements

The total project financing will be $85 million, (see table 3 below) of which $75 million (88 per cent) will be an IDA credit, and Government of Uganda/NITA-U counterpart funding will be $10 million, which is 12 per cent equivalent. The counterpart funding will mainly cater for taxes, clearing and forwarding charges.

Loan Terms and Conditions

The terms of the loan are as given in table 4. The loan amount is $75 million, the loan period is 38 years, the commitment charge is 0.5 per cent per annum on the unwithdrawn financing balance, and the service charge is 0.75 per cent per annum.

The financing has conditions, which are shown in the report. 

Financing Conditionality

This is shown in table 5. The repayment period is 32 years, the grace period is six years, the present value of the loan is $29.36 million, the debt service of the loan is $77.02 million, the grant element is 61 per cent, and the discount rate is 5 per cent.

Economic Rate of Return

Given the benefits of the project, the feasibility study demonstrates economic viability of the project with an expected internal rate of return of 17 per cent.

Project Institutional Implementation Arrangements 
The project will be implemented over a period of five years. The NITA-U will be the implementing entity with the overall responsibility for the successful implementation of the project, with the Ministry of Information and Communications Technology providing overall policy guidance as well as general supervision and monitoring of the project implementation.

Observations and Recommendations 

1. 	Implementation Delays of the NBI/e-Government Project 

The committee noted that the NBI/EGI project is funded by a concessional loan from the Exim Bank of China with counterpart funding from Government of Uganda. In 2006, a contract was signed between the Ministry of ICT and M/s Huawei Technologies Company Limited of the Peoples Republic of China at a contract sum of $106,590,305. 

The project was divided into three phases and implementation was staggered in 27 months. The project commenced in July 2007 and was expected to be completed in June 2011. However, the completion date has been revised several times. Though phase I and II of this project have been completed, phase III of this project has not yet been completed and is approximately four years behind schedule against the original project completion date, as it had to be re-scoped by NITA-U to take into account lessons learnt from the implementation of phases I and II of this project.

The committee recommends that NITA-U should, therefore, fast-track the implementation of phase III of the NBI/e-Government infrastructure phase to avoid further delays. 

2. 	Key Implementation Impediments to the NBI/e-Government Infrastructure Project 

The committee recommends that NITA-U should ensure that the implementation impediments experienced in the first phases of the NBI/e-Government infrastructure project do not manifest again during the implementation of the Regional Communications Infrastructure Programme (RCIP). The Regional Communications Infrastructure Programme should be adequately supervised and optic fibre cable capacity issues addressed in line with recent technology advancements and capabilities. 

3. 	Budgetary Implications of this Loan 
The committee recommends that the Government of Uganda/NITA-Uganda should ensure timely provision for its counterpart funding for the project when it becomes effective. 

4. 	Project Sustainability 

The committee recommends that Government should provide adequate funds to these beneficiary public institutions in order to ensure the sustainability of this project. In addition, all the above resources should be transferred directly to NITA-Uganda to avoid instances of building arrears and to realise the revenue required to develop the sector.

5. 	Strong Partnerships and clearly Delineated Roles as needed between the Government and Private Sector

The committee recommends that Government should explore various Public Private Partnership (PPP) modalities as a way of leveraging long term leases/indefeasible right of use to give incentive to the private sector to invest in upgrading their existing network infrastructure and/or building additional infrastructure to provide the needed connectivity to government sites and invest in closing infrastructure gaps in unserved and underserved areas and avoid any displacement of private investment.

6. 	Resettlement Action Plan 

The committee recommends close coordination between NITA-Uganda and UNRA to ensure that the implementation of the civil work activities of this project follows, as much as possible, the already existing right of way and road reserves in order to minimise land compensation costs. 

7. 	Project Impacts on Improving Access to and use of ICT in Uganda 

The committee noted that this project will have a positive impact on the population and in the region.

8. 	Contingency Plan 

The committee notes that the project does not have any contingency plan yet one of the substantial risks the project faces is under costing of ICT infrastructure components and cost escalation of project elements due to delayed execution of project activities.

The committee recommends that part of the project financial resources should be allocated to cater for price and physical contingencies.

9. 	Financing Recurrent Expenditure using Loan Resources 

The committee recommends reallocation of loan funds from this component amounting to $3 million to infrastructural development of the sector and contingency financing of the project. The committee further recommends that in future, Government should not borrow to finance consumptive expenditure.

Conclusion 

The committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow up to SDR 54.4 million, which is $75 million, from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to finance the Regional Communications Infrastructure Programme be approved, subject to the above recommendations. I beg to move.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the report of the Committee on National Economy on the Regional Communications Infrastructure Programme. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on the Table documents regarding land, which is a brief to Parliament, agreed minutes of negotiations, financing agreements, Status of the National Backbone Project Closure Report for NBI Phase I project appraisal document. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay minutes of the Committee on National Economy regarding this report. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. The report has been signed by 14 of the 28 members, so it is eligible for debate. Are there any comments?

4.11
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the committee for the report. Unfortunately, they have not talked about the first, second and third phases. There is an Auditor-General’s report, which indicated that the price of the works, which were done under phases I, II and III were exaggerated. That means that there was a lot of “air”. People stole our money when they received it during those three phases.

We got a loan of $107 million from China Exim Bank and yet MTN did a similar project of their own at about $3 million. In Rwanda, they did the entire country at $18 million. Now we are here borrowing another $75 million plus a grant of about $10 million to add on to what we have already spent. I think projects in Uganda are too expensive. That is why I think Uganda must be in another world. How can you borrow $75 million plus the grant of $15 million, which is almost $90 million, to do that small area and yet that same area could have been done maybe for $10 million? Who is implementing these projects at such high costs?

Madam Speaker, I would have been happier if we had first discussed the report of the Auditor-General or if the committee had made a comment on the report of the Auditor-General on phases I, II and III. 

I see on page 12 of the report - I have been talking to my brother, hon. David Bahati, the minister. By then, he was one of those who queried that first phase because he was a member of the committee. I do not see the interest rate; I do not know at what interest rate we are borrowing this money. The terms mentioned are as follows: 38 years, 0.5 per cent per annum on un-withdrawn balance and service charge of 0.75 per cent on withdrawn. If there is an interest, it should have been in this table. Why should you separate it from the other conditions? I know you have said that you will show me. If it is on page 9, I do not know how much it is but you will show me.

Madam Speaker, we have got loans but if you read the Auditor-General’s report of last year, it says that a lot of money, which we have borrowed, has not been utilised and they are charging us a commitment charge for un-withdrawn money. When you get money and you do not use it, you are charged. Why should we go and borrow when we do not want to use it? Why don’t we borrow exactly what we should use? -(Interjection)- I am talking; I have been in Parliament for 15 years but you have just come. 

These monies that we lose every year could do something better. If last year only we lost almost Shs 20 billion and you count the amount we have lost over the years - at one time we lost Shs 16 billion, another time we lost maybe Shs 10 billion; if this money was put to proper use other than losing it in commitment charges yet we have not spent, it would have been better. Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I would be very happy this time if we put the conditionalities here before we approve this loan request. So the implementers would know that if this money is not utilised as per the agreement, those who have not utilised it must be held liable. 

Why am I raising this? I am told that one of the reasons why contracts delay to be implemented is because people are waiting to be bribed. As they wait to be bribed, they hold up projects. Even when they are implementing, they do not want to pay unless they have been given money. This is very dangerous. We should bring people to order if we want this country to move; unless we want to be like the NRM government which says they are fighting corruption every year but we do not see it being fought.

Madam Speaker, I am one of those who still disagree that phase I, II and III worked. I was the Leader of the Opposition and they brought equipment to my office but it was not working!  I do not know if it works now but it was not working, and this is the same project. The company which was involved then was called Huawei. This company stole money and I think we should have blacklisted this company in Uganda because in Korea it was blacklisted, in UK it was blacklisted and I think other countries. I saw it in the Economist, and all this was because of poor work and stealing money. However, here in Uganda it is not blacklisted because those who should blacklist it are involved in “eating” with them.

MS KAABULE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the honourable member, who is asking about phase I, that phase I was completed and it covered various areas which are not covered under phase V. Phase I was completed and it covered the key towns of Jinja, Mukono, Entebbe, Bombo and Kampala and this was within the optical fibre cable project. It also interconnected 28 ministries and government departments. The phase we are talking about now is to cover different areas, not the ones that were covered under phase I.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, if that is the chairperson, then I am worried. I said that we wanted a report from the committee on phase I, II and III and what work has been done under these phases. I was raising issues that for phases I to III, we borrowed $107 million but the work done was very poor. We are saying that there is equipment in the office of the Leader of the Opposition, am sure even in the Speaker’s office, which has never worked. 

Madam Speaker, I do not know what we are talking about now. How can we bring another phase when the first, second and third phases are not operational? That is the reason why I am raising this. As we are doing this, we need to know what happened to the first phase and why it has not worked, and how sure are we that the second phase will work. Technologies are changing; we can even borrow all this money today and the technology changes and this is a loss.

Lastly, how long is this infrastructure phase going to last? I cannot see that information anywhere. I can see they are talking about net benefits and other things but they are not talking about that. We are going to pay the loan for 36 years but how long is this project going to take? It is like borrowing money for a road; you can pay in 40 years but after 10 years, the road is worn out and then what happens. So you start paying back the money when you do not have the road. Likewise, the committee should have told us how much we are borrowing, what the benefits are and if it would still be working after 36 years. This is because the money you borrow and payment must be equal to the life of the project. So, I need the committee to help me to understand what the life of this project is. I thank you, Madam Speaker.        

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Mariam Nalubega comes up, I would like to confirm that on my desk, I have an antique. That gadget is there and when I received it, I was very excited because you could call the President and other people. However, I tried to call the President on that line and failed. I also tried to call the PS for ICT and failed. I think I have tried to call three to four ministries while testing. They are just decorations; it is on my desk there. 

4.16
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy for the report. 

I think I am not going to differ a lot from my colleague, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I have been sitting on the ICT committee since the Eighth Parliament to date. Madam Speaker and colleagues, we need to iron out things. If something is wrong, we should say that it is wrong. The NBI/EGI project was misconceived. We are having trouble and issues as the ICT committee because we supervise NITA-U and the other authorities that are implementing this project. 

Like hon. Nandala-Mafabi has said, when you look at the project design, this project is supposed to enhance communication in Government. We bought very expensive equipment but to date, Cabinet has to travel all the way from Kampala to go to State House to meet the President. In Berlin, Cabinet meetings are held via videoconferencing. Ministers here are not communicating and inter-linkages in Government are non-existent. Connectivity and networking is not there. 

This e-Government project was supposed to enhance employment creation by facilitating business process outsourcing. As of today, we still talk about one business process outsourcing centre here in Kampala. You will not find one in the west or the east and not even an expansion in the central. We are spending so much money and earning little out of it and the tax payer is paying. 

I think that as we go to the third phase, - honourable minister, you know the issues of NBI very well - let us not hide our heads but revise what should be revised. I know that the Committee on National Economy did not even consult the ICT committee. I wish that you had because we would have told you our issues and the pain that we have over this project, because we want our youth to get jobs. 

The cost of the MBs has not reduced as is being reported here. People out there, and even Government, are still buying MBs from private operators. Look at Parliament, who is facilitating our internet here; do we get it from the NBI? No! What are we doing for this country? Why are we causing pain for our children and grandchildren by getting so indebted and we are not getting anything out of it?

Madam Speaker, I am not here to oppose this loan request. I want this money to be borrowed but for the right cause. Can we re-examine this project for the good of this country? We want to be like other states; for example, Malaysia is using little money but on target while we are scattering because some other people have interests. Our interest should not be individuals but Uganda as a country and what we want to offer for our generation.

Madam Speaker, I would support this loan request only if it is revised, examined and we go back to the strategy and the principles for which we conceived it. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.21
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is truth in what Members of Parliament are saying and in the frustrations surrounding the first project. However, learning from experience, we know that there are some MDAs that are now connected. I do not know how efficient they are but what I think is that this new project is to rectify some of those connectivity problems that we have between institutions and some other MDAs. 

By the time that loan was passed in Parliament, NITA-Uganda had not been put in place. Now that there is an institution called NITA-Uganda, we think that there will be better coordination because now there is an institution responsible. At that time, I think Government got a loan and started – (Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, my Chair, hon. Kasule, and Madam Speaker. My brother, it is not rectifying the old ones; it is saying, we are extending to another 50 MDAs, five municipal councils, four public universities - They are just adding and not talking about the old ones. 

You have heard from the Speaker that hers is just there. The Leader of Opposition, I am sure, also agrees with this because before I left that office I had tried to call internally within Parliament and failed. Therefore, my brother, you are saying that it is going to improve but it is not rectifying; it is expanding on a wrong platform. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I think you have confirmed that they were just expanding to those different institutions without creating the connectivity. That was the earlier project. However, this recent one talks about connectivity between institutions, where Parliament communicates to the Ministry of ICT and to others. I think that connectivity would be created. 

However, we now have some comfort in the fact that there is an institution that will report directly to Parliament, and that is NITA-Uganda. By the time that project was running, NITA-Uganda had not been created. Now that it is there, we have somebody to report back - if you have used $10 million, tell us what you have used that money for and how it is working, looking at the outcomes. 

I think it is our responsibility to complete that project because since it was done in phases, that means that there were things that were deliberately left out that should be completed using this second phase. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.25
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Information and communication technology is one of the most crucial areas that we should be investing in. In the NRM manifesto and programmes, ICT is one of the priority areas but what is funny is that the NRM Government does not invest in ICT. If you look at the budget, they put about Shs 20 billion for the Ministry of ICT. If you budget Shs 20 billion out of Shs 24 trillion, it cannot be a priority.

This loan would have been ideal as one of the efforts to invest in ICT. I sit on the Committee of National Economy and we were told by the Director of Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) that we did not need all that money amounting to $74 million then. He said that they could do the job with $11 million. I am now surprised that we have come back with $75 million; I do not know what has happened. The money that was borrowed earlier, as has been ably pointed out by hon. Mariam Nalubega and hon. Nandala-Mafabi, was squandered. 

Furthermore, even the equipment and fibre that they installed was of an inferior quality that will not serve the country for a long time. If you compare it to the one that was installed in Rwanda and Kenya, ours is inferior and the bandwidth is smaller. This shows the extent to which our country focuses on ICT.

We have a teleconferencing facility here at Parliament where people should be able to communicate so that the Clerk should not be moving to attend meetings. Even the Speaker and the President can talk over a tele-system but this does not work. When I used to sit on the ICT committee, we insisted that we did not want to meet NITA-U people here because we could video conference with them but this never happened. They always came here and yet we have a special room with the necessary equipment, which does not work. Therefore, if we invest in equipment and spend so much money and yet the equipment does not work, what are you doing for the economy and the country? These are some of the issues that we raised.

I, therefore, think that we should not approve this loan unless the minister brings us a report of what has been done. Even a forensic audit was done by a Kenyan firm on this project and they made recommendations. The company agreed that they would make the mistakes right. 

Honourable members, the most important thing is what the Director of UCC said. He said that we did not need that money and we could do this with $11 million. What has happened? Is this money perhaps being channelled somewhere else? We do not understand. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.29
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is painful that in an economy like ours, we can afford to throw away money without bothering to know if it is not performing what it is supposed to perform. I would like to propose that we require the minister to present to this House a report on the performance of the previous phases before we can go ahead and approve this loan request. 

If there is already evidence that what was purchased has not done what it should have done and there is no explanation, and yet we are going ahead to request for more money to expand something that is non-functional, we would be doing this country a disservice. Can we require that the minister presents to us a performance report of what we have already approved for the same purpose? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Thembo Nyombi): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleagues, for the issues that you have raised. Although the debate is not complete, I thought that I should rise and put right some of the issues that have been raised, which in our view have been misunderstood.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of phases I and II of the National Backbone Project, colleagues may wish to know that the project was designed in such a way that it had three phases: the e-Government Project, the National Backbone Infrastructure, which was phase II, and the third phase is commencing soon. Therefore, when we talk of the $106 million and we start comparing with other countries, we are actually comparing the incomparable. We are looking at the whole project that has never been completed and comparing it with other projects that were completed.

I would like to say that yes, this project had quite a number of quality-at-entry, issues. We have been engaging the ICT committee; colleagues here are aware that the issue of the forensic audit originated from Parliament. The President too had concerns over this project and we in the ministry had concerns, which we put forth and a forensic audit was done. Actually, when you read the outcome of that forensic audit, it identified some inadequacies, which were because of the design of the project. It was designed in phases and given to one contractor; we engaged the contractor and I would like to be on record that all the concerns and issues that were identified in phase I, the e-Government Project, and phase II, the National Backbone Infrastructure Project, have been put right. All the issues have been closed and that is why at first we had only connected 27 ministries, departments and agencies but today NITA-U has continued to connect other agencies and so far they are 94.

After the operationalisation of the National Backbone Infrastructure Project, we were able to save close to $2 million a year. Government operations like IFMS are running on the national backbone infrastructure. I know that there is some equipment in one office or the other that may not function as they are supposed to; I am very sorry, Madam Speaker, that your phone could not call another phone. Probably, that could have been a maintenance issue that can be put right. 

I have communicated with the ICT committee in my office on more than three occasions. We know that there are Government agencies that have raised issues about their equipment not working and we have gone there to check why the equipment is not working. What we have found out is that there are a few maintenance issues and when we do handle these issues, the system is up and working. So, really –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, perhaps my English could be problematic; how do you maintain a system that has never worked? Is the Minister for ICT in order to say that the equipment of the Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition or the Deputy Speaker cannot work because it lacks maintenance? Is he in order?   

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable minister, I think you should help us by solving the problem because there is a problem and you need to send your people to solve it.

MR THEMBO NYOMBI: I thank you, Madam Speaker. It is good that we have heard this and definitely, our technical team will work on it. Other agencies that have this system and it is not working should alert us. We shall send our technical team to look at it. However, I was saying that I have this system in my office and it is up and working and I have communicated with the ICT committee. 

We agree that the project had quality-at-entry issues, which we have largely put right and phases I and II have been closed. The Auditor-General raised issues and these issues have been closed. Most of these issues had no relation to technology but were around civil works, depth of the fibre and how it was buried, among others. This is why we are connected from 27 to 94 agencies. There is no way you can connect more agencies when the system is not working. Therefore, I would like to confirm, Madam Speaker, that the first and second phases of the project are up and running.

The reason as to why we are requesting to borrow this money, and why I would appeal to you to support us to borrow this money, is that we have the infrastructure - the road - and we now need to put vehicles. That is why you see that component of e-Government application. It is one thing to have the national backbone infrastructure but another to have the applications to run on this infrastructure. There is no way you would appreciate the resilience of this infrastructure without having applications on this infrastructure. Therefore, the reason as to why we need this money is to have the applications on this infrastructure connecting more public agencies, going to areas where we did not go to like Karamoja and West Nile, and building our capacity to cover the policy gaps where we have been left far behind. 

Honourable members, you do know that ICT is evolving at a very high speed and that is why we are requesting for this money. If there are problems, we shall solve them. Technology is evolving very fast but we are sure and certain that phase I and II are up and working and we need this money to put the applications on this infrastructure so that we can appreciate the kind of infrastructure that we have. 

I appeal to you, colleagues, to support this loan request so that we increase our connectivity and reduce on the costs of Internet bandwidth. I have heard a colleague say that Internet bandwidth has not come down. I need evidence to this because I know that four years ago, a megabyte per second per month in this country was $1,200 and it came down to $600 because of the interventions of NITA-U. In the last two years, we have brought this cost down to $300.  With this intervention, we want to bring the cost below $100 megabyte per second per month and we shall do it because we know what to do. Thank you very much. Please, support us, colleagues, and you will see where we shall take this country.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House do approve the loan request.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Minister, since you said that you have done a forensic audit and phases I and II are clear, let us share it. Bring it to the House so that we have the same information that you are talking about. We want that forensic audit laid before this House

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: We will do that, Madam Speaker, and thank you very much, colleagues, for supporting us. Just wait for results now. We will share this report with you; there is nothing to hide. We have the project acceptance for phase I and II. I beg to lay the two on the Table. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have a procedural issue to raise on this. The minister refers to phase I and II, but in the report they say phase III is supposed to be completed by 2015 and we have one month to the end of 2015. Now the minister is talking about phase I and II; why hasn’t he talked about phase III unless there is something they left out?

He is also confusing two things; even in this table, the National Backbone Infrastructure was in phase I and EDI, that is, e-government was also there. The first phase was $8.2 million and the EDI was 21.9 on page 4. Now he is trying to separate these projects and say that phase I did NBI and phase II did EDI yet each phase was doing both.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, I have just directed the minister to bring the report of the forensic audit on those two phases to this House so that you can take him on on the things you are raising.

Honourable members, join me in welcoming people from an important part of this country, members of the Gema ku Mwino group from Buyende in Busoga represented by hon. Suleiman Balyejusa and hon. Kadogo. Please, stand up if you are the ones; tusangaire. (Applause)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATIONS BILL, 2015

Clause 27

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chairperson, yesterday we deferred decision on clause 27 on the establishment of a fund for the organisations. Our position is that we think this fund is necessary in the event that there will be need to support some of our local NGOs that may be struggling to help our population.

Let us remember that some of the international NGOs that come here get their funding from their governments. Let us remember that many of the local NGOs operating here also get funds from governments abroad. Therefore, what is wrong with us also setting up a fund to support some of our local NGOs? This is the spirit in which this proposal was made. I beg, honourable members, that we consider this and that this fund be established. I thank you.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to add my voice to that of my senior colleague, the minister. We run a mixed economy where we have the interests of Government supported by the interests of non-governmental organisations. We focus on the same issues but differently.

Madam Chairperson, of all the thousands of NGOs we have in the country, virtually 99.9 per cent of them operate on support from outside the country. This endangers our sovereignty and national interests. It means that we can have the interests of external forces overriding our local interests. It is not that we should not entertain them but we should also have the ability to develop the capacity of our own local NGOs or CBOs. The SACCOs that we operate in villages are quasi-NGOs or CBOs and yet they are supported by Government. The Government intervenes in the private sector where companies run into trouble. This happens even elsewhere in other countries.

Where our people have invested their interests, which may include financial interests, and they are in a crisis, there should be a way of supporting them to come out of such crises. This fund, which can attract donations and support from whoever wishes our local NGOs or CBOs well, would attract support and this can be entertained to help the local CBOs.

The question yesterday was: What is the criterion? I think we can establish the criteria or we can provide for criteria so that the fund is utilised in a manner that is transparent, objective and based on the need. However, to do away with the fund, Madam Chairperson, would be denying our local NGOs and CBOs to emerge and run independently even when they want to stand on their feet to object to certain wrong things and immorality parachuted onto them from outside.

I beg that colleagues really consider this matter with the very appeal that we are giving so that we pass this fund.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I have heard a very convincing case presented by the honourable Minister for Internal Affairs and supported by the hon. Simon Mulongo. However, I have one difficulty. If we invest public resources into any company, organ, body or NGO, there must be audit requirements. If you are putting in government money - our public resources - into a non-governmental organisation, first of all you must have the legal framework to audit that organisation. Where is that legal framework?

Secondly, is that the path you want to walk? Do you want to create a regime that permits you to invest public resources in non-governmental organisations and then audit them? Yesterday I asked the question, where is the delineation between non-governmental organisations and other apparatus of Government? If you fund them, they stop being non-governmental organisations; they become public funded entities, departments, agencies - whatever name you want to give them. You have to drop the name “Non-Governmental Organisation” and call them Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs), the traditional nomenclature that we are very used to.

Madam Chairperson, I have that difficulty. I just want the chairperson to show me the legal regime that would permit him to audit them and I also want him to convince me that this is what he wants to do.

MR BABA: Hon. Odoi-Oywelowo, aren’t you aware that Government is funding missionary hospitals and some private schools? Have they become public entities? This has been happening. Therefore, why can’t we support some for a service?

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, he asked us to answer and I wanted to say that one of the reasons why the current Bill is coming into place is to ensure strengthening transparency and accountability of the NGOs. Clause 36 requires that NGOs file annual returns and furnish the bureau with information about their sources of funding and accountability. Therefore, they are required to furnish the bureau with such information including accountability and audited annual reports. This is already provided for in the Bill.

Madam Chairperson, the issue is that the NGOs’ categorisation is very clear. We have international NGOs (INGOs), we have business oriented international NGOs, we have environmental NGOs and we have government operated NGOs. A number of those NGOs operating here are actually government operated from outside. We also have the quasi-autonomous NGOs and then there are those, which are purely private NGOs. 

Therefore, this categorisation shows that there is always a relationship between those NGOs and Government. Besides, the framework we adopted in this country is that of cooperation where the Government and NGOs focus on the wellbeing of the society, approaching service delivery from different directions. This cooperation can be enhanced further to do away with the suspicion there is of hatred and that NGOs could be operating as enemies or subversively. We should come in as shareholders in delivering the public good. This will enhance that.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I wanted to answer the question asked by hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo about how this will be audited. The law that we passed here, the National Audit Act, actually requires every entity, which receives even Shs 1 from Government, to be audited. Therefore, the legal framework is already there. I think that as long as this fund is established within the framework and within the MTEF of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, we do not have any problem with that arrangement.

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. You know the havoc these foreign NGOs are causing to our country. They are the ones that promote homosexuality and very many other evils in this country. Therefore, the earlier we do away with them or try to control them, the better. How do we control them? We control them by promoting our own home-grown NGOs so that we can promote those interests that NGOs actually promote. 

My worry is that if we give these foreign NGOs more support, it means that we are not promoting our national sovereignty. I would propose that we find a way or a methodology of funding our local NGOs so that we strengthen them. As time goes on, maybe they can take over from these foreign NGOs. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I know that there are some troublesome local and international NGOs. However, I just want to give an example from my district. Plan International is both a German NGO at the international level but it has got another, which is local, and they have done tremendous work. They are in this whole country, in Tororo, Lira, and they have done a lot of work on their own. 

The second one is Kamuli Mission Hospital. Before we got what we call Mulago, this was the only hospital there. Therefore, when we criticise, let us not put all of them in the same pot and squeeze and demonise them.

MS AOL: Madam Chairperson, I once worked with NGOs and NGOs are supposed to be autonomous. The moment we legally fund them, they will lose that autonomy.

Secondly, we have good NGOs like the Anti-Corruption Coalition. These ones are not enemies. They are supposed to check governance issues, unless we really want to do away with them. 

I also know that we have missionary schools, which used to be funded by NGOs but later on, Government took them over. I believe that those faith-based schools started complaining a lot when Government took over the running of those schools. Right now, we have private schools, which are not run with support from Government.

I know Lacor Hospital gets a lot of support from Government. When I was still in the local council, Lacor Hospital was getting this support without us putting this into law. Why do we now want to put it into law? Is it not going to compromise their autonomy?

We need to look deep into this because with every coin, you will get two sides. Unless we really consult a lot - Thinking of funding CBOs and NGOs aside, we do not even have enough for Government. Look at the health sector. This sector is supposed to get about 15 per cent of the budget according to the Abuja Declaration; have we ever reached even 10 per cent of the national budget? We have not. Therefore, why should we right now make it legal that we should fund non-governmental organisations or that we should put something for them?

My thinking is that we should go a little slow on that. They are able to operate; in fact, they have been operating without us making a law that NGOs must be funded. We are going to compromise these NGOs; they are not going to do their work the way they have been doing on their own. It is my thinking that we look at the criteria. You should bring the criteria for handling them here. Bring them and lay them on the Table so that we see if they are appropriate. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to give examples so that we know where we are going. You are aware of a man called Teddy Cheeye who is in prison. The Minister of Health by then was hon. Elioda Tumwesigye and you know what happened. There were GAVI funds available and many NGOs went there to try and access these funds. People formed NGOs for the purpose of picking this money as they had seen free money and some of them have ended up in jail. Those who were lucky are not there. 

An NGO is formed for a purpose. It is not formed for the purpose of getting resources from Government. It is formed to do particular activities - if I have enough resources, I will do x and y. 

Regarding missionary hospitals, I can tell you that they can do it but they will always implement a specific item. Those days when we were giving out free drugs, they would get free drugs. Nowadays, if they want drugs - for example, if Nsambya Hospital wants drugs, they go to National Medical Stores and buy their own drugs. Otherwise, it has also got its own Joint Medical Stores. You cannot create a government fund to say that we are now going to fund NGOs. You are going to bring a swarm of NGOs whose purpose is to eat public money.

The second example I want to give is of SACCOs. When we said, “form SACCOs because we are going to give money”, you remember what happened. A family would sit and record people, they form a SACCO, after picking the money it collapses. We must be careful regarding public resources. 

If there is an NGO doing a good job, for example, Anti-Corruption Coalition, there is the Office of the IGG which has a budget or the Office of the Auditor-General or there could be a budget in the Ministry of Finance for good governance. They can decide, if they want to implement a project, to go for these NGOs to assist them to implement the projects. It is a one-off and when it is done, they account, they are audited and that one is closed. However, you should not legalise or make a law to create a permanent fund for an NGO. It is very dangerous.

What we have to do with this clause is to delete it. We should have deleted it yesterday. Maybe there are some people in the Ministry of Internal Affairs who are interested in these NGOs so that they can create them and get money. 

I will give a third example of UNRA and Ministry of Works. They always carry out research and feasibility studies for roads. What they do is that they go and buy land in that area so that they are compensated. This could be another way. They want money here so they go and form NGOs and pick public money. This is a very dangerous clause for public resources. 

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, if we do not want to waste time because we want to progress, we better delete this clause. I am sure that many members will agree with me that this clause should not be passed.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I want to speak from two angles. One is the experience I have had with NGOs when I was dealing with the resettlement of people from IDP camps. Non-governmental organisations can be defined and have been defined in some contexts as non-government organisations that thrive where Government does not reach. If there is a need, which Government does not fulfil, other interested parties or individuals play a part, which meets the need. There are many areas where Government does not reach and where individuals or groups form organisations and they meet the needs of the people. 

Therefore, to say that Government must reach every corner is to be over optimistic about Government and even to think that Government can be so efficient. Some of us who have participated in governments do know that this sense of efficiency is an illusion. Therefore, non-governmental organisations do play roles where Government does not reach. That is the first point.

Secondly, many of the NGOs that we see operating in Uganda, in Africa and the Third World are government-funded and that is a fact. In fact, if you want to know how we can be influenced and how we are influenced by governments, study the role of NGOs in their performance of certain services in the country. In the end, they actually penetrate the societies where formal governments do not go but their agents reach there through NGOs. Therefore, anybody who is not studying that seriously should now begin to think that NGOs are penetration organisations of those countries, which come to us. Where Government does not reach, they reach there through non-governmental organisations. That is why the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the late Minister of Internal Affairs was very concerned that we should have a legal framework to control the impact of these NGOs in as far as they can be penetration organisations under the guise of non-governmental organisations.

If I am not making sense then there is a problem. I am saying that the law that we have in place now, which is trying to start a fund, has two great purposes. The first one is that NGOs serving good purposes where Government cannot reach get support from Government. We already know about hospitals and private schools under this arrangement. Therefore, Government already supports NGO activities where Government cannot reach because Government is not adequately equipped financially at present.

Secondly, to have it in law that NGOs that are doing a good job should be supported because Government cannot do the job they are supposed to do but somebody is doing it on behalf of the people – that Government should have a fund and can extend support is a legitimate point, which must be supported -(Interruption)

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for giving way. I am failing to understand. The minister says that we want to fund NGOs because they are doing complimentary work or they go to areas where the Government cannot extend services. Are you going to take the same approach to private institutions that are carrying out very good work where the government cannot reach such as private schools or private medical service providers? Are you going to do the same for those private service providers?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 27 is the only provision in this Bill that talks about funding of NGOs. Essentially, this will mean that once established, this fund will be the basket into which Government and donor money will go. The NGOs shall then apply for that fund on criteria to be decided by guidelines issued by the board. 

The reason I wanted to seek clarification from the minister is that by doing so, you would essentially be running NGOs through this fund. This is because for you to get any funding, whether you are a donor or not, you will have - If this law comes into place and a donor is going to give any money, all that money will be put in this basket and it is Government money. That is the way it is. 

Honourable minister, we have gone through this law and we asked you at the committee level to tell us where else in this Bill it is indicated how NGOs shall access funding. There is no other provision. That is why it was the humble position of the committee to amend it and put a provision as in the committee report that the existence of this fund shall not prejudice. Let me read it for the benefit of the minister. You are accepting the amendment as it is, which essentially means that the existence of this fund shall not prejudice the work of the NGOs to raise money outside this fund - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Hon. Kivumbi, the Shadow Minister of Internal Affairs, the information I would like to give you is great. We are not against it. In fact, when you delete this clause, what you are saying is already covered. People are free to access money anywhere. 

The information I am giving is that we do not want money to come from Government to go and do activities meant for NGOs. If you have formed your NGO, do what you want. We only want you to do it legally. Do not bring homosexuals as you are saying, etcetera. Get your money and do what you want. We do not want to give you our money and that is it.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am wondering how hon. Nandala-Mafabi would run a government if he cannot recognise weaknesses among those who are trying to contribute to the running of a country and come in to help them. Government – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank you for the guidance you gave. You said that there is Plan International in Kamuli, which has done a wonderful job. I do not think that there was an NGO fund. You said that they are doing a very wonderful job and we have been in this Government for 30 years. When did you notice that we need to fund NGOs so that they are able to work?

Madam Chairperson, is the honourable minister, Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere, in order to question how I will run a government when I know that you can run a government without funding NGOs, something that the NRM Government has done for 30 years? Is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Unfortunately, I have not read your manifesto; therefore, I cannot make that ruling. (Laughter)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Chairperson, it is easy to claim but it is another thing to authenticate a claim. Government is not saying that the fund will be given freely to every NGO; no! That is not even possible. We have ministries, which are not getting enough money and they are government departments – (Interjections) - Please, give me a chance. We are talking of assisting NGOs on merit. They are doing a job such as that one carried out by Mengo Hospital and Nsambya Hospital. However, they do not have enough money. Government cannot carry out every job that concerns health and we assist them to do that job. 

Finally - (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank you and indeed thank the honourable minister for accepting to provide clarification to a backbencher. It is really good manners that ministers give us clarifications. This is because they are the ones that are running Government. 

Madam Chairperson, I have three issues for which I want clarification if we create this fund. Outrightly, I am of course opposed to it, but let the honourable minister clarify to me on accountability for the public funds. We have done very poorly every time we have tried to put money in organisations and pockets which are not Government’s. We put money in the mariner in the hotel at Munyonyo and up to now, we have not recovered it from the time of CHOGM.

The honourable minister now wants to portray an image that we can follow up public funds. Let him assure me, this country and we, the taxpayers, that they have the capacity as Government to follow up every coin that they are going to put into these organisations. 

Where does he expect to mobilise these additional resources from and yet we come here all the time and cry about a budget deficit? Can he assure this country that he has extra money? He does not even have money to deal with hepatitis B; the outbreak in Serere is terrible - I will be raising this matter tomorrow – and yet he says he has money! Where is he going to get this money from? 

Lastly, can he account for the mess in the money that we gave to NGOs for the global fund? It would appear to me that Government has some NGOs that they have earmarked and they are looking for a way to channel our money. We have serious deficits in government sectors - education, health and everything. Can the honourable minister convince me that he has answers to these three issues? 

Otherwise, I agree with the view that colleagues have that this should be deleted. Nobody should even be masquerading that we have money to dish around especially when they are accusing NGOs of being briefcase organisations because they do not declare their money. Now you want to run around and even put our money in institutions that do not declare their funds. 

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. There is something I did not understand from what the minister was saying. He said that there are certain areas that Government cannot reach. Why isn’t Government reaching those areas? Isn’t it because of shortage of funds in Government? Government cannot employ its own people to reach those places due to shortage of funds. Where are we going to get funds to pay the NGOs if Government cannot employ our people to do the work there? 

MR KAFUDA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I also wanted to inform the minister that most international charity organisations that have been funding our local NGOs are withdrawing their funds and donations. 

Madam Chairperson, we are talking about the accountability issue, but there is no way an NGO will give you accountability. There is no law that will be formed to audit NGOs. You are talking about the schools which are being aided by Government as well as some hospitals but the aid which is there is to pay salaries for teachers and give drugs to those health centres. 

For the case of NGOs, we are probably going to allow each and every family to come up with an NGO like the way it is done in SACCOs so that they can access this free fund. Madam Chairperson, this will not work; we cannot support that. These are charity organisations. Take an example of a situation whereby a child has failed to get school fees and I dig into my pockets and pay school fees for the child. If this child is an orphan, I will take care of that orphan. 

We cannot say that we are creating a fund for these NGOs because tomorrow they are going to close. Take a look at the number of NGOs that are functional. Take a look at the number of NGOs that are registered. You find that out of 100 there are only five that are functional, and these are NGOs that are being funded by international NGOs. However, for the locals here, I am telling you we are simply attracting thieves. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do appreciate the need for transparency and accountability. However, are you suggesting that those genuine struggling Ugandan NGOs should not be supported at all? Should they struggle and close? 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I think this should not even be “non-governmental organisations”; we should scrap off the “non” and they become “governmental organisations”. This is because an NGO is a non-profit making body. The danger crippling of public service delivery is in funding these NGOs which is simple. However, if Government is run by NGOs especially in service delivery, the Government can crumble because it is not supposed to get those services. The Government cannot delegate its duties to NGOs. It is the role of the Government to provide funds and services to the public and not NGOs. Where would they get the money? 

If the policy of Government is to provide UPE to each and every parish and give them a primary school, why don’t you take money there instead of an NGO complementing a Government policy? You would be working against your own policy. You pass a policy to implement it with your money, then you give it to another entity to implement it for you; do you think that would be a good job? You cannot be in charge. You must be in charge because you have money to fund your own policies. If you do not have money to fund your policies, how then do you find money to give to others? 

I can give an example. I was the Minister of State for Primary Healthcare and back then, we used to give money to NGOs to supply drugs. Did they supply? When we changed the policy, Parliament said that it would provide money to National Medical Stores and right away, the coverage of supply increased. Therefore, you are now turning around from implementing your services as Government; you want someone else to do that duty for you and provide the funds for you. It should actually be deleted. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Chairperson, I hope members have the Bill. Page 22, Section 28 is headed “Audit”. I will read it: “The Auditor-General or an auditor appointed by the Auditor-General shall, in each financial year, audit the accounts of the Board”. It is in here! We all know – (Interjections) – Please, hon. Odoi, can you give me a chance to complete what I am saying? We all know that a board is set up with objectives and responsibilities. I am not going into details of that matter. 

Secondly, there is the funding of these NGOs according to section 27 - establishment of a fund or organisation - and in (2)(b) it says that the funds may come as grants, gifts or donations from Government or other sources made with the approval of the minister responsible for finance. That may have been amended but what I am saying, Madam Chairperson, is that three things are very clear: if money is appropriated by Government, there exist already mechanisms of checking on the accountability. Secondly, is money going to be given to every NGO that exists? The answer is no. This is so because we are dealing with reasonable people running a country. 

Thirdly, I thought my sister and member of this House, hon. Alice Alaso, was a Christian; the moment you see everybody who is not you as a bad person and does only bad things, then you cannot even have a partner and will be alone. This is a result of what you were saying that all these are going to be NGOs, created by Government. Will money be given to them? Government is so selfish; it will do things only in its own interest. I therefore, do not believe that –(Interjections)- You can rise on a point of order but that is what you said. Finally –(Interruption) 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Is the honourable minister in order to really say things I did not say? Could it be that he was absent-minded when I made my submission? I did not say that Government is not interested; I only talked about accountability, the budget deficit, the problems we had with the Global Fund; and maybe to add one more for him, the business of Government for NGOs is to create an enabling environment for the NGOs to do their work, not to fund them. Is he really in order to bring his own imaginations and to try to even judge my Christianity before the Lord Jesus even returns?

Moreover the Pope is coming here the day after tomorrow. Is he in order, Madam Chairperson – (Laughter)- I have raised an order yet hon. Baba is rising up.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you were asking whether I thought he was absent- minded but it is difficult for me to determine who is absent-minded in this House. I, therefore, cannot make a ruling on that one. Please, control yourself.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: In all these efforts, we are trying to address the needs of our people. There are those needs which Government meets directly and there are those many needs which Government does not meet, not because in some cases it does not know the needs but it is because it does not have the means to meet those needs. That is the reason why we have NGOs from outside the country coming here. This is the reason we borrow money. Earlier on, we were borrowing money just because we do not have enough ourselves. Therefore, when we think that NGOs have a role to play – (Interjections)- I am concluding my point, no more contributions from me. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, there is no one on the Floor.

MR BABA: Madam Chairperson, we came in good spirit hoping that we could build consensus on this matter, given that previously - take the example of a community school deep in the villages where Government has not been able to reach. The communities are struggling; Government has gone out there to support them and this is the spirit in which this fund was being established. Since there is no consensus, we withdraw that proposal. (Applause) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 27 be deleted.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Chairperson, I think the position of the minister is that clause 27 stands deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is the exact question I put but I do not know what you were celebrating. (Laughter) Honourable members, I put the question that clause 27 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, from the public finance, when the money is taken to the Consolidate Fund, there is no surplus fund; it is the one to invest, the one to build and we shall always allocate it there. Therefore, clause 29 should be deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have done that in two or three other pieces of legislation. I therefore put the question that clause 29 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend the sub-title to provide for registration of organisations with the bureau and clause 31 should entirely be substituted with the following: 

“(1) 	Any person or group of persons incorporated as an organisation shall register with the bureau. 
(2) 	An application made under subsection (1) shall be accompanied by-
(a) 	evidence of statements made in the application as the minister may prescribe by regulations; 
(b) 	a certificate of incorporation; 
(c) 	a copy of the organisation’s constitution; 
(d) 	evidence of payment of a prescribed fee. 

(3) Upon compliance with the requirements of subsection (2), the bureau shall register the organisation. 
(4) 	An organisation that has been registered remains registered until-
(a) 	its registration is cancelled in terms of this Act; 
(b) 	the organisation is voluntarily deregistered; or 
(c) 	the organisation is wound up or dissolved.”

The justification is to provide for a clear method of registration and also to give the minister powers to make regulations as to the form and content of documents needed for registration, and also to retain the mandate of incorporation of legal persons with the Registrar of Companies and URSB. 

We also propose to insert a new clause 32 to provide for refusal to register an organisation by the bureau as follows:

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we first deal with the other one?

MR MULONGO: Obliged, Madam Chairperson.

MR BABA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to go with the proposals of the committee except that I wish to make amendments to clause 31(1) to read as follows, and I will give the justifications: “No organisation shall operate in Uganda unless it has been dully registered with the bureau established under section 5 of this Act and has a valid permit issued by the bureau.”

Secondly, “Subsection (1) shall apply to organisations, which incorporate or register under the Companies Act or Trustees Incorporation Act and fall within the definition under section (3) of this Act.”

The justification is that there are NGOs that incorporate companies limited by guarantee and they go out operating and yet they operate as NGOs. What I am proposing is that should they want to operate as NGOs, they should come, register and get a certificate from the NGO board. That is the main reason why we want them to do so.

There are many NGOs presently that have gone to the Uganda Registration Services Bureau and have been incorporated as companies limited by guarantee and yet are operating without supervision and without checking. The idea is that if they operate there as NGOs, they should come and register with the board. That is why I want to make those two amendments.

Furthermore, we have more than 1,200 NGOs that went to the bureau, registered and they are out there operating without supervision but operating as NGOs. We therefore would like to have a supervisory role on what they are doing on the basis of this new amendment. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you share your document with me?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the minister has brought a very long statement. I have checked my iPad but it is not there and I have failed to understand what the minister is saying.

However, I would like to go with the committee proposals. It is good you have removed the “incorporation” because the person who does incorporation is URSB. Having done that, what the bureau is supposed to do is to register people. Uganda Law Society, for example, issues certificates of registration but it cannot say for you to form a company of hon. Fox-Odoi and Sons Advocates, you need to be registered by us. That is what the minister is trying to bring back.

Madam Chairperson, I do not think what the minister has said adds any value. We should go with what the committee has proposed because it is better and well drafted. Unless the minister has another view which is contrary to that or we share that statement that we have proposed -

MR BABA: We have actually accepted the committee report on incorporation by the Uganda Registration Services Bureau. That is proper and they should do that. What we are saying is that if they operate as NGOs and at the same time they are registered as companies limited by guarantee, they should come to the board and get a licence to operate as NGOs. This is the effect of this amendment; nothing more, nothing less. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Chairperson, the essence of clause 31 as amended is to provide for what the minister is trying to provide for in the amendment, that you come to the bureau with your certificate of incorporation and register to operate as an NGO. That is what the committee report is all about. I do not see the value of the new amendment; the minister intends to add to what is already covered.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, hon. Kivumbi, for giving way. What the minister is trying to say is what happens in business. When I register my company, I get an incorporation certificate. However, to go and work, I must get a trading licence somewhere or somehow. What he is trying to say is that register but to be managed properly, you must get a permit from me so that I can have a supervisory role of what you are doing. If I do not give you the trading permit, you do not operate. I find this proper for purposes of managing and centralising NGOs because they are under the Minister of Internal Affairs. 

I, therefore, think it is very prudent to have them supervised. Before they start, they must register and go to the Minister of Internal Affairs so that they can know them and take on their supervisory role. That is if I understood the minister properly.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Hon. Kakooza, I am sorry to say but I belong to the Institute of Certified Public Accountants. When I send my documents, I send them under my firm and I am already registered with URSB. What I do is that I go there for registration as a practicing accountant for them to have evidence that I am a practicing accountant so that when Fox Odoi comes to my office, before he can give me a job, he must get my certificate of practice.

What the minister is raising is already covered. I would like to give another example. I am in Bugisu, how will I know that this NGO called X is allowed to operate there? The only way is by seeing the certificate from the NGO board saying it is already registered.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Chairperson, I do not know why the minister is bringing this thing up because when you go to clause 33, applications and issuance of permits, the issue will be fully catered for. I have failed to understand the import of this amendment by the minister. Our considered view is that we go with the decision of the committee and when we go through clause 32, which we have not considered, matters will become clearer to the minister. I beg that we move.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the committee’s position is categorically clear with the organisations that register and operate as NGOs. However, we can also have organisations that register otherwise but operate NGO-like businesses. Take the example given by hon. Nandala-Mafabi of the CPA firm - You are given a practicing certificate from your professional body but you also offer a service of an NGO nature. People say we shall be utilising CPA services to offer accountancy services for NGO purposes; you are doing NGO work but also you have a certificate of practice from a professional authority. That calls for the attention of the NGO bureau. 

In this case, the committee did not cover those who are registered otherwise but operate NGO activities. They are supposed to be covered under the amendment by the minister. This is my view and for that matter it becomes valid. Even clause 33 is about those that have registered as NGOs and operate as such.

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is your amendment and the minister’s amendments; what are you saying about them?

MR MULONGO: I am saying that we concede to include the minister’s amendment as an additive. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Chairperson, we should be very clear. You come with the certificate of incorporation and with it, you are allowed to operate. If I have Muwanga and something foundation, I come with my certificate of incorporation. Once I want to do the work of an NGO, I must go to the NGO board, apply and get permission. When I cease doing that work, I am free to go back to my earlier position and do other business and I can go back and trade in coffee; I will not operate as an NGO. For one to masquerade is an illegality. You cannot create a law anticipating to cater for a masquerade; it is criminal.

My humble view is that the position of the committee is very clear. When you go through 31, 32, 33 and 34 we will be home and dry. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 31 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 32

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, clause 32, refusal to register; we propose to redraft it to reflect as follows: “(1) An organisation shall not be registered under this Act – 
(a) where the objectives of the organisation as specified in its constitution are in contravention of the laws of Uganda” – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I just have a procedural issue here. Clause 32, which you are talking about, is different, unless you are talking about the one you want to insert. Do you mean inserting or you are talking of the one we want in the Bill?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairman, are you introducing a new clause.

MR MULONGO: Yes, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is why you would say, whether it is 32 (5) or 32 (d) or whatever -

MR MULONGO: We are proposing to insert a new clause 32 to provide for refusal to register an organisation by the bureau.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced into the Bill as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The new clause 32 should read as follows: 
“32. Refusal to register 
(1) 	An organisation shall not be registered under this Act- 
(a) 	where the objectives of the organisation as specified in its constitution are in contravention of the laws of Uganda;
(b) 	where the application for registration does not comply with the requirements of this Act; 
(c) 	where the applicant has given false or misleading information in any material particular. 

(2) 	Where the bureau refuses to register an organisation under subsection (1), it shall inform the applicant in writing of the reasons for the refusal within 90 days from the date of communication of the decision.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, the formulation has a problem. The decision was coming from elsewhere and then the board would communicate after receiving, because it is now the board that is refusing. Originally, the plan was for the minister to do the refusal. 

We need to improve on it to say that, “Where the bureau refuses to register an organisation under subsection (1), the bureau shall inform the applicant in writing of the reasons for the refusal within 90 days”. Stop the issue of the date of communication.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have a further amendment on that. Ninety days is a quarter of a year. Why does it take you quarter of a year to respond? Once you have taken a decision, you should communicate the same. In most cases, a decision is supposed to be taken within 14 days; that is how it is. Even an appeal in a tax body is done within 14 days and an appeal in court is 30 days; why should this one have that latitude of time?

I would like to move an amendment here on the refusal to be within 30 days. The Justification is, for timely action. Otherwise, here you are going to create inefficiency and incompetence.

MR BABA: Can the honourable leave with “within 30 days”?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the new clause be amended further as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: “Within the period when the application was submitted to the bureau for registration”. We should insert the word, “period”, otherwise it is not clear from when to when these 30 days apply.  “Within 30 days from when the application was submitted to the bureau.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, it was submitted, it has been considered and it has been rejected. After that rejection, you must inform the person within 30 days. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: After the rejection day? How shall I know the rejection day?

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, we had related it to the date of communication of the decision. Once the decision is taken, then the clock starts ticking. Earlier, we said 90 days but now it is 30 days. Immediately the decision is taken, within 30 days a communication has to be made.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, that is a good one but what about the period when I may make my application? We have not given them a specific period. It can take years before you make a decision. We must also fix a period on receipt of application. I think that was what hon. Alaso wanted to say; maybe she has a better formulation on the period.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Chairperson, I think when we go to section 33, the bureau is supposed to take 90 days -(Interjection)- We may amend that but once you apply, your application must be considered and the time period specified; it cannot sit there forever.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, there is a provision ahead? Okay, honourable members, I put the question that the new clause as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, 33 is talking of something else. The Shadow Minister of Internal Affairs is talking about -

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have not gone there yet -

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, he referred to it and said this could be covered there but clause 33 is about the grounds for revocation. We are talking about consideration of the application under clause 32; in which case, if we want to embed a timeline, we must put it under clause 32 and not clause 33.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know whether what you are reading is similar to mine. I am seeing here under clause 33, application and issuance of permit.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: That is a new clause. I think clause 33 referred to is in the committee report under the new clause, and then clause 33 referred to here for refusal is within the Bill; so we can proceed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the new clause, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, are we going to clause 33?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, the old clause 32.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, we cannot go now to the old clause 32, we shall deal with it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It has the editorial work; it will be done by the legal officer. That is editorial, changing the numbers and so on.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, clause 32 is about registration and clause 33 is going to be about issuance of a permit after registration. So in this case, we are saying that before one is given a permit, it has to be registered. If one is not registered, then communication has to be made to the applicant as to why the organisations cannot be registered and that is why we brought in that new clause in addition to the provisions in clause 32.

Clause 33 is now going to be dealing with permits, so if you move us, you could rule, Madam Chairperson, it means that the applicant here for registration will be given reasons within 30 days.  I suggest we move now to clause 33 to deal with permits.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why are you jumping the old clause 32?

MR MULONGO: Our correction was only to insert those two new clauses; clause 1 as in the report and clause 2, which gives duration within which to communicate about the refusal to register.

MR KIVUMBI: Madam Chairperson, I think when the committee worked on the report and redrafted clauses 31, 32 and 33 effectively, it dealt with clause 32 in the Bill and it collapsed. By the time you go through it, it will not be existing as it is. So if we move with the committee’s report, it will effectively deal with clause 32.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your amendment, honourable Chair?

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, we have a new proposal to insert a new clause 33 to deal with application and issuance of permits to read as follows:
“33. Application and issuance of permits
(1) 	An organisation shall not operate in Uganda without a valid permit issued by the bureau.

(2) 	An organisation shall apply to the bureau for a permit and the bureau shall, within 90 days, issue a permit subject to conditions or directions stipulated by this Act.

(3) 	An application made under this section shall be in a form as the minister may by regulation prescribe.

(4) 	An application made under this section shall specify-
(a) 	the operations of the organisation; 
(b) 	the areas where the organisation may carry out its activities; 
(c) 	staffing of the organisation; 
(d) 	geographical area of coverage of the organisation; 
(e) 	location of the organisation’s headquarters; and 
(f) 	date of expiry of the previous permit.

(5) 	An application made under subsection (2) shall be accompanied by evidence of payment of the prescribed fee.

(6) 	Subject to the provisions of this section, the board may issue an organisation with a permit to operate for a period not exceeding five years at a time.” 

This is meant to provide for a clear process of application and issuance of permits to organisations operating in Uganda.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, I have particular difficulties with the 90 days. You know, how competitive you are as a country depends on how easy it is to register business. There are countries where it takes only seven days to register a business including NGOs, and the honourable chair proposes 90 days. I am not particularly good with mathematics, but hon. Nandala-Mafabi has just said that is a third of a year. You submit your application and wait for one third of a year to be registered as an NGO. 

In very polite terms, that is a joke. In other words, I think it is just rude and unreasonable to expect that a person will wait for 90 days for you to register him as an NGO. I beg to propose that we go with 30 days.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chair, what is your rationale for the 90 days?

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, we are dealing with situations where you need to watch the status, do background checks of such an organisation; there may be need to have sufficient time to do that. It could be an international NGO and communication is not as simple and easy. So, time was required to study this. In any case, we are putting 90 days as an extreme; it is “within” and that can be within a day but should it require taking much more time, it should not exceed 90 days. That was the rationale. We could reduce the days to say 60 days, two months or three.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to remind ourselves that this House created the financial intelligence authority and their work is to do the checking on the internet not by driving to Botswana or something like that. 

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I think it has been well articulated by hon. Fox Odoi. Yesterday, we put in place a very robust board and we said it should include representatives of internal security organisations to do the vetting. I do not know whether hon. Mulongo is now putting a vote of no confidence on the people we put in the board yesterday to say that they are so inefficient and cannot deliver the necessary information in less than 90 days. It would be frustrating, as hon. Odoi has said, to wait for 90 days to have an organisation registered. I think 30 days is reasonable but if he pleads seriously, we will give him 45 days.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, we will be happy to go with 45 days. Most obliged.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much, honourable members. I put the question –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, on paragraph six, where they said the permit may not exceed five years at a time, I think it is very dangerous. We know certificates are issued annually, why should you put five years? This is segregation. 

We should say the board may issue an organisation with a permit to operate for a period every year. If you put five years, getting to know what the organisation is doing in five years is a long period. Contracts are three years; I think here we must –(Interruption)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Chairperson, the reading of subclause (6) is: “Subject to the provisions of this section, the board may issue an organisation with a permit to operate for a period not exceeding five years at a time.” It can be five years. However, the information I would like to give you is that we also want organisations to freely organise and plan and to be sure they live. These organisations have plans, activities – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have withdrawn.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the new clause be introduced as proposed together with the amendments that we have discussed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the new clause do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, we now have those new clauses to substitute the clauses in the Bill. These are new insertions and this means that we have covered clauses 32 and 33 and now we move to the new clause 34.

We propose that we insert a new clause 34 to deal with renewal of permits to read as follows: 
“(1)	Subject to section 33, an organisation shall apply for renewal of a permit within six months before the expiry of its permit.

(2) 	An organisation applying for renewal of a permit will comply with subsection (2) of section 33.

(3) 	The bureau shall renew a permit if it is satisfied that the organisation has complied with the requirements of the permit and this Act.

(4) 	An organisation that wishes to change the conditions of the permit or the area of focus or the geographical area of focus may apply to the bureau to have its permit reviewed.

(5) 	The bureau shall review and renew the permit for an organisation applying under subsection (4).

(6) 	An organisation whose permit expires, but continues to operate without renewal of its permit, shall pay a fine of 10 currency points for every month of operation in default of renewal of the permit.”

Madam Chairperson and honourable colleagues, this insertion is intended to provide for a clear process of renewal of permits.

MS ALASO: I have a bit of discomfort with applying within six months. Earlier on, I think it was stated that this permit is given for one year and then you implement your activities within six months and then the next six months you again apply. 

I thought the earlier position of three months before the expiry would have been helpful because the monitoring committees - and I also think that for purposes of renewal of this permit, these organisations need to prove that they are active in the field. Now imagine that you have a budget and work plan which runs for one financial year but before you even implement it, midway somebody is asking you to come back and ask within six months. I think that is not helpful for the implementation of programmes.

We could revert to the earlier proposal of three months to the expiry, which allows them a bit of latitude to implement and then refer to those activities as the reason for renewing their permits.

MR SABILA: I believe that the proposal for an organisation to apply for renewal OF six months before expiry was premised on the fact that approval was supposed to be communicated within three months. 

Now that we have reduced it to 45 days, I think that it is proper that they allow them three months to the expiry because now the time for approval is going to be shorter. Therefore, three months to expiry of the term is okay by me. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Before hon. Aol comes up, I would like to understand the rationale of No.4, where you say that an organisation that wishes to change the conditions of the permit or the area of focus or the geographical area of focus may apply to the bureau to have its permit reviewed. Does it mean that if I give you a permit to work in Katakwi and then you move to Bukomansimbi, I just discover you there? I should be obliged to tell you where I am. I would like to know the rationale of this provision; why is it “may” and not “shall”?

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, your observation is very critical. Once you change the conditions of the terms of the permit, it becomes obligatory. It is actually “shall” and we have to change to “shall”. 

MS AOL: Madam Chairperson, I keep on recalling what happens practically on the ground, especially with community-based organisations. I do not know whether it will be practical if we put those conditions, even of three months and a fine to be paid in case of non-renewal. I do not know how it is going to be practical. With NGOs and international NGOs, it is practical but with CBOs, which are even more relevant in the communities and they do commendable work, it is not. 

I wonder whether we could relax this because after all, if you do not renew, even getting support becomes a big problem – you cannot get financial support without renewing or being legally in place. Therefore, if we again place a fine, this means that we are almost fining them twice; first, you do not get support and then two, you are fined for not renewing. I, therefore, suggest that we create a position for communitybased organisations differently. This is just for you to think about.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have two issues here. I do not know when the board will be likely to see the accounts of the NGO. If the board wants to see the accounts, then that would be the best basis on which to renew. However, at that time, the accounts would not have been done.

We have passed on the Floor that within 30 days after application, the permit must be issued. I think that the period in which you should apply must be near 30 days, which now means that six months are too many. We could say within 45 or 60 days – in fact, I would like to propose that within 60 days before the expiry of the permit, because after applying within 30 days they must issue it. That is my first point.

The second is that I propose the fine to be big, because we have made the NGO board efficient and this means that those applying must also be in time. If you say 20 currency points per month, for example, then that is Shs 200,000, and the only entity that can be affected in this is a CBO. However,  if you have an international organisation or a very big local organisation and you allow them to pay a fine of Shs 200,000 while they are committing a crime worth Shs 4 billion, then it is very dangerous.

In line with that, I would like to make a proposal that for one to operate, they must have a permit and if you operate without one, this currency point must change so that you are fined at least 1,000 currency points –(Interjections). My justification is that 1,000 currency points is Shs 20 million, and at every particular time, you should be having a valid permit. We have told the NGO board that within 30 days from when you apply, you will have your permit. What stops you from applying and getting your permit on time? We should be tight on both sides. Let the NGO board be efficient and let the NGO, which is operating, be efficient in application too. I think - (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: If you leave a gap of six months for an NGO to operate, it can do its own business and run away and it does not apply. Therefore, you have to bring the time nearer to the decision on the application so that those NGOs are affected in the same way as when you do not give them a licence.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, that is my proposal; to make both sides efficient; the NGO and the NGO board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But did you move an amendment?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am moving two amendments -(Interruption)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Can you accept this information? Madam Chairperson, I have information to give. You are making a law for the big organisations but how about the smaller ones that are struggling? You may find that in one month you have not complied and then you are required to pay Shs 20 million; you will close shop! This would be bad because some of them really do good work. 

Therefore, much as you think about these big multinational NGOs or local strong NGOs, think of those that are small and growing. They are the ones that are likely to default in one way or another because of capacity, human resource and other impediments.

Madam Chairperson, I appeal to my good friend to reconsider. You can see the difficulty of raising money; just because of Shs 3 million, so many candidates are failing to get Shs 3 million to get nominated as Members of Parliament. Therefore, in a third world country, let us not be very hard with this kind of punishment.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Are you telling me that these big multinationals should default so that they pay Shs 200,000, and if they default for the whole year it will be Shs 2.4 million? Now compare this with the fees; supposing the fees that this ministry will suggest is Shs 2 million, why don’t I default instead of going in to hustle with the NGO board? I rather pay the fine than go and pay the registration fees.

We have to be careful; we must have a way to block these NGOs from operating illegally - (Interjection)- Okay, 100 currency points for purposes of moving forward; otherwise, you must consider the cost of the trading licence and the fine. I can concede on 100 but also the time should be within two months for efficiency.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But isn’t it to your advantage to start this process early? You start in June, put in your application - I think it is better if you have more time.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, six months was taken because these CBOs are particularly composed of people who are really down in villages whose competencies may not be as articulate as those in urban areas. Six months was also meant not only to absorb such but also to apply to those foreign-based personnel who work in the country. Immigration regulations require around six months if you want to renew a permit to work in the country. Therefore, the six months was supposed to cater for all those kinds of conditions and starting early is no harm.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Chairperson, the fine of 100 currency points, which hon. Nandala-Mafabi proposed, I think might be prohibitive for CBOs. Maybe we should have two categories: 10 currency points for CBOs and 100 currency points for the NGOs.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Leader of the Opposition, what I am saying is that if you do not want to pay this money, then do not operate without a permit. It is a fine; it is not a registration fee. It is about an organisation whose permit expires but continues to operate without it. Why should a CBO continue to operate without a permit? It can cease and say I am not going to operate until my licence is renewed. However, the moment you operate, you must pay. Why should you operate in illegality? Let us be fair. 

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, this calls for prudence and calls for everybody to do legal business and we should be timely in our actions. We have said that NGOs should do it within 30 days and likewise when you do not apply and operate, you should pay a fine.

MS IBI EKWAU: Madam Chairperson, I think I buy into hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s argument. Some of these NGOs come to only hoodwink us and run away. If the society has been benefiting from an NGO that came in the name of providing good services to the locals and then at the end of the day, after getting registration fees and making people contribute some small things here and there, they begin turning against the people, in such a case even the communities would benefit. This is because the organisations would even find it hard to renew their permit and in the process, the communities would be saved.

You remember cases of an institution like COWE that went around getting money from every village in the name of providing services. At the end of the day, it was the locals who suffered. They did not do it in only one district in the western region but duped over 20 districts. Therefore, at the end of the day, it is the locals who suffer with their hard earned money. If such an NGO went to renew their permit, there should be very stringent measures to have them nabbed at that point if they have done a disservice to the community.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 33 be introduced into the Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, are you withdrawing my amendments? We already agreed to insert clause 34 and since we have agreed, I am moving an amendment that if you operate illegally, then you must pay a fine.

My justification of paying a fine which is high is that it can be traded off. If it is less than the fees, they can trade it off in form of fees that would have been paid for the permit. Therefore, we must make it so high so that this person must pay and we deter them from dodging fees. In one month, someone can commit a lot of crimes and by the time you realise it, he has gone. I propose that they should pay a fine of 100 currency points from 1,000 for every month you are in default, after being convinced by the Leader of the Opposition.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we cannot just insert from the air. Let us first insert this new clause into the Bill and then we can move the amendments. Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now for the amendments -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have no problem with clause 31 because it says “within six months”; it means that it can be one or two months. Had it said “not less than six months”, that would be different. Within six months before the expiry, even if there is one day remaining, you can apply and I have no big problem with this one. 

However, I have a problem with clause 34(8) where it says; “shall pay a fine of ten currency points” -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Before we go there, there are two other areas where I want to make the changes. Let us go to clause 34(4).

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, I propose that clause 34(4) should read as follows: “An organisation that wishes to change the conditions of the permit, or the area of focus or the geographical area of focus shall apply to the bureau to have its permit renewed.”

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Chairperson, if we have elections going on and an organisation would like to do some election monitoring and observation, should it also necessarily apply just to do something for a month or two? If the organisation is not necessarily doing any election monitoring but elections have come up and they are interested and want to offer that service, must they also apply? I think “may” was comfortable.

THE CHAIRPERSON: “May” is in relation to saying they are no longer working in one area but are going to another area.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: When you are also changing service or area of focus.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But you cannot just wake up and change service by yourself.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Chairperson, I am just giving an example; there are organisations which have applied right now to do some elections observation and monitoring. They are engaged in human rights, provision of services to people and even aid but they are offering to do that service. Do they have to apply to the bureau? They would have applied to the Electoral Commission.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think that in the issuing of that licence the conditions, areas, objectives will be clear. If it is part of general objectives, it is okay. However, if you are coming to say you are going to check the number of cows in Karamoja when it was not part of your original plan, then that would be altering the focus.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, at the core of the permit is the nature of work and the place of operation. Therefore, once you change any of those, these are serious conditions that require the attention and renewal of authority from the bureau. Therefore, “shall” is well applied.

Madam Chairperson, the issue of currency points -(Interruption)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Chairperson, we are talking about conditions under subclause (4) in clause 33 which are clear. There is area of operation. The thinking of the committee was, for instance -

THE CHAIRPERSON: But are you taking issue with your committee report?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Yes, with “shall”. The thinking of the committee was that you may be having an organisation, - and we have met this one practically - you operate in Kampala and you are engaged in civic education but in one way, you find yourself going to do civic education in Kamuli and the DISO turns up and says, “according to your permit, you did not apply to be in this area”. If the condition is “shall”, you will be definitely kicked out. 

We believe that we were causing flexibility in operations; that is why we used the word “may”. If you are going to seek permanency, then you have to apply but if it is just that kind of work and you are creating “shall”, then you will impede people. That was why the committee used the word “may”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us be serious. You cannot just go walking around the country - today you are in Kampala, another day you are in Gulu, then Hoima. Please, be reasonable.  I put the question that the new clause -

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I wanted to be sure that the issue of the duration is captured as “within six months” because I had proposed three months.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, you will be oppressing those bodies. Let them have the six months. They can come in the first month, in the second or third.

MS ALASO: I would implore the honourable shadow minister to buy this position of notifying on location. There was an NGO in this country which fleeced teachers from everywhere. It would get money from Teso and then move to Busoga. Therefore, when we make it “shall”, we make it for the bad ones. The good ones I think can fulfil the other obligation. I really want to beg you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: On the question of the currency points, I think we are okay. I put the question that the new -

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, there was a typing problem in the numbering. From four we go to five and six. On (5), it should say, “The bureau may review…” Here both “shall” and “may” are used but for the bureau it is “may”.

For the currency points, there was a proposal to have a lower currency weight for CBOs and then a higher one, like 100 currency points, for international NGOs. If we could have a formulation to cater for the two separately, because if it is 100 currency points for a CBO, for example, it would just be too much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Just make a sample proposal so that we can hear.

MR MULONGO: An organisation whose permit expires but continues to operate without renewal of its permit, in the case of a CBO, shall pay a fine of 10 currency points and in the case of an international NGO, 100 currency points for every month of operation in default of renewal of the permit.

MS ALASO: The chairperson just left us with a question. He said in case of a CBO and then the international one; what about those ones that are national, not just CBOs but they are there, if you take that formulation. We need to figure out how to bring in even the national ones. Otherwise, that formulation only looks at the CBOs and the international ones. The national ones are left out.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, from page 5 of the Bill, we have the interpretation where we have been given what CBOs mean; we have indigenous and international -(Interjections)- for clarity? 

Madam Chairperson, permit me, with the good guidance from my colleagues, to say, “10 currency points for indigenous organisations and 100 currency points for international organisations.”

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, I just want to be sure what amounts in shillings he is referring to. He said 2 million and 100. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Currency points.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I think the whole thing is now more complicated with the provisions of the indigenous. Some of those CBOs are actually these women making soap. They are those people who dance for us. They do not even have the 100 currency points and you want to fine them that. I think further distinction should be made otherwise we will just get them out of operation. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Will they have applied and been given permits?

MS ALASO: By the sub-counties?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes. You cannot just be captured unless you have applied, are on the register and have defaulted. That is when they catch you. I cannot find you on the streets and say, “Stop dancing; you owe me money”.

MS ALASO: Maybe we will be guided by what the practice is as of now. Even now they are supposed to register with the sub-county and district but their working capital is really miserable. If you put them at 100 currency points, you are just choking them.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The 100 currency was for the others.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, these CBOs operate and even get support from us locally or even internationally. The law has to be serious and I thought hon. Nandala-Mafabi raised issues of seriousness on their part, except we would like to separate the penalties so that the greater weight goes to the others.

Madam Chairperson, let me paraphrase my proposal: “An organisation whose permit expires but continues to operate without renewal of its permit in the case of CBOs will be fined 10 currency points and 100 currency points for any other organisation for every month of operation in default of renewal of the permit.” This gives the CBOs less while the others pay 100 currency points.

MR NANDAL-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have no objection to what hon. Simon Mulongo has raised. He is talking about renewal but what about those which can form and start operating? They may not have a permit but are operating. You also have to be careful. Where do we tie those ones?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Under this part of the law, we are dealing with rejection of application.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, that is why I was raising it because this one is renewal of permit. Maybe we should create issuance of permits somewhere else.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we already have it.

MS IBI EKWAU: Madam Chairperson, I am of the view that by the time this CBO comes to operate, it will have gone through the formalities. Therefore, when you again say that you have come and started operating without a permit, how did you get there at all? Those are the ones that should even be nabbed and arrested.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the new clause be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, now going back to clause 33 proper of the Bill, we propose to amend clause 33 by-
i) 	Relocating the clause and fixing it after the section on renewal of permits.
ii) 	Deleting paragraph (1)(c).

This is because there is a penal provision specifically to deal with contravention of the provisions of the Act.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we have not handled clause 32. After clause 31, we inserted a new clause 32. I think we should first go to clause 32 in the Bill and handle it.

MR JAMES BABA: My understanding from the report of the committee is that the amendments proposed by the committee now replace what is in clause 32 in the original Bill. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if you read the committee’s report, there is no where they are saying we are replacing clause 32. It says, “Insert a new clause 32” and goes ahead. Therefore, if that is the case, we should read clause 32 and delete it. If we do not do that, it will remain part of the Bill. We must start with clause 32 of the Bill.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the honourable has a point. Our clause 32 of the Bill is supposed to be substituted with clause 32 of the report.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that the old clause 32 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32, deleted. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 33 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33, as amended, agreed to. 

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, clause 35 is about the registration of organisations incorporated outside Uganda. We propose a new clause providing for the registration of organisations incorporated outside Uganda to read as follows:
“(1)	Any organisation incorporated outside Uganda which intends to operate in Uganda shall apply to the bureau to be registered and issued with a permit.
(2)  	An application made under subsection (1) shall be accompanied by -
(a) 	the prescribed fee;
(b) 	a certified copy of the certificate of incorporation from the country of incorporation; and
(c) 	a certified copy of its constitution, or a charter or documents governing the organisation.

(3) 	Subject to fulfilment of the requirements under subsection (2), the bureau may proceed to register and issue a permit to such an organisation.” This is to provide for a clear registration process for organisations incorporated outside the country.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced in the Bill as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the existing clause 35 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to insert a new clause 36 to provide for exemptions of provisions of this part as follows:
“(1) The minister may, in an emergency situation and in consultation with the bureau, exempt an organisation from the requirements of registration and issuance of a permit.

(2) 	Any exemption made under subsection (1) shall not include payment of prescribed fees.
(3) 	Subject to subsection (1), the minister shall issue a provisional permit for the exempted organisation to operate for a period not more than six months.” 

Madam Chairperson and honourable colleagues, this is meant to provide powers to the minister to exempt requirements for a permit in cases, particularly, of emergency. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, first of all it is not a new subclause; it is a new clause. You wrote here subclause. We are dealing with a new clause being introduced. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, exemptions are dangerous. If you have read the statement of the new President of Tanzania, he said that there are no tax exemptions and no NGOs have been exempted from anything. There is also no movement of first class or even business economy. 

The moment you create exemptions, you are creating a window for the ministers. They will come and say that you do not do anything and then exempt you for six months. You have created a board; why should a minister have the authority to exempt? That is taking the powers of the board. I strongly believe clause 36 should be deleted. The new clause should not be accepted. Exemptions are very dangerous and are discriminatory. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Under what circumstances would one want to be exempted? Give us the rationale. 

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the conditions for issuance of permits are rigorous. The way we have stipulated them is rigorous. It may take days if not weeks for an organisation to be given a permit to operate.

We are talking about specific situations of an emergency nature. Take an example of a situation whereby you have a big landslide of volcanic eruption or flooding and you want to fly in professionals of Ebola. Under the conditions that we have put in place, you cannot have those people come in and begin operating unless they have fulfilled the requirements, which will take a lot of time. 

Therefore, we would like to say, as much as we would want to be very tight, there are times when we may require to relax, specifically with emergencies. We cannot be so tight even in emergencies. It is us who will require such skills, logistics and support.

MS IBI EKWAU: Madam Chairperson, I think whatever he is interested in can be captured in a regulation. You cannot bring this selective approach in handling the law. 

I think these processes of lining up in ministries for people to see the minister are some of the things that encourage corruption. At the end of the day, you will get a loophole - a very small opportunity or a window in the law - and that is how we are encouraging people to flout where we are supposed to improve on efficiency. 

I am, therefore, of the view that we completely do away with whatever the chairperson is proposing. That can be handled in the regulation. There should also be other bodies that can be used to sort out such an emergency. In case of flooding, don’t we have other NGOs that would handle such? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, of course no one wants corruption. However, sometimes when these things occur, you hear the Government saying that they are appealing for support and time is of essence. I do not know why you really want to close all the doors. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Chairperson, in the opinion of the committee, we found it prudent to create this provision. This is because there are circumstances that can genuinely occur. In such a situation, you do not have the time to go through all this due process and yet the country will need assistance. Take an example that you have a hurricane of the magnitude of Katrina and a huge emergency and an international NGO wants to lend effort. The conditions in here are very clear. This permit will be provisional; it must not exceed six months. 

Therefore, in these situations, you cannot tie down the hands of a government from functioning. When it comes to these exemptions, I think to some extent we must trust people. The belief that all people in this country are not trustworthy is also terrible. I am trusted enough. Our humble opinion is that this provision is critical going forward.

MR JAMES BABA: Thank you. For once hon. Muwanga Kivumbi has been very useful to me. (Laughter) I think the major concern on the exemption has been on payment of fees, licence money and so much more. However, in this situation, there will be no exemption on issues of fees. Whether you come for emergencies or not, you will be liable to pay the fees. I think if that was the concern, this is not part of the exemption. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: If the fear is about the minister, we could say, “on advice of the board”. This is because the board can assess the situation, advise the minister and the minister acts accordingly. This will take away the fear of unearned efforts. 

I also support the proposal by the committee to the extent that these emergency situations may require no time for reaction.

MR OKUPA: Hon. Kasule Ssebunya, you know if we want to give the minister powers to carry out the exemption, let us give them to him. Do not bring in the issue of the board. The board first of all is appointed by the minister; therefore, what checks will the board play? Let us just trust the minister. 

I think the problem is with the checks so that the minister does not abuse those powers. That is the most important thing. However, I think the minister should have these powers because the board will not stop him. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, just to add to that, it is unlikely that the Red Cross will go and look for the bureau. Their first thought will be the government ministry and then they will go to the minister. I think let us not have a lot of suspicion. I put the question that - 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have no problem now. However, where does the minister account for these exemptions? We must also give him a time –(Interjections)– Yes, like taxes, we say every quarter and they must account for exemptions of tax. Giving somebody an exemption to trade without a license is illegal. I do not even see any reason why you charge him. Why don’t you give him a certificate to go? 

Therefore, what I would like to propose is that we say at the end of the financial year, the minister shall within 30 days lay on the Floor of Parliament the exemptions he has granted as far as this law is concerned. 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I think the committee got this formulation from the deleted clause 32(3). I think they are trying to place it in the exact way it appeared. It reads, “The minister may, in consultation with the board, in an emergency situation, exempt an organisation from any of the provisions of this section except that the exemption shall not include the payment of the prescribed fee.” I think that is how it is.

I have no problem with that because that exemption will not include money or any fees. If it does not, it means it is specifically for those emergencies and they can deal with it as the minister is called to help the situation. I think the formulation there is better than the ones we are proposing. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 36 stands part of the Bill. 

 (Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the old clause 36 –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am on clause 36 and I have an amendment. It reads, “Annual returns, estimates and furnishing of information. An organisation shall…”  I am saying this because there are some CBOs which operate in local areas. I think they should submit to the board annual returns and to the local government in their area of operation.

The justification is that those areas where they operate must know the activities in a reported annual return.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, first of all, our insertion did not do away or replace the existing one. Clause 36 still exists in the Bill and it needs to be seen with its merit. It is easier where the returns will be to the board and through the local government in the area in which they operate. In the first place, they are supposed to integrate their work plans with those of the local government to ensure there is synergy in the activities they carry out in the districts. 

These annual returns and estimates can furnish information flows very well to the board through the local government, the district monitoring committee and to the bureau.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the old clause 36 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to move a motion that clause 37 be read tomorrow. (Laughter) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, please move the motion for the House to resume.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move a motion that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Non-Governmental Organisations Bill, 2015” and passed clauses 27 to 36 with amendments, deletions and new additions. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to).

Report adopted. 

7.01
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, thank you for your indulgence. Yesterday, I raised a matter here which required the Attorney-General to respond regarding a court ruling. If we do not handle it and we break off tomorrow or the other day, if we are to appeal within 14 days we will have problems. Therefore, if you could re-direct the Chief Whip to have the Attorney-General come here to explain and we see the way forward on that matter.

THE SPEAKER: On that matter, I know that the Attorney-General will be coming tomorrow to update us all on that issue. House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow. 

(The House rose at 7.01 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 26 November 2015 at 2.00 p.m.) 

