Tuesday, 20 November 2012 
 
Parliament met at 11.40 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.
  
PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)
 
The House was called to order. 
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much for coming for this sitting. You are very welcome. Let us do business. 

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you will recall that we have clauses that were stood over and we should deal with them. Just to recast, we have clauses 54,55,56,57,58,59,83,87,110,112,125. Those are the clauses that we stood over and we left the House yesterday after a full day of deliberation on clause 54 only. If there are any reports - we can now move forward on clause 54. 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, on clause 54, we tried to harmonise, though we did not have a drafted proposal. However, this morning, there is a proposal that I wish to present to the House, then we take a decision on it. The proposal is as follows: we recast that sub-clause 54(2) to read as follows: “For purposes of sub clause (1), the minister shall by a regulation approved by Parliament prescribe the exceptional circumstances”. This is to require the minister to come to the House to present the circumstances that would amount to exceptional circumstances. Parliament would then have been involved in taking a decision on the circumstances that would be exceptional.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is the proposal from the chairperson of the committee. Any discussions on it or does it take care of our concerns? 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think the whole point of contention all along has been these special circumstances. What we are trying to do actually is to postpone the problem because we have failed to agree on it here. We say, let the minister go and do them in the regulation and then come back; but we have not sorted out the problem. 

When we adjourned yesterday, we were of the view that many of us with divergent views would come together and we actually sat up to almost midnight yesterday in a meeting. And we still had this problem; there is that amendment, which I thought our chairperson should have shared with us in the morning because we have been here since 9 o’clock waiting. You remember when we left, we had tasked the legal counsel, Khalifan and others to come up with an arrangement and we would be here early enough and look at what had been captured from that meeting. But since then, we have not got any report from our colleagues or our chairman who chaired yesterday’s meeting up to midnight. So, that does not sort out the problem, honourable chairperson. It postpones the problem. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Supposing on the issue of the postponement, it never comes back? What if it does not come back?

MR KATUNTU: Why wouldn’t it come back, if the law is saying you have to bring it? It has to come back.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, what I am saying is, supposing those circumstances are actually valeted and they do not exist, and there is no need to come back by any instrument?

MR KATUNTU: I believe if there are any circumstances, the minister should come and amend the law and so on, to cater for them. But as of now, we have no such circumstances; we are not convinced and we cannot legislate on something we are not convinced about. Actually, I am not convinced; maybe other colleagues are convinced, but I am not. 

MR OTADA: Thank you, Mr Chairman and colleagues. I would like to agree with hon. Katuntu that we would be postponing a problem. The points of contention are not the principles. For those of us who are not convinced, for example, I still stand firm on the fact that anything that will make the minister undertake a procurement is something that I will not support. Anything that is going to suggest that we are circumventing competition, as a matter of principle, I will not support. 

Yesterday, another colleague on this side made a point that the exceptional circumstances can be addressed by the natural flow of events. If an existing licensee is at Block A, he is already there, and has all the advantages to win in what I see as a competitive undertaking for the next block, by virtue of him being on the ground. 

I think Ugandans would want a fair deal in this sector and that can only manifest itself if we do not circumvent competition. So, the long and short of what I am saying is that personally, I disagree in principle, and I do not really think that the proposal by the chairman of the committee is going to help. That proposal is just going to postpone the problem. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you. Mr Chairman, I have listened to the proposal by the chairman of the committee. As hon. Katuntu said, we came in a bit early today in order to see how we could come to the end of this. But when one rethinks this issue, you will realise that if we give room for direct applications and licenses, it has the potential of running down the entire Bill. Even the compromise we had achieved under clause 9 is consequently lost. 

Therefore, the fundamental of this and why it is central, which is the reason we are sticking to it, is that you leave the table open; you might have done the best work around the Bill, but once you leave this fundamental gap, you are more or less washing to dry in the sun.

I would like to call upon the chairman of the committee to look at it again. These exceptional circumstances can be handled under the normal procurement procedures. So, to make this Parliament put a window – we do not mean that the minister is up to some mischief, no. We are saying that for the good of the people of Uganda, let us be certain. Even now, when you say that you are putting it in the regulations,  the debate has now emerged from the Bill, and it is best that it is handled in the Bill, because under the regulations, there could be different atmospheres and intervening variables. But once it has been captured under the Bill, it is okay, because that is where it belongs. If we do not do that, we shall be postponing the problem, and postponing of a misconception. If there are any issues, here we are. We come here to debate this with open hands. So, if there are any matters that we have not been able to see, we are here to be shown that. If there are any unforeseen circumstances, let them be stated as such. 

Otherwise, as far as we are concerned, there is no way we can retain clause 54 because at the end of the day, it runs down the entire Bill. That means every effort that has so far been made will come to naught once you allow the existence of this clause; it adds no value to the Bill.

11.51
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbamazi): Mr Chairman, I rise to support the amendment because in real life, we must always prepare for the unforeseen and the unexpected. If you box yourself in one situation from which you will not be able to get out of, you are not planning properly.

I want to equate this to the concept of a safety valve. This is a mechanism that allows you to relieve yourself of pressures when they go beyond the pre-set levels. Then, instead of the whole thing bursting, you have a mechanism to relieve that pressure and you move on.

I thought the concern of the colleagues yesterday was that they were not sure about things like direct – (Interjections)- Oh, yes, it was (a), which I had proposed to amend –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Where no applications are received.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Yes, where no applications have been received. Although I thought it was alright, I could understand the misgivings by people on it. However, this formulation, in many ways, gives you a solution because in the Bill, we do not do this now. But when the circumstances arise, we have the safety valves I am talking about. Let the minister then come back to Parliament so that Parliament can decide on that. This is because the fears of my colleague, hon. Ssekikubo, were about the lack of trust in ministers. Okay, let this minister come back to Parliament, if there is no minister who is trustworthy.

And as you correctly observed, Mr Chairman, this will be only when these circumstances actually arise, and you look at them in their entirety. The minister will have to come and inform you about the emergence of particular circumstances. So, Parliament will decide to either sit or not and that will be it. But for you to say that you must close tightly with no escape route or safety valves, is not good planning. That is why I support this formulation. I think it gives us that opportunity when the matter arises, because, now, it is only in anticipation; we have a way of handling it reasonably within or to the satisfaction of all concerned.

Therefore, I would like to urge hon. Katuntu and all the other colleagues on the other side of the argument – not the House – to please, see this so that we can move together. This was actually meant to address the concerns that you have so persistently raised in this debate.

11.56
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I can see the logic of wanting to find the exceptional circumstances. But it also takes me back to the intentions of clause 9, in which we prescribed the functions of the minister. I thought we were trying to see how the minister can also have the prerogative to approve, and in case of anything, that minister should be in a position to intervene at that point.

As far as I am concerned, I need to be convinced about these exceptional circumstances that might not be detected in these earlier stages. What would these exceptional circumstances be? (Interjections) Well, now that we do not know them, I think it is important that we get it right. And that can only be done by setting very clear benchmarks that have to be followed in the whole process of negotiation that leads to the granting of a licence, which must be very clear and tight. I think we are just assuming that we are not trusting –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, this is not about negotiation; it is about receiving an application for a licence. There is no negotiation in it.

MR RUHUNDA: So, it is just receiving? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is just receiving an application for an exploration licence.

MR RUHUNDA: Isn’t that catered for really? Because, if it is not catered for, that is when we can think – clause 53 caters for it and that is why I am trying to find the logic as to why we should insist on this unique clause that might create problems. We are also looking at unforeseen problems. So, it is a bit of a challenge and that is why I feel that within the law, we must really be very clear and specific so that we do not give room for error. If we give room for errors - we are looking at the future when all of us will not be there, and that is why we feel that we need to really do a good job that will not enable other people who come after us to make mistakes.

MRS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Yesterday, we laboured at length to try and address the issues that the honourable member is raising - under what circumstances, and if you look at clause 54(2), the Bill goes further to state, “For purposes of sub-section (1), the exceptional circumstances  include...” and highlights some three circumstances: “(1)  Where there are no applications received in response to invitation for bids; (2) Where an application is in respect of an area that is adjacent to an existing licence, which has a reservoir that traverses or crosses the boundary of the licensed block; and (3) for promoting national interests”; and here, we were looking at instances where our National Oil Company which is still in its infancy needs to be supported. 

Therefore, honourable member, yesterday, we discussed at great length these various circumstances and indeed any of these three could happen. That is why there was a need to provide for those exceptional circumstances. I suppose the proposal that the chairman has brought up is that if highlighting these three seems to be contentious, let us provide for them in the regulations which can be brought on the Floor of Parliament for approval. But that is the essence of having clause 54(2).

MR PETER NYOMBI: Mr Chairman, I rise to support the amendment that was proposed by the chairman. I think the greatest fear regarding this proviso is for the minister abusing his or her authority. That is the greatest fear in handling what has been referred to in the Bill as direct applications. 

Members are concerned as to why a minister should be endowed with such authority to handle direct applications in what is referred to as “exceptional circumstances.” There is a caveat within this proposal on the authority of the minister because the proposal says, “For purposes of subclause (1), the minister shall by regulations approved by Parliament...” which means the authority of the minister is clamped by a caveat within this proposal amendment. Therefore, there would be no room for the minister to abuse his or her exercise of authority while handling direct applications. And for that reason, Mr Chairman, I   think this is a very good compromise that we should all support.

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have a problem, the Constitution is very clear. It vests with Government the responsibility of managing any natural resources on behalf of the people of Uganda. Article 244(1) is very clear on this. Now, I would like the Attorney-General to define – the Constitution is here – “Subject to Article 26 of this Constitution, the entire property in, and the control of, all minerals and petroleum in, on or under, any land or waters in Uganda are vested in the government on behalf of the Republic of Uganda.”

I would like the Attorney-General to clarify to me what Government means and then I can proceed; because it seems the entire authority of Government is being undermined. Who has the political responsibility? Who is accountable to the government? It is the minister. But here we are, trying to take away the responsibility of being politically accountable to the ruling Government. Then what is the purpose of having a minister? 

So, I do not agree with undermining the authority of the minister. Let the minister be there, let him or her be held accountable and responsible for any actions that he or she takes. The Constitution is very clear on this. Why are we trying to undermine the Constitution?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think the point is made. The discussions are clear. Given the circumstances we are faced with, standing over clause 54 would as well mean standing over clause 55 and clause 56, which are dependent on clause 54. How do we resolve this and move forward? 

The motion that we failed to take a decision on yesterday was for the deletion of clause 54. If you delete clause 54, that means you delete clause 55 and clause 56, and start from clause 57. What is the way forward?  

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Chairman, we are discussing clause 54, bearing in mind what we had discussed earlier on because we agreed on clause 9 and we amended it; and we know the powers that we gave the minister. So, in view of that, I would like to suggest that the minister remains a very big player in this Bill although we know that under normal circumstances, his or her approval of licences is after consultations with the Authority. 

When we come to special circumstances, which are exceptional and the chairman comes up with a special arrangement - these are special circumstances and now we have a special arrangement of coming back to Parliament. I feel that we should agree with the chairman. These are special circumstances which need special attention. And, of course, coming back to Parliament is good enough. Thank you.

MRS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to propose that for the exceptional circumstances, we could insert, “Where after invitations for bids have been sent out like three times, and no application has been received, we consider that a special circumstance where the minister can now come in”; and two, “Where the application is in respect of a reservoir within a licensed block, but that block extends into an unlicensed block.” So, I think we need the minister’s intervention in such circumstances. This is to allow direct applications.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is an amendment to the proposal of the chairman of the committee. Are you suggesting that we drop the chairman’s recommendations and then take this up as the new one?

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. There seems to be a false impression being created that there is a section of this House that is just anti-minister, undermining the minister or the ruling Government, as my colleague put it. Some of us who have been pushing for these amendments do not think that way. In fact, we think that if this clause stands as it is, it could actually undermine this Government or even the minister’s office. So, we would like our colleagues to look at it in good faith. 

However, Mr Chairman, let me say this. When we adjourned at around midnight yesterday, I had two ideas running in my head, and I had thought that the chairperson and the technical people had picked it. 

One, we thought that looking at the PPDA would help since it provides for some of those exceptional circumstances in the ordinary procurements following the rules. And, we thought that we would have an import on some provisions that apply within the PPDA such that those circumstances are known. That is what I had in mind and I thought our colleagues were going to work on that and bring it this morning so that we could harmonise it and move ahead. 

Secondly, we had also moved closer to sub-clause (b) about the reservoir.  And we thought our technical people had picked that idea together with the chairman; and that they would come up with some sort of refined amendment, but it looks like we just wasted those three to four hours we were together, because, the chairman has come with something very different, which we never addressed ourselves to and we are back to square one.

So, the point I am trying to make is that we went to that meeting with open minds and until now, we have open minds about a compromise. But we have gone back to the same position as at the time we left this House. So, my view is that since what we discussed does not seem to -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Would you like to propose it for the House to hear because we were not in that meeting, so that we can have some idea?

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, when you look at the PPDA, the Act itself and the regulations, it gives circumstances where the ordinary procurement cannot be achieved and it sort of gives procedure as to how to achieve it. We thought that the technical people would have gone and looked at the PPDA and then import those provisions into this Bill. That is what I really thought and we were fully agreeable to that. 

Then, we also had a little bit of re-drafting of the reservoir - that technical question which has been explained over and over again. And we are saying, can’t we have a re-drafting to reflect the explanation you have been giving? We were totally opposed to (c) and we still remain opposed to it as long as you cannot clearly say this is national interest. It is not about the minister, but we are talking about any licensing authority, whether the Petroleum Authority itself or the minister. But I think we have already covered that under clause 9. So, the issue is really not about the minister. 

Hon. Mwesigye, the issue is really not even about the minister. We have already taken a decision in this House that it is going to be the Petroleum Authority. So, we are proceeding from the premises that we are guiding the licensing authority which is the Petroleum Authority and not the minister. So, the issue about undermining Government does not arise. This is not partisan and it is not about Government, but a transparent procurement process where rules are known.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Katuntu, you have heard the proposal from hon. Nyakikongoro on (b). Was that part of what you were thinking about?

MR KATUNTU: I did not get it quite correctly. If we can have the benefit of what she said again.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, can you state the amendment in (b)? 

MRS NYAKIKONGORO: “Where the application is in respect of a reservoir within a licensed block which extends into an unlicensed block.” That should be considered as a special circumstance.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, that was the proposal. Does it capture the sentiments you shared in the meeting?

MR KATUNTU: Not really like we had thought, because by the time we left, I thought we had some sort of draft. The chairperson of the forum had that sort of draft, which we had thought of.

MR PETER LOKERIS: Mr Chairman and Members, we had a marathon meeting yesterday to try and harmonise these issues, and the drafting committee felt that by subjecting these circumstances, they would be subjecting the regulations which would be made and tabled before Parliament, and then some of these issues would arise. 

It is true, we were thinking of the reservoir extending into the next block. How do we go about it? Do we have to subject the whole block to advertisement or through direct application? 

So, we came out to say that we would adjust the boundary to the extent to which the reservoir intrudes into that empty block and they understood. Our friend hon. Katuntu said, “I will sleep over it and also redraft the framing of this special circumstance.” And I thought by now you would have come up with that draft of yours so that we compare with what we have said. There are special circumstances which will ensue, especially if there is a very hardworking licensee who comes and makes a discovery and then it is discovered that it crosses over; does this licensee have to wait for a long time, while their equipment remains idle? 

So, we are saying that, that does not make business sense; it is good to curve out that area. But we thought that the redrafting of the committee should include future discussions over this because Parliament is staying – even tomorrow there will be Parliament. And if you subject it to Parliament it means that Parliament will be discussing all these exceptional circumstances when they occur. They may take a long time to occur – maybe after 10 or 20 years. That is what our draft here suggests. But if there is another way of re-formulating it, then we would do it so that we take into account these special circumstances. So, that discussion was there.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I listened to hon. Nyakikongoro’s submission in respect to clause 54(2)(b). The word we proposed was, instead of saying “adjacent” we were grappling with the words “application in respect of areas that extend to an existing licensed reservoir”. The bit we are capturing was “that extend” but also when you look at “extending” even under this it is well catered for under the PPDA Act. So, we would be safer even in those circumstances; if we could transplant this to here, it would rhyme, but it does not cause a crisis.

And besides, Mr Chairman, the impression that Members have created is as if we are in a hurry. But they need to be informed that the United States produces more oil than Saudi Arabia and it has a lot of potential to produce much more. Those of us who have just gotten the opportunity are behaving as though we had to licence by hook or crook. Let this law guide us and we shall move in that manner.

And lastly, I would like to implore the House; when we are reading – and it is you, as the Chairman, to guide us on the Constitution. Article 77 establishes this Parliament; 78 gives us the composition and 79 gives us the functions: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda.” 

Mr Chairman, without labouring through the entire Constitution, I would like to restrain my colleague, hon. Mwesigye, he should overcome that bellicosity over and over again. We are all talking about Government; we are in Government, including the minister and the Authority. It is important in such circumstances to overcome that “bush” mentality and we remain patriotic to our country. But each time bellicosity - at least be within the parameters –(Interruption)

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Mr Chairman, I do not believe that hon. Ssekikubo is in order to refer to what I have said here – and I was quoting the Constitution – as the “bush mentality”. Is he in order? 

Further, Mr Chairman, the Constitution is very clear in Article 244(2): “Subject to this article, Parliament shall make laws regulating - (a) the exploitation of minerals and petroleum; (b) the sharing of royalties arising from mineral and petroleum exploitation; (c) the conditions for payment of indemnities arising out of….” It does not mention anything these people are trying to propose. 

The point of order I am raising is that: Is he in order to say that what I have said is “bush mentality”? (Laughter) I went further to explain that what we are talking about is in the Constitution; it is not bush mentality! Is he in order, Mr Chairman?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it is not permissible by the rules of this House to impute improper motive on a Member. Even if the words “bush mentality” may not be negative on their own, but the context in which they have been used suggests that the Member who made that statement had motives other than what we are sitting here for. So, the Member imputed improper motive to a colleague in the House and is not in order. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, is it in order for hon. Ssekikubo, who clearly said that hon. Fred Mwesigye was being bellicose and that, that state was “bush mentality” yet he is a beneficiary  100 percent, of the results of that “bush mentality”? It was the “bush mentality” that freed this country and brought the freedom even for hon. Ssekikubo to sit with other people. Is it in order for him to condemn what brought about the freedoms we are exercising today? Is it really in order today, speaking from this House of dignity and freedom; this House that manifests the achievements we have registered so far, to condemn what brought about all this? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The strong objection from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is on record.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I wanted to make clarification to hon. Ssekikubo that we should not always legislate in anticipation; of thinking about corruption and grabbing things, but we should also legislate in certain peculiar circumstances that we have mentioned. For instance, the amendment that I was suggesting was that – yes, we appreciate the PPDA Act, but at the same time we are the same people who usually say that the process of the PPDA Act sometimes holds service delivery. And this is a licensee who has gotten into business – this is a businessperson, but finds himself in these circumstances. So, why should we really put on halt his business simply because we do not want the Authority to handle direct applications? I believe that we should leave room for the Authority to handle this situation, especially where we know that there are circumstances that will happen where we may need direct application, and also to allow state participation. Why should we deny state participation; after all, the public is in the interest of the state, and the state is in the interest of the public?

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to give some information that when the existing reservoir has been already discovered, and if that reservoir extends to the next block, this is not a discovery and not exploration because we already known that there is oil. We only want to ascertain the depth and width of the well. Should we really delay the process by going through the long procurement procedures? That is the information I wanted to give.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Mr Chairman, on the issue of direct applications, supposing there were advertisements two, three, or four times and people do not respond, why shouldn’t the Authority source for people to take up the business? Why should we close ourselves that people have not applied and, therefore, we do not want the Ugandans we have labelled corrupt to move out and solicit for business?

Oil is a business industry and we shouldn’t halt our business from moving on. So, I believe that we should not tie ourselves with this law and then tomorrow we lament on why we legislated in a wrong way.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 54 stood over. I am advised people are trying to redraft; can we go to clause 83?

(Clause 54, stood over.)

Clause 83

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 83; there was a redraft. You want to move a motion for adoption?

MS AOL: Yes, to suspend the sitting.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, we harmonised clause 83 and the new proposal is to amend sub-clause (5) as follows: “Where special circumstances referred to in sub-section (4) arise, the licensee shall propose a new operator for the approval of the minister.”

Justification: To allow the licensees to participate in the selection of the alternative operator.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, is that acceptable? Does that resolve the standoff we had in clause 83? Are we together Members? The issue was on sub-clause (5). Is this the position you people agreed on with regard to clause 83(5)? The proposal from the Chairperson is: “Where special circumstances referred to in sub-clause (4) arise, the licensee shall propose a new operator for approval by the minister.”  Is that okay? I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 83, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 87

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, under clause 87, the proposed amendment is as follows: “Where a licensee is in default because of serious or repeated violations of Ugandan law and conditions, and agreements with the Ugandan Government, the minister may in consultation with the Authority and with the approval of Cabinet by notice in writing served on the licensee suspend or cancel the licence.” 

Justification: To provide for wider provisions for default on violation of Ugandan laws.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: He is reading what is here on page 5.
 
MR KATUNTU: I think the principle is okay, we do not have any problem with it. But the wording has to reflect what we passed under clause 9; otherwise, we don’t have any problem with the principle.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This is one of the clauses that -

MR KATUNTU: That should be cleaned up.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, clause 9 directly applies to this. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: The chairman can agree to this, the words “serious or repeated violations”. I think once there are violations they do not necessarily have to be repeated. You could say, “...serious violations of Ugandan law or conditions and agreements with the Ugandan Government. The minister may in consultation with the Authority and with the approval of Cabinet by notice in writing served to the licensee suspend or cancel the licence.” I think once we have overcome the other one we can see which approval or which consultation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It will be adopted in the spirit of clause 9 which was passed. Here they are saying, “serious or repeated”, which means the repeated qualification is different from serious because if you are doing minor things but repeatedly; they may not be really serious but they are so repeated as to become a nuisance.
 
MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, in principle, we agree, especially where we are following the principles of 9. But for clarity, I think we need to clarify one, it is the Authority in consultation with the minister. Point number two is to avoid the use of some words like “serious” because I have the experience of the former employment decree where we would talk about “gross misconduct” and “gross” also became an issue for interpretation. This prompted the minister to make regulations that would define what would amount to “gross”.

I would be much more comfortable with the word “repeated violations” because every regulation that we put in place is intended to serve a purpose. Now, when you say, “serious” it is going to become an issue for litigation to determine whether this violation was serious or not, yet it is actually an offence against the law.

I, therefore, propose that we delete the word “serious”; “repeated” might be okay because we must leave room for some discretion for the Authority to say, “Well, this is a minor breach, this is fundamental.” Because, even under the ordinary rules of contract, not every single breach renders the contract susceptible to repudiation. So, we must leave some room for discretion for the Authority to determine. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, if it is one it is okay?

MR SSEGGONA: It could be okay if in the opinion of the Authority it is a serious breach. It is simply a violation; otherwise, you would give a licence to violate if the licensee feels that the violation is minor.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, we delete “serious or” and leave “repeated”?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, even if it is once, it could be so devastating. So, you do not have to necessarily say, “You have to repeat before there is a cancellation.” It could be as such -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, “Where a licensee is in default because of violations of Ugandan law and conditions and agreements with the Ugandan Government, the Authority may in consultation with the minister and with the approval of Cabinet by notice in writing served on the licensee suspend or cancel the licence.” 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, I am happy to announce that I am in agreement with hon. Ssekikubo on the amendment proposed that we delete both “serious” and “repeated” so that the discretion hon. Sseggona was talking about is clear.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, I put the question to that final proposal - “Where a licensee is in default because of violations of Ugandan law...” and the rest continues. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 87, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 110

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, we did not have an amendment to clause 110, the decommissioning fund. We are leaving it as it is.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think the explanations became clearer with the discussions. Honourable members, the proposal is that we leave clause 110 as it is. This is on the decommissioning fund.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, we had agreed that decommissioning is at the tail end, after the activities had been undertaken, concluded and now they are winding up. In the decommissioning, we have the decommissioning of the rigs, oil wells, pipelines etcetera that are very significant. When we say a decommissioning fund shall be contributed to by both Government and the licensee, I remember hon. Sseggona here asked, “suppose at the end of the work, the licensee packs up his bags and goes and it turns out that the cost of decommissioning far outweighs what was contributed?”

Mr Chairman, another point of concern is -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, that one is taken care of in sub clause (6). 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I thank you for that. The proposal we were coming up with is that the decommissioning should not be shared by Government. This is because by then, we have already entered the profit stages for the licensee. In which case, this contribution by Government and the licensee- Suppose they want to shift this equipment to some other site, suppose they want to leave them there for a while-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, but where is it said you share with Government? Where is co-sharing? It is not there. Sub Clause (7) is saying the balance will be given to the Government.

MR SSEKIKUBO: If it is wholly borne by the licensee, I would not hesitate, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that clause 110 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 110, agreed to.

Clause 112

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, we also agreed that clause 112 remains as it is in the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: After review, the committee and the people who went to harmonise came to the conclusion that what is provided for in the Bill is sufficient to deal with the matter. Is that the position? I put the question that clause 112 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 112, agreed to.

Clause 125

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, there are proposed amendments to clause 125. Insert the word “production” immediately before the word “licence” in sub clause (1). It will now read as follows: “The Minister may, in consultation with the Authority, consent to the use of a production licence by a licensee under this Act as security of his or her share of the licence as part of the financing of the activities associated with the licence in a manner prescribed by regulations.”

Justification: The licensee should have the possibility of sourcing for huge amounts of money to finance the development of a field using his or her shares in a production licence. This is one of the avenues of funding petroleum activities internationally.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Of course, that applies subject to clause 9, which we have passed. Honourable members, I put the question to that particular amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WERIKHE: Substitute sub clause (2) with the following: “The security referred to in sub clause (1) shall only be in relation to the licensee’s share or entitlement of the future revenue obtained from production of petroleum as provided for in the agreement.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 125, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 54

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Have we achieved some progress on this?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, in light of the clear failure to achieve consensus on this one, and in light of the effort last night and the extended debate we have had since morning, I rise to propose that we stand over that clause again. Let us give ourselves more time to consult on it and hopefully, generate a consensus or if we really cannot, then do the needful. I so propose.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Had you made any attempts, shadow Attorney-General?

MR KATUNTU: I think we need to be on record. From the spirit of last night’s meeting and from what we had asked our technical people to do, we are of the view that clause 54 should be amended in the following terms - the Prime Minister can, after listening to it, tell us whether he would agree with us or not -

“For purposes of subsection (1), the exceptional circumstances are:
(a) Where invitations for bids have been sent three times and no application has been received.
(b) Where the application is in respect of a reservoir within a licensed block which extends into an unlicensed block. 
(c) Enhancement of the participating interest of the state.” 

If the amendments are coached in those terms, then we may not have any problems. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to this amendment. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, I oppose that amendment to the extent that it is obviously intended to remove what hon. Katuntu had said earlier, that is, national interest. I have repeatedly said here, in this debate, that I am surprised that anyone would oppose that, because where there is a nation there must be interests and therefore there must be national interests. I thought what we could have worked out something else. His point had been that this is so broad, so can we define it. What I thought we could do - That is why, incidentally, I moved the amendment yesterday - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Proceed.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The problem was that the Leader of the Opposition was taking my attention- (Interjections) – No, the lady, not you. 

I thought that the point he was making, which we could sit together and sort out, was his fear of the broadness of the expression “national interest”. To remove “national interest” is not correct because that is the primary factor. National interest in law, and in politics, means the reason for the existence of the state. Actually, that is what it means. When you are dealing with a strategic resource like oil and you remove national interest, what exactly are you up to? 

Therefore, I do not support that amendment. As I said, let us have more time and go over this. Even for that one, we can sit together and see if we need a definition because that is what he had said in his argument earlier. Hon. Katuntu, we can go over that definition so that we really take care of “national interest” to the satisfaction of everyone.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I put the question to the first part so that we remain only with the proposal from hon. Abdu Katuntu, the shadow Attorney-General? The proposal is that in (a), it should be, “Where invitations for bids have been sent three times and no application has been received.” In (b), it should read, “Where the application is in respect of a reservoir within a licensed block which extends into an unlicensed block.” I put the question to those two. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, with respect to (c), I just want to invite the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to know in principle that we have come a long way. In arriving at this kind of drafting, there have been consultations which have been very wide. 

When we talk about “national interest”, to which we all would wish to refer and we agree, it is national interest in a contextualised manner. Mr Chairman, my most intended recipient of this message is the Prime Minister and the Prime Minister’s Office seems to be working. The point I am making is that we talk about national interest in a contextualised manner. What I am inviting the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to agree to is that it is a contextualised manner in which we are referring to national interest, and the custodian of this national interest, on behalf of the state, is actually the Authority in consultation with the minister.

Now, national interest is contextualised in what sense? In a sense that the Authority is going to look at the application and see whether this is going to assist the participating interest. Now, that is the participating interest in a commercial sense. We are trying to avoid a language that may not augur well with those who are not in for national interest and who may not be here. This is a discussion we had with the chairman of the committee. We said that this clause is intended to assist in the promotion and enhancement of the national interest in a contextualised/commercial manner. 

If you want to give preference to a business mode that is assisting national interest, and I want to limit it at that, that is the intention we are looking at in (c). It cannot be national interest in the abstract or in the unlimited imagination. It must be national interest in a guided and guarded manner. With respect to the non-commercial aspects of national interest, we have already catered for it in other provisions of this clause where we said that if it is a question of acquiring oil, the state my acquire oil in the following circumstance - We have already catered for the non-commercial. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, can I make a proposal?

MR SSEGGONA: Yes, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you combine the two principles - enhancement of the participating interest of the state in the promotion of national interest? 

MR KATUNTU: I would concede on that. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question. The circumstances are, “enhancement of the participating interests of the state in the promotion of national interest.” 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, I am very constrained not to support that formulation. I have said this before, and allow me to repeat it, I do not harbour any fear of national interest. I hope no one has anything against national interest. I understand the fear that this might be too amorphous or too broad, so can we define it? However, it is important that in defining it, we do not kill it. 

I said, and I am going to make this point in the argument that will follow, that national interest takes into account regional politics, geo-politics, world/global politics, in the context of the benefits to Uganda as a whole. This is really a decision that will be taken at the highest level possible in the leadership of the country. So when you formulate it the way you have done - enhancing the participating interest of the state - you are now restricting it. You are talking about, for instance, Uganda having an interest in drilling, because we are talking about exploration, and that is alright, but that is not all; national interest is much broader than that. 

I did say, but maybe not officially, but let me say it now, that in the case of the award of licences that exist now, actually this was taken into account because we looked at our strategic interest in terms of how we relate to the world in politics. This determined their participation in the exploration of oil even today. So, this formulation would actually curtail the state’s ability to achieve that. That is why I plead that we find a way of defining national interest, so that there is no doubt about what we mean, but without curtailing the promotion of that interest of this country in every sense. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, in light of our agreement on 2(a) and (b) as newly adopted, can we proceed to clause 55? 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, we cannot have this debate longer than we have had it. We have had enough; many man-hours have been wasted. We came with a spirit of open minds, we sacrificed beyond ordinary working hours to see that we reach consensus, and we actually addressed the real fears as they were being raised by especially the front bench. What was the fear? It was about this reservoir and how it is technical, and we have agreed. If there are no bids, we have also agreed. The only addition we have made there is the number of times, which is three times. It is logical. 

The reason why we were conceding to (c) is because the minister told us that we have a problem with our young oil company, so we need to give it a little bit of affirmative action. The ordinary rules might not apply because this is a young national oil company, and we agreed. That is why we coached it in these terms. What the Prime Minister is rising, actually, is the biggest problem, which takes me back to my original stand, where I opposed the whole clause in the first place. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the final amendment in (c) is, “enhancement of the participating interest of the state in the promotion of national interest”. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 54, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 55, agreed to.

Clause 56, agreed to.

Clause 57, agreed to.

Clause 58, agreed to.

Clause 59, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

1.05
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (Ms Irene Muloni): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

1.06
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (Ms Irene Muloni): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill, 2012” and considered clauses 54 to 59, 83, 87, 110, 112, 125 and the title of the Bill. The committee passed clauses 54, 83, 87 and 125 with amendments. The rest were passed un-amended. I beg to report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You now report that the whole Bill has been passed with amendments. 

MS MULONI: Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill, 2012” and passed it with amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

1.07
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (Ms Irene Muloni): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted
 
BILLS
THIRD READING

PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

1.08
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Irene Muloni): Mr Speaker and colleagues, yesterday I requested for the recommittal of clause 9 of the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill, 2012. On that basis, I beg to move that clause 9 of the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill, 2012 be recommitted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, seconded by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Honourable minister, would you like to speak to your motion? 

MS MULONI: Mr Speaker and colleagues, I have reviewed the implications of amending clause 9 and I must say I have challenges with its implementation. It was stated in the amendment of this clause that the minister would approve the granting and revoking of licenses, and negotiating and endorsement of petroleum agreements. My understanding of this is that it will leave the licensing role to the Authority and only allow the minister to approve the licensing. I, therefore, wish to recommit this clause on the following grounds:

One, there is need to have an independent Authority. The Bill we have been discussing gives independence to the petroleum authority to ensure it exercises its powers and performs its functions and duties without any interference. If the minister is given powers to approve the decisions of the Authority, there is bound to be no independence of the Authority. As a result, it violates clause 15 of this Bill.

Secondly, licensing is a detailed process, which is carried out continuously over a period of time. Right from the beginning - If I may highlight the various stages that this licensing process goes through; as Government, we acquire the preliminary data that enables us to evaluate the petroleum potential of the different areas before licensing. These areas could include areas where there is no petroleum data previously acquired or those that have very limited data. In our country, this could include areas like those identified but not yet explored, the sedimentary basins of Lake Kyoga and Kadam in Moroto, among others.

There is also the issue of issuance of reconnaissance permits, where we have multi-client seismic acquisition companies that we need to attract to this country to acquire this data. Once this data is acquired, it helps us to identify the areas for licensing. That data also gives us a better understanding of the petroleum potential of the areas which the companies will be bidding for. The cost of this data which is acquired is borne by those multi-client companies. They normally recover their costs when the data is sold to the potential licensees as they did.

Government uses this data to define the sizes and in demarcating the areas to be licensed into the discrete blocks covering the desired prospects. Government then announces, locally and internationally, the areas to be licensed. At this stage, we can have road shows, which are undertaken internationally, to advertise for the licence rounds which are going to be introduced so that we can attract potential investors in the petroleum exploration areas. In this aspect, data packages are prepared to be sold to all potential bidders.

The bidding instructions normally indicate the criteria to be used for the evaluation of the bids. These include areas like the work programmes, the national content, the signature bonuses, the environmental precautions and the safety aspects, among others. Following this, there is need for negotiation with the companies that will have offered the best terms before a final selection is made. Of course, due diligence needs to be done before the final announcement of the winners, and there is need to negotiate the final contract with the highest bidder.

After going through all these processes, the agreement between the company and Government is signed. This is done after the necessary consultations and approvals are done within the government structures. After all this has been done, regulations will then commence. At this stage, the Authority takes over to review and approve the annual work programmes and budgets, appraisals and detailed drilling programmes, and the production forecasts. The Authority also monitors costs and expenses including ensuring that the recoverable costs are audited by the Auditor-General. It also engages the licensed companies in technical discussions relating to the work programmes and undertakes independent interpretation of the technical data. The Authority will also manage and maintain the country’s petroleum data depository. Furthermore, it will assess the drilling programmes, the well proposals and review the field development plans presented by the licensed companies. It will also ensure the day-to-day compliance by the licensed companies of the laws, regulations and rules and contract terms.

When you consider this whole process and the issues I have raised, there is need to clearly separate and manage the two roles played by the Authority and the ministry which is supported by the directorate as indicated in the Oil and Gas Policy. Giving the licensing powers to the Authority creates some kind of conflict because these are licenses and agreements that this Authority is going to supervise, monitor and enforce to ensure compliance to the conditions stipulated therein. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, as part of international best practice, it is important that the role of the Authority is distinct in as far as licensing and regulation is concerned. We have shared experiences from many countries that have been in the oil business for a very long time, and indeed they have separated these two roles of licensing and regulation. 

In Denmark, we have the regulator as the Danish Energy Agency but licensing is done by the minister. In Netherlands, the regulator is the Directorate of Energy Market but licensing is done by the minister. In the United Kingdom, the regulator is the Secretary of State on behalf of Her Majesty the Queen but licensing is by Cabinet. In Mozambique, the regulator is the National Petroleum Institute but licensing is by the Council of Ministers. (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, as a matter of procedure, I can see the Minister reading a very detailed written presentation, possibly written by her technical staff or by herself after doing a lot of research; would it not be procedurally proper if she gave us copies of what she is reading, other than imagining that we are tape recording all that she is reading out to us?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Once a motion has been moved and seconded, a member is entitled to speak to it. The nature of the text of the speech is not reflected in the rules. Therefore, the hon. Minister is justifying her motion. Proceed. 

MS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. I was sharing with you what is happening in other countries. In Norway, the regulator is the Norwegian Petroleum Directorate alongside the Petroleum Safety Authority but licensing is by the Cabinet. In Sri Lanka the regulator is the Petroleum Resources Development Secretariat and licensing is by Cabinet. In Thailand, the regulator is the Department of Mineral Fuels but licensing is by the Council of Ministers. In Mexico, the regulator is SENER but licensing is by the Ministry of Energy. In Kenya, the regulator is the National Oil Corporation of Kenya but licensing is by the Minister. 

Finally, Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable members, I would like to highlight to all of you that petroleum is a strategic resource whose management should be seriously taken into context in as far as the Executive’s responsibility is concerned. It is important to note that the Minister, with the approval of Cabinet and on consultation and advice of the Authority, will play that role effectively. The Minister does not handle these matters in isolation but consults and is advised before a decision is taken. 

Therefore, my plea is that we make it clear that the licensing – because what was approved here in Parliament was that the Minister approves the granting and revoking of licences and approves the negotiating and endorsement of agreements. I think it is important that we make it very clear, so that it makes it easy for each of the parties involved to play their role effectively and to ensure that we manage this resource in the best way possible. I beg to move, Mr Speaker. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I listened to the Minister and to her motion for a recommittal. At an appropriate time, I may have to come up and express my view about the motion because it really goes against the spirit which had been generated. 

Mr Speaker, I rise is to inquire about the time we shall be allowed to bring our 64 clauses for recommittal, since there is an opening now for a recommittal. So, procedurally, I am asking that since the Minister has finished hers, can we raise ours using the same motion or she goes through hers and then we come in later? At what stage, Mr Speaker, will you allow us to bring up our 64 clauses that we want recommitted? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules are very clear. They say any Member at this stage can move a motion for recommittal of a clause or the whole Bill. That is the rule.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Could I proceed right away, since we shall be allowing debate on all of them? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, there is a motion right now. 

1.25
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, before I speak in support of the motion, I just want to say that obviously, this is a motion where there will be no consensus; it is clear. So, in light of the fact that we do not have the numbers to take a decision, I wonder whether we should continue when we cannot take a decision. I am just seeking guidance and once you guide, then I could come back and speak to the motion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of quorum has been raised. Under rule 23 of our Rules of Procedure, it is clear at what time the Speaker can ascertain quorum or is required by the rules to ascertain quorum. 

When a matter is going to be voted upon, the Speaker is required to ascertain whether there is quorum. I have been monitoring the House right now and our total number is now 63, which is about half the quorum that is required. So, we shall not be able to take a vote. For the House to take a vote, all the Members need to participate in that debate so that they know what they are voting for or against. In the circumstances, we shall not be able to proceed with this matter. Therefore, the House stands adjourned to tomorrow 2 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 1.27 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 21 November 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
