
Wednesday, 20 November 2013

Parliament met at 3.11 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I just have two matters: I have studied the reports from the committees about work, which is pending and I want to advise Members that all the Bills pending before the committees must be completed and presented to this House before we go for the Christmas recess and there will be no more excuses. 

So, the Government Chief Whip and the Leader of the Opposition, please, crack the whip on the chairpersons to ensure that the Bills, which are outstanding, are done and also the other work. But the Bills are very important because some of them have been sitting here for some time.

Secondly, this morning, I received a petition from a sample of formerly abducted children from Northern Uganda, DR Congo, and Central African Republic. I think that there is something that we have not been doing, and that is to address their lives after their return. 

So, I have asked the Members of Parliament that we shall draft a motion and debate what to do about them. One of them who came was a girl abducted from DR Congo who was taken to Central African Republic, where she produced two children. Of course, they were born in the bush and they do not have birth certificates. She escaped but Ogwang, the man who took her, died there and so, she is a Congolese with children who have no identity. She was asking me, “What should I do with these children?” The stories are really many and I think that we need to address that. I have asked the Members that we should discuss their petition before we go for Christmas so that something can be done about the post-conflict human situation. 

I think we are dealing with the roads, buildings, water but the human factor is something that we also need to address. Therefore, I hope that when the time comes, the Members of the Government side will rise to the occasion and we find solutions for these unfortunate human beings. 

I thank you very much. 

3.15
MR KENNETH KIYINGI (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What I have is a matter of national importance, regarding extensive damage and destruction of crops including maize, beans, tomatoes, houses for the elderly as well as coffee and banana plantations by heavy rain storms accompanied by hail stones. Over 200 households have been directly affected from different parishes and villages including Kasi, Magungu, Luwonga, Migamba, Katiti, Bbula and surrounding areas in Kituntu Sub-County, in Mpigi District.

I humbly seek Government intervention in this matter through provision of relief items like irons sheets for the elderly and the least privileged, maize flour, beans as well as maize seeds and beans for replanting.

Allow me to note that much as the area I am talking about is only 80 kilometres from Kampala, it is one of the most impoverished areas in Uganda and so, I humbly call upon Government to intervene in this matter for the good of the people of Uganda. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Would Prof. Kabwegyere want to say something about the situation in Mawokota?

3.17
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I welcome the report. I would propose that that report is presented to the Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees because for any action, there is a need to know the details, particularly, from the CAO so that we know what to mobilise and how to intervene. The sooner that report is comprehensive and available, the better for you, Government and the people you represent.  

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The accountability has been given by committees on work pending but there is also work that is hanging between the plenary and committees.

Madam Speaker, specifically the committee claims that they finished the report on the misappropriation of donor money in the OPM but we have not discussed that report. So, I was wondering whether we do not have reports that committees have finished but they have not been formally presented in the plenary.

THE SPEAKER: That is why I did not talk about them. I have those reports and they will come. I am talking about what has not come. 

PETITION BY THE PEOPLE OF MAIRINYA “A” VILLAGE, BUKABOOLI SUB COUNTY, MAYUGE DISTRICT REGARDING BOUNDARY DISPUTES

3.19
MR MAJEGERE WAIRA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the chance of presenting this petition under Rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure. This is a humble petition of the people of Mairinya “A” Village, Bukabooli Sub-County, Mayuge District. 

The petition regards a boundary dispute between Mairinya “A” Village in Mayuge District and Namuntenga Village, which is in Bugiri District.

The petitioners are people from Mairinya “A” Village, Bukabooli Sub-County, Mayuge District who are concerned about the land dispute between the residents of the two communities. The petitioners aver that on – 

THE SPEAKER: No. Just read the prayers.

MR WAIRA: Okay, thank you. The prayers are:
“
    1. That Parliament urges Government to intervene in the above dispute in order to create harmony amongst the residents of those communities.
    2. That Parliament urges Government to cause the demarcation of the boundaries of Mayuge and Bugiri districts.”

I beg to move. The members who have signed are about 80 residents. I thank you.

Madam Speaker, I take this opportunity to lay it on Table. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think the prayers are simple because they are really asking Government to go and call a meeting to discuss with them. But the important one is to determine the boundaries. 

I do not think that one should stay long with the committee because it is about asking Government to deal with the boundary situation. So, send it to the committee but the prayers are very clear and so, please, handle expeditiously.

Now, hon. Members, we had under our rules provided for the Prime Minister to answer questions every week. But for some time, the practice had died out and inadvertently today, it was left out of the Order Paper but the Prime Minister is here and so, I am giving him up to 4.00 p.m. to answer. That is 45 minutes to answer questions – if there are any. 

We will start with hon. Ssemugaba, two minutes.

3.22
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga West County, Kyankwanzi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to put a question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. 

Several times, on the Floor of Parliament, Government has assured Parliament to bring an amendment of Section 14 of the Uganda Revenue Authority that allows full Operationalisation of the Road Fund so that the Uganda Revenue Authority can be given a lee way to bank that money directly on a monthly basis to the Uganda Road Fund. But the ministers who commit themselves, especially the Ministers for Finance are dilly dallying around and yet, there is a Cabinet Memorandum already ordering this to take place. Why is it delaying and yet the roads are bad?

We added over 10,000 kilometres to UNRA for maintenance but there is no money added. The money we are giving them – Shs 280 billion - is still the same. We have just increased by peanuts. They need more money for maintenance. Some of the roads that were taken over by UNRA are never maintained at all and some roads have become impassable and yet, they are very important to promote the economy of Uganda and even the homestead income of our areas. Why is it not being brought here because I even have the Hansard here? 

THE SPEAKER: Why haven’t they activated the Road Fund? Isn’t that the question?    

MR SSEMUGABA: Madam Speaker, therefore, I ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister why the Minister of Finance sabotages our work and yet, it is this Parliament that passed that Act in order to have better roads in Uganda. 

THE SPEAKER: Will you answer one by one?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

3.25
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, in response to that question, I would like to inform this House, as you already know, that Government fully supports the question of the establishment of a Road Fund that will be used exclusively for the maintenance of roads, and the Ministry of Finance had been given the instructions to start the process of making the amendment to the Act to make that possible. 

To the best of my knowledge, that is going through the normal passage of enactment of laws. We expect to have this in Cabinet as soon as possible and when we are ready, we will present the Bill to this House. I thank you.

3.25
MS CHRISTINE ACAYO (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. On a number of occasions, it has been noted that the Prime Minister’s Office has become more of an implementing agency than a monitor of Government programmes. I have heard the Prime Minister promise that there shall be restructuring of the Prime Minister’s Office. I would like to know from the Prime Minister when this restructuring will be done. I thank you. (Applause)

3.27
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, as you know, the cardinal functions of the Prime Minister are to coordinate all Government activities at all levels, everywhere and to monitor and evaluate the work of Government.

I have stated many times before that the way the Office of the Prime Minister was structured, it required some changes to enable it perform these cardinal functions. I want to inform this House that indeed, we have presented proposals of reform to Cabinet and Cabinet has passed them. We are now at the level of implementation. The technical people are in the process of producing the necessary instruments to achieve this objective. I thank you.

3.28
MR PETER LOKII (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I am aware that there is a KDA Act, which was one time referred to as Karamoja Develop Arua. I want to find out from the Prime Minister when the Karamoja Development Agency will begin to do development work in Karamoja because it does not seem to be financed.

THE SPEAKER: There is what is known as the Karamoja Development Agency but he says it is not doing anything to develop Karamoja. What is happening to it? It is an old thing but it is not starting. It has been there for some time.

3.29
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Well, I think that hon. Lokii is technically right. Madam Speaker, a Ministry of Karamoja Affairs was established in the Office of the Prime Minister and it is fully performing the functions of handling the affairs of Karamoja. In Cabinet, we have discussed the question of bringing the necessary legislation to make the law cognisant of this reality. Therefore, this Karamoja Development Agency - I think that is what it is called - is working within that new framework. But again, we will be coming here to Parliament to amend the necessary laws to bring what we are doing on the ground in line with the law. Thank you. 

3.30
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative): Madam Speaker, I would like to address myself to the Treasury Memorandum. As Leader of Government Business, when are you going to submit the Treasury Memorandum to this House? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.31
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): As soon as we are ready, we will bring it here. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, as far as I am concerned, I think we talked about this only last week or the week before and we are expecting the Office of the Clerk to furnish us with the necessary information to enable us to do what we are expected to do; and as soon as we get that, we will get back to you.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, the Treasury Memorandum is from the government in response to the recommendations of this House. It is not the Clerk. But those are done all the time as a matter of course - they have not come? Okay, if the Clerk has not been issuing the extracts of the resolutions - but I have been seeing them; but just to be sure, send them again; all of them, from all the reports that we have discussed. Thank you.

3.32
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We lose 82,000 children per annum and $290 million in trying to fight malnutrition. May I know when Government is coming up with the Nutrition Act to deal with malnourishment because it is a very big problem in this country?

3.33
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, the law is not the problem. What we have done as Government is to generate - and the President, indeed, launched the programme on nutrition and we have established a mechanism of promoting nutrition in the whole country. As a matter of fact, it is coordinated from the Office of the Prime Minister. Uganda is one of the 35 countries in the world that have joined the scaling up for nutrition movement, which is a United Nations programme, actually, spearheaded by the head of – It is UNESCO –[Hon. Member: “You are not sure”] - no, because I am the country representative, I am absolutely sure. 

When I was in New York only a few weeks ago, I did discuss this with the Secretary-General, Ki-moon. So, I think what we should do, maybe if we did not do it properly, is to publicise for hon. Members of Parliament, give you all the information about the nutrition programme and the plans that we have.

So, the law is not an impediment. It is a programme that we launched a long time ago and it is something that we are rolling out. We have 15 districts, which are in the pilot programme for the implementation of this nutrition action plan and we should give you, hon. Members of Parliament, the full details so that you can see the roll out plan for the whole country. Thank you.

3.35
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides for qualifications for one to be President of Uganda. Yes, Article 102 says, “A person is not qualified for election as President unless that person is-
(b) not less than thirty-five years and not more than seventy-five years of age.” We have heard confusing versions of the date of birth of H.E, the President of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. (Laughter) 

So, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I wish to ask for the exact date of birth of H.E Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. Thank you. (Laughter)   

3.36
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I will ask him. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: He has said he is going to ask the person. (Laughter)

3.37
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Madam Speaker, I have only two questions for the Prime Minister: One, why does it take such a very long time for letters of concern written to the Office of the Prime Minister to receive a response? I will give a case in point of a letter I wrote about a disaster in my district in May and to-date, I have not received any response.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I want the Prime Minister to tell this country what crime the people of Agago District have committed against this Government to deserve the kind of bad Central Government roads that are in the district now. All the Central Government roads in the district are in a sorry state and they are not accessible; and whenever it is raining, the people of Agago District have no access to any other district. Thank you very much.  

3.38
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Letters written to the Office of the Prime Minister take long to be responded to. I am glad to hear that they respond to them first of all; that is very positive. But secondly, I would like to have particulars from hon. Franca Akello as to whom the letter was addressed. If it was addressed to me, it has not arrived yet and as soon as it arrives, I will respond. If it is addressed to other people, I will need to get particulars and find out if they have received that communication and why, if they have received it, they have not responded. 
The second point about the state of roads in Agago, Madam Speaker, we all know, because we passed the Appropriation Bill here, that this Government in this financial year, particularly consistent with its programmes of the past, gave priority to roads and road maintenance. We have, I think, Shs 2,360 billion in the budget for that purpose. 

The question of managing roads has been prioritised. We are dealing with roads that link us with neighbours and, therefore, we have tarmacked Kabale to Kisoro; we are doing Kabale to Katuna; and we are doing the road to Moroto. The other day, the President launched the construction of that road to Moroto; we will continue to Kotido and Kaabong. We are doing Gulu-Atiak-Nimule. We have done Arua already. From Arua, we are continuing to Olaba. We have the plan. We came from Soroti to Lira and we plan, actually, to link Kitgum to both Lira and Gulu by tarmac road as well. It is only Kanungu, which is still in the pipeline. (Laughter) So, that is one type of roads. 

The other one are the roads that link up district headquarters. We have taken a decision that these will be given priority and the Minister for Transport will come here to announce the new approach to managing these major roads because they are going to have what they call “term contractors”. They will give major contractors the work to maintain those roads on a 10-year basis and the contractor will remain there to do the road all the time.

Therefore, in terms of roads under the Central Government, I can say very clearly that we are determined. We have the programme, we have the resources. I want to assure you that these roads will be properly maintained.

Of course, there are roads under local government, which are also provided for and the money is passed on to the local government. I would like to know if there is any specific problem with Agago, which I had not heard about. I will be happy to attend to it.

3.43
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I hope my Kabale Municipality road will be worked on also. My question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is: I understand when the NRM was looking for votes is 2010, their main concern was corruption. I would like to know what they are going to do to the following accounting officers who were found to be corrupt by Police/CID, the Auditor-General and Parliament: One is Mr Pius Bigirimana; two, Mr Kagoda; and three, Mr Lukwago of Ministry of Health.

3.44
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr AmamaMbabazi): We have discussed this before in this House. Certainly, the NRM Government is committed to fighting corruption. There is no doubt about that. Anyone who has any doubt, please, be informed now that the NRM Government is absolutely determined to fight against corruption.(Interjections) Those who have the capacity to understand  -  hon. Nambooze, not everybody is in that category as you know. 

But we must make a distinction between one, allegations; two, accusations; and three, investigations. We must make a distinction between those and the established fact that there is, indeed, an act of corruption, which has been proven. You remember when we were passing the budget, we discussed these particular names. They went back and we have said, “Unless we have had evidence proving that these individuals were guilty of any impropriety, we will wait to get that evidence and we will act.” Thank you.

3.46
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This humble question has been put before the Rt Hon. Prime Minister since 4 September 2012 and he has never answered it. It is about Ssembule Steel Mills. Every time he comes he says, “I am coming, I am coming.” In summary, Ssembule Steel Mills was advertised for sale due to the debts accumulated in regard to high interest rates. 

Ssembule Steel Mills was founded in 1971 by indigenous Ugandans and it has been a success story especially in the early days of the NRM Government. It even hosted four heads of state at the invitation of President Museveni and even assisted the Movement during the Luweero Triangle War. My humble question is: When are you going to assist this company, Ssembule Steel Mills, an indigenous company, which has also assisted you?

3.47
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, indeed, has raised this issue with me many times, that is true. My response to him has been and I would now like to repeat it, since he has brought it in the open, that this Government is very supportive of entrepreneurs, especially Ugandan entrepreneurs who are investing in strategic areas like that steel area - it is very important. 

As hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi and some of you may know, we have supported Ssembule Steel Mills before. The same people were actually in other activities, which Government fully supported. So, I have discussed this matter with the President and I have discussed it with the Minister of Finance and what we agreed was that the Ministry of Finance, which is responsible for this, should meet with the Directors of Ssembule, see where their weaknesses are and determine how Government once again could intervene. We would like to intervene in a matter we have concluded is viable because if it is not, however supportive we may be of that industry, we will have to find another way of helping out. Thank you.

3.49
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have just two questions: One, is the Prime Minister aware that the Mercedes Benz he is travelling in was procured at Shs600 million from the PRDP money?

Two, the Prime Minister, having been involved in a lot of scandals - Temangalo, CHOGM, OPM and Oil scandals - when would he consider resigning since he is the face of Government business? (Laughter)

3.50
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Well, these are old stories, of course. The Mercedes Benz I move in is an official vehicle of the Prime Minister. It was procured using the procurement processes of Government and I am not part of that process of procurement. I thought hon. Odonga Otto knew better than that.

Two, on the question of scandals, my simple answer is that if you call something a “scandal” it does not become a scandal because you have called it a scandal.

On Temangalo, there is a record here – this House took a position on it. And it is obvious again, to anyone who cares and has the capacity to understand, that if you look at what happened in Temangalo, that I sold my land at a price below the market price and that I did not take part in any negotiations because I had given someone full powers of attorney to sell on my behalf, then you will come to the same conclusion as this Parliament or as any reasonable person would do, that that was not a scandal. It was simply a market transaction of sale of my land.

Two, there was a question on CHOGM. Again, this issue came here with allegations, which had no basis and that report was dismissed because, you know, someone tried to connect me to something wrong. First of all, there was nothing that went wrong, absolutely nothing, but two, I was not connected at all with procurement during CHOGM.

It is true that I wrote a letter on the eve of the CHOGM Summit to the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to make sure that the decoration, which needed to be in place – because I had that role - should be handled and someone said I was trying to give orders about expenditure. I would have happily done so but actually, I did not do that because it was not my business to do so.

The most recent one was about oil bribes. This is consistent by people who have no basis really to tarnish me. They try to throw mud at me; first of all, the mud does not reach and even that which gets anywhere near, does not stick anywhere. So, I would like to urge them, to please, not waste their time because they will never, never soil my name. 

(Statements expunged from the record.)

3.56
MS SARAH MWEBAZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibuuku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister when Government will be delivering the ferry on to Lake Kyoga because they have been promising, year in, year out.

3.57
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Hon. Members, I think it is not long ago when the question of a ferry on Lake Kyoga, which was procured under the Office of the Prime Minister, was before this House, precisely questioning why money in the Office of the Prime Minister meant for something else was used to procure a ferry. So, hon. Mwebaza, there is already a ferry on Lake Kyoga. It is a recent one.

Two, we are planning –

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I represent those people; there is no ferry on Lake Kyoga.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: But you are now the Speaker. I did not know the Speaker could speak as a Member of Parliament. But I want to assure the honourable member representing Kamuli District that secondly, we are procuring another ferry, which is going to come, that will ply between Kasiro and Bulambuli and all those places. So, there will be a new ferry and the procurement is being processed. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when you talk about Muntu, it is different from the BKK Ferry. The BKK Ferry is different from the Muntu Ferry. You are talking about the Muntu Ferry – Bukungu, Kasiro, Kaberamaido Ferry. That is what they are asking about - the one from Bukungu,Kaberamaido to Kasiro.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, yes, you are right. If that is a specific one, it is not yet procured. I am reliably informed that the process has started and I hope it will be ready the next time we go through the budgeting cycle. We will provide for it. I hope so.

4.00
MS SARAH MATEKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Government promised to build seed schools in every sub county and technical schools in every county. I would like the Prime Minister to tell us the status of this programme’s implementation.

Secondly, I want to know from the Prime Minister, what plans Government has for the families that recently were affected by the stray bombs from DRC. Thank you.

4.01
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, as you know, the question of skilling Uganda is a question that Government gives priority. We have launched a new programme called “Skilling Uganda.” We have a plan to build technical schools throughout the whole country.

We still have 180 sub counties that do not have any form of technical schools. But we are determined to cover these as well. This is out of 1,400 sub counties that we have in Uganda.

I hope we will have time to discuss this issue because I think we ought to discuss it in detail in this Parliament so that all of us are on the same page.

It is true, there were some stray – I do not know whether they were stray bullets – I do not want to characterise them as stray bombs, but there were bombs from DRC that hit Uganda. We have taken this up through diplomatic channels and we shall give those diplomatic channels the time and opportunity to sort it out.

I had not received the report from the hon. Mateke about the extent – the district chairperson rang and told me about possible casualties. Actually, at the beginning, we thought there were no casualties and I am waiting to receive the full report. So, we will definitely respond to it in the most appropriate manner. Thank you.

4.03
MR YONNA MUSINGUZI (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to know from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister whether he knows that people in Ntungamo, Mbarara, Kabale and Bundibugyo, who were affected by the ongoing road construction, have not been compensated to date. And whether he also knows that staff of UNRA have approached some of those people and asked them to sign payment vouchers as having received the payments yet, to-date, there is no money on their accounts. Does he know about that and what has he done about it?

Madam Speaker, this situation is very tough on some of us. People are up in arms. We have tried to contain them, but we cannot contain them anymore. Thank you.

3.57
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Yes, I am very much aware that there are some people who have not received their compensation and I want to assure them that their compensation is being processed. The ministry has now received the money and I think the vouchers are also in place. So, I suppose, in a very short time, they will be receiving payments for compensation. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the 45 minutes we allotted are over. However, the reference to hon. Mwiru as a thief should be expunged because it was not based on facts. The Prime Minister said he just used him as an example because he was looking at him. So, that portion should be expunged – no, I think also the allegation by hon. Mwiru against the Prime Minister should be expunged. Both of them should be expunged. Okay, let us go to the next item.

MOTION FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON ENERGY ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE ELECTRICITY SUB-SECTOR IN UGANDA

3.59
MR JACOB OBOTH-OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a report that was concluded over a year ago. It was laid here around October last year. I would like to lay some document before I give a snap shot.

I would like to lay the record of proceedings and minutes and verbatim transcripts; the Gen. Salim Saleh Report on Electricity Tariff Reduction, which was an item within our terms of reference; the submission, which with your permission, I will ask the chamber attendants to bring in; it is that record in the big box.

I also would like to lay the Strategic National Energy Plan for Ghana, one of the benchmarks. This is the main report for 2006. In addition, I lay the Strategic National Energy Plan – Energy Supply to the Economy from the Energy Commission of Ghana; the Kenya Electricity Access Investment Prospectus, 2009/2014 by the Ministry of Energy of the Republic of Kenya.

Madam Speaker, I would also like lay the Final Report of Kenya Generation Company. In that report, they had a Good-to-Great Transformation Strategy, which we thought would be a good document. I would also like to lay the updated list of Cost Power Development Plan for the study period 2011 and 2031 dated March 2001, also from the Ministry of Energy of the Republic of Kenya.

Just to refresh the memories of the honourable members, a committee was set up and we submitted the report. To give a brief, in the executive summary at page 9, we stated that it was purely to understand the irregularities in the electricity sub sector and comprehensively address its terms of reference. 

The committee, as a matter of necessity, had to review the restructuring and reform process in the sector that dated back to 1999. 

The committee also established that the reform process in the power sector that led to the unbundling of UEB into successor companies, UEGCL, UETCL and UEDCL had good and well-intended objectives, which included the several ones enumerated. 

The committee on page 10 noted that the power sector restructuring process, which involved the unbundling of UEB into successor companies was marred by irregularities. The power distribution concession agreements signed between the Government of Uganda and Umeme Ltd had a number of unfavourable clauses to Government and the citizens of Uganda. 

We established that the role played by Paul Marley in the unbundling of UEB was highly suspect, given his employment record with Eskom enterprise of South Africa of which he was a shareholder of Umeme Ltd in 2004 and later Eskom and then the subsequent employment into Uganda as a billing expert. He offered his opinion, which was biased and doctored about UEB. 

One of the terms of reference of this report was to look at the clauses of the provision of Umeme, the concession agreement and to look at the tariffs. For the record, I want to note that the Salim Saleh report we laid as evidence - that report had critical recommendations including one that a forensic audit into the Umeme investment and level of losses be addressed. So, this is not just a new thing. 

So, in summary, we made several recommendations as seen on page 31 and 32, and I believe that the Members will find it necessary to refer to them during the debate. One of the major recommendations we made on page 13 was that, we project that the power distribution segment should be managed under public/private partnership framework with Government having at least 51 percent shareholding. 

We also recommended that Uganda should be divided into various zones that will attract competition, and involvement of mainly home-grown solutions, just like Kenya and Ghana are doing. I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as you recall, that report was presented in full by the chair of the committee and we asked Members to go and read it. All he has done is just to highlight a few areas to refresh your memory in preparation for the debate. We are going to appoint time for that debate, come back with your copies because I know that you have them. I will give you time next week to debate that report – no; you have them because we gave them to you. We gave them to you when it was being presented; that is why I want to get you Ipads so that we do not have to print reports. 
Maybe, Clerk, you may have to succumb to the need to produce again in case they have lost their copies. You will have to organise to issue another set for the debates since we have not yet given you the Ipads – you will present your arguments next week; everybody will be free to speak next week.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE ON THE CONDUCT OF HON. GEN. DAVID SEJUSA, UPDF REPRESENTATIVE

4.15
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. As a preliminary matter, I beg to lay on the Table the minutes and record of the proceedings of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. I beg to lay. 

The Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline is provided for under rule 146 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda with a mandate to, among others:
a) 	Consider any matter of discipline referred to it by the Speaker of the House, including on attendance of Members at sittings of committees and report its findings to the House; and 
b) 	carry out such other functions as are conferred by these rules or as the House may assign it. 

On 26 September 2013, the Speaker of Parliament referred the matter of hon. David Sejusa’s continued absence from the sittings of the House to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline for investigation and subsequent reporting in accordance with rule 101(8) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The applicable rules are reproduced here verbatim -rules 101 (8), (9) and (10):

“(8) Where any Member alleged to have infringed sub-rule (6) persists in absenting himself or herself from sittings of the House after having been warned by the Speaker under sub-rule (7) of this rule, the conduct of that Member shall be referred by the Speaker to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. 

(9) A Member whose conduct is under investigation by the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline under this rule is entitled to be heard in his or her own defence and to be represented by Counsel of his or her own choice.

(10) Where the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline upon investigation finds the allegation referred to it against a Member under sub rule (8) proved, and the report of the committee is debated and tabled in Parliament, the Member shall, on the basis of that finding, cease to be a Member under Article 83(1)(d) of the Constitution.”

Honourable Members, we are on page 3 of the report. In execution of its mandate under rule 101(9) and (10) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the committee has investigated and considered the matter referred to it by the Rt Hon. Speaker and now presents its report to the House. 

Background

In a letter dated April, 29th 2013, hon. David Sejusa, UPDF representative, wrote to the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament in this manner: “This is to inform you that I will be going out of the country and will be away for three weeks starting 30 April 2013. This is therefore to request that you grant me leave to be absent from the House for that period”.

In response, the Rt Hon. Speaker, in a letter dated 29 April 2013, granted leave of absence in the following terms: “I received your letter informing me about your plans to travel out of the country for three weeks, from 30 April 2013. As requested, leave of absence is granted for that period.”

From the foregoing, the said leave period expired on the 21st day of May 2013. On 24 May 2013, through his lawyers, Luzige, Lubega, Kavuma and Co. Advocates, hon. David Sejusa sought to extend his leave of absence from the House on grounds that he was still away on official duty. On 16 April 2013, through his lawyers, hon. David Sejusa made a further request for the extension of leave for a period of three months. The letter, quoted in part, reads as follows: “We do act for and on behalf of Gen. David Sejusa, also known as Tinyefuza; on whose express, valid and cogent instructions we humbly address you and request as follows…” The letter is attached. You will find the full text. 

“It is on that basis that our client requests you to extend his official leave of absence from Parliament for another three months from today, during which period our client would have explained himself to the relevant parliamentary committee which will determine whether his explanation is satisfactory or not and also enable him decide on the next course of action either to resign on his own accord or otherwise. 

Our attention has been drawn to reports that the UPDF wishes to proceed unconstitutionally by removing our client from Parliament without due regard to the relevant legal provisions. We are, however, confident that such manoeuvres shall be resisted by your good office as and when they contravene clear constitutional provisions of how a Member of Parliament vacates office.” 

In a letter dated 21 August 2013, the Rt Hon. Speaker sought clarification from the Chief of Defence Forces of the UPDF in the following terms: “As to whether the member is away on official duties as he earlier stated since he is not away on any parliamentary duties.” The Chief of Defence Forces responded, in a letter dated 6 September 2013, to the effect that, “As far as the UPDF is concerned, hon. Gen. David Sejusa is not on any official duty of the UPDF.”

In the circumstances, in a letter dated 16 September 2013, the Rt Hon. Speaker communicated to hon. Gen. David Sejusa as follows: “I am now constrained to invoke the powers of the Speaker under rule 101(7) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I hereby give you a warning for your continued absence from the House and accordingly require you to attend the House at the next sitting of Parliament.”

Consequently, on 26 September 2013, in her Communication from the Chair, the Rt Hon. Speaker informed the House of the matter of Gen. David Sejusa’s continued absence from the sittings of the House and invoked her powers under rule 101(8) of the Rules of Procedure to refer the matter to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to investigate and subsequently report.

Methodology

Guided by, and in compliance with the requirements of the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, in terms of methodology, the committee conducted open public meetings in committee room 018, ground floor, at Parliamentary Buildings. To effectively accomplish its mandate, the committee meetings took on an adversarial character with the lead counsel guiding invited witnesses to tender oral sworn evidence on the matter under investigation.

The following key features were notable in informing the report of the committee and guiding the conduct of the committee meetings:
    a) Invitation for the participation of hon. Gen. David Sejusa. (Annexure 1 to the report)
    b) Consultation with stakeholders and witnesses and their testimonies. There is a list of witnesses in annexure 2.
    c) The review of the official records, the Hansard, and the attendance register of the Parliament of Uganda. 
    d) Consideration of technical counsel.  

The committee terms of reference 

The matter before the committee for investigation, that is, the continued absence of hon. David Sejusa from the sittings of the House, was referred by the Rt Hon. Speaker under Part XVI (Leave of Absence) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, specifically rule 101. Thus, the committee, in order to premise its investigation in the ambit of the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure, addressed itself on the terms of reference elicited from both the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure and the relevant case law on the matter.

Specifically, the committee understood its mandate to require it to:
    a) Determine whether the hon. Member had sufficient cause justifying his absence; or
    b) Determine whether the hon. Member was away on official duty or parliamentary duty;
    c) Hear hon. Gen. David Sejusa’s defence to the allegation of absence from the sittings of the House without leave, contrary to the Rules of Procedure of Parliament;
    d) Determine whether the allegations against hon. David Sejusa of infringement of rule 101(8) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament were proved; and
    e) Make recommendations to the House on appropriate action.

Service of the Committee Summons

Personal service of committee summons

In its meetings and in accordance with the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the committee scheduled a meeting at which hon. David Sejusa was to appear and defend himself against the allegations referred to the committee. Further, the committee decided to issue committee summons to invite hon. David Sejusa to appear before the committee and defend himself against allegations referred to it.

The committee tasked the Clerk to Parliament to effect personal service on hon. Gen. David Sejusa. In that regard, the Clerk to Parliament sent out committee summons and delivered them to hon. David Sejusa’s pigeonhole. The Clerk to Parliament extracted a copy of the summons, scanned, attached and emailed the summons to the official email address of hon. Gen. David Sejusa at dsejusa@parliament.go.ug. The emails are annexed as annexure 3 to this report.

Substituted service

The committee’s meetings at which hon. David Sejusa’s attendance was required took place as scheduled at the Parliamentary Buildings in room 018. The committee was informed by the Clerk that the personal service was attempted but was not successful since hon. Gen. David Sejusa was not available at Parliament. The committee then directed the Clerk to Parliament to effect service of the committee summons by other means of substituted service to ensure that at the next committee meeting, hon. David Sejusa appears before the committee.

Having received information that hon. David Sejusa had applied for asylum in the United Kingdom, the Clerk to Parliament sought the cooperation of the Minister of Foreign Affairs to deliver the committee summons through the British High Commission in Uganda to hon. Gen. David Sejusa. At the same time, the Clerk caused the committee summons to be published in the local media. These are reflected in our annexure 4 to the report.  

To that extent, the committee was satisfied that all reasonable steps had been taken to discharge the requirement to notify hon. Gen. David Sejusa of the need to have him appear before the committee to defend himself against the allegations referred to it for investigation.  

Findings of the Investigation

Official appointment

The committee found that hon. Gen. David Sejusa was appointed by the President as Senior Presidential Advisor/Coordinator of Internal and External Security Organisations and as such, in his official functions, was directly supervised by and reporting to the President. 

The committee learnt from Gen. Katumba Wamala, the Chief of Defence Forces, that hon. Gen. David Sejusa was not any official duty of the UPDF.

The whereabouts of hon. Gen. David Sejusa

The committee learnt from some of the witnesses that they had read media reports that hon. Gen. David Sejusa was in the United Kingdom.

Attendance to Parliamentary Business
The committee established that hon. David Sejusa’s leave of absence initially expired on the 21May 2013. The committee further established that his applications of 24th May and 16th August were declined by the Speaker on 16th September 2013. Thus, the committee established that between 21 May 2013 and 26 September 2013, hon. Gen. David Sejusa was absent from the House without leave of the Speaker of Parliament. 

The Clerk’s record of Members’ attendance to the business of the House indicated that from the 21st day of May 2013 to the 26th day of September 2013, there were 41 sittings of the House. The committee found that the Member never attended any of the 41 sittings. In the same vein, the committee also learnt that from the time of his swearing in, the Member hardly attended any sittings of the House.

6.4 Parliamentary Procedure on absence without leave    

The committee considered the procedural requirements under the Rules of Procedure of Parliament relating to leave of absence and a referral made to the committee in that regard by the Speaker, to Parliament. The committee found that all the requirements for a referral to be made on a member’s absence without leave had been fulfilled and thus the committee found that the matter was properly before it for investigation. 

6.5 Multiplicity of reporting lines

The committee learnt that Gen. David Sejusa was serving at several official capacities and thus had several multiple functional reporting lines. 

a) Public Service appointment

In the letter that was reviewed by the committee, hon. David Sejusa had been appointed by the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Public Service to serve as a Senior Presidential Advisor to coordinate the work of ISO and ESO in intelligence gathering and analysis and thus subject to the Public Service Standing Orders according to the terms of his appointment. The appointment letter is annexure 5 to the report.

b) Serving UPDF officer

The committee further learnt that hon. David Sejusa was still functioning as a serving officer of the UPDF at the rank of General and as such was subject to the UPDF Act and the Army code of conduct.

c) Member of Parliament

The committee too judicial notice of the fact that Gen. David Sejusa was Member of Parliament subject to the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. As far as the matter before the committee was concerned, the committee noted that the committee’s considerations were restricted to and primarily concerned with hon. Gen. David Sejusa as a Member of Parliament.

Observations

From its investigation findings, the committee made the following observations:

i. Multiplicity of reporting centres

As demonstrated in the findings of the committee, it was of notable concern to the committee that hon. Gen. David Sejusa was deployed. The committee noted that this manner of deployment or appointment would invariably compromise the effectiveness and efficiency of any person. To the committee, the rationale behind such multiplicity of deployment needs to be examined to ensure the safeguards that militate against persons holding several public offices as envisaged in the Constitution is not negated. 

The committee observed the risk of undermining the Constitution if such functional multiplicity is perpetuated. 

7.2 Appearance by hon. Gen. David Sejusa

The Rules of Procedure make provision for a member whose conduct is under investigation by the committee to be heard in his or her defence and to be represented by counsel of his or her own choice. The committee summoned hon. Gen. David Sejusa to appear before it. Copies of the invitations are attached for ease of reference. 

The committee received correspondence dated 30 September 2013 from Messrs Luzige, Lubega, Kavuma & Co. Advocates; Rwakafuzi and Co. Advocates; Mbidde & Co. Advocates and Alaka & Co. Advocates indicating that they had instructions to represent hon. David Sejusa in the investigation.

The committee requested the lawyers to produce written evidence that hon. David Sejusa had instructed them to represent him. Whereas the lawyers undertook to avail the committee this evidence of instruction, in further correspondence dated 3 October 2013, the committee was informed by Ladislus Kiiza Rwakafuzi, head of the Sejusa legal team that “Our client, with all the great respect that he has for the Speaker of Parliament, will not appear before the committee. Our client believes the process is flawed because the Executive is exerting undue pressure to the Speaker contrary to the Constitution.” The committee resorted to effecting personal service to hon. David Sejusa through all other available means. Despite having taken all available efforts to effect service of the committee summons to hon. Gen. David Sejusa, he failed and or neglected to appear before the committee. 
The committee was satisfied that their efforts to ensure that hon. Gen. David Sejusa appears before them were adequate and sufficient. 

7.3 The powers of the Speaker in the absence of a Member 

Article 83(1) (b) of the Constitution makes it ground for a Member of Parliament to vacate his or her seat in Parliament if “that person is absent from 15 sittings of Parliament without permission in writing of the Speaker during any period when Parliament is continuously meeting and is unable to offer satisfactory explanation to the relevant Parliamentary committee for his or her absence.”

Rules 101(1) and (6) of the Rules of Procedure stipulate that: “(1) Every member shall attend the sittings of the House unless leave of absence has been given to him or her by the Speaker...  (6) Except with the permission of the speaker, a member shall not absent himself from 15 or more sittings of the house during any period the house is continuously meeting.” 

Hon. Gen. David Sejusa’s absence from the House was initially with the leave of the Speaker. However, after the Speaker declined to grant his request for extension of leave of absence, his continued absence was without permission of the Speaker and contravened Article 83(1)(d) of the Constitution and rules 101(1) and (6) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

7.4 Effecting Service of Committee Summons 

The committee observed that it was important to have elaborate procedures laid out in the Rules of Procedure of Parliament on how service of committee summons on members of Parliament can be effected. Whereas the committee was satisfied that it had adequately and sufficiently effected service of its summons on hon. Gen. David Sejusa, the Rules of Procedure of Parliament had been found lacking in so far as guiding the committee on the procedure for effecting service of committee summons was concerned. This is an area that may require amendment to the Rules of Procedure.

The Constitutional Duties of a Member of Parliament

Article 79(1) and (3) stipulate that:
“1) Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter of peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda… 3) Parliament shall protect this Constitution and promote democratic governance of Uganda.” It is the constitutional duty of a Member of Parliament to legislate for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda and to promote democratic governance of Uganda through his or her attendance to parliamentary business. Failure to attend the meetings of Parliament is a dereliction of duty. 

7.6 Committee considerations 

The committee had a number of considerations it underscored as key in ensuring that its investigation falls within the four corners of the law applicable to the removal of a Member of Parliament.

a) The committee took solemn note that the establishment of the office of a Member of Parliament was an essential constitutional matter under-guarded by Article 1 of the Constitution which provides that “All power belongs to the people who shall exercise their sovereignty in accordance with this Constitution…” and “(4) The people shall express their will and consent on who shall govern them and how they shall be governed through regular free and fair elections of their representatives or through referenda.”

The committee was further alive to the fact that the removal of a Member of Parliament from his or her seat in Parliament thus called for the committee to act with an abundance of caution as an error in any direction would tantamount to denying the electorate concerned with the exercise of their sovereign power contrary to the Constitution. This was much more so especially in a process to which the said electorate was not a party.

As such, the committee was inclined to rather err on the side of caution than on the side of negligence in this matter. In that regard, all means within its reach were exercised to ensure that the ends of justice were served.

(c) Guidance was sought from the pronouncements of the Supreme Court on the procedure for removal of a Member of Parliament with specific reference to, among others, Constitutional Appeal No. 2 of 2006 between Brig. Henry Tumukunde and the Attorney General and the Electoral Commission regarding the duty placed on the Speaker in a matter of this nature.

Among others, the following statements of law were instructive. 
    (i) “It should have been incumbent upon the Speaker to carry out an inquiry to satisfy himself that the Member’s resignation was voluntary.” The committee notes that in this case, referral of the matter to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline for an investigation is critical.
    (ii) “A Member of Parliament can only cease to be a Member in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.” This could not be over emphasised by the committee.
    (iii) “Amongst the Speaker’s functions and roles is his or her duty to guard and protect the rights and security of Members both within and outside the precincts of Parliament. In the House, the Speaker’s orders are the only practical and binding law to Members only subject to their own Rules of Procedure. Outside it, his or her counsel, advice and recommendations should be respected by all and sundry. The Speaker is fully protected from the jurisdictions of court by the provisions of Section 25 of the Parliament (Powers and Privileges) Act.” The Speaker’s role as the guardian of the Members of Parliament was well laid down here.

(d) 	The democratic imperatives requiring the representation of the people of Uganda in their governance as stipulated in the Constitution was a key consideration.

Conclusions of the Committee
    1. Whereas the committee exercised all means to effect personal service of the committee summons, hon. Gen. David Sejusa failed and/or neglected to appear before the committee whether personally or otherwise.

    2. Hon. Gen. David Sejusa’s continued absence from the House for 15 or more sittings of the House during a period when the House was continuously meeting was without permission of the Speaker and as such contravened Article 83 (1) (d) and rule 101 (6) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

    3. After rigorous investigation, the allegations of infringement of rule 101 (6) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament referred to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline by the Speaker under rule 101 (8) against hon. Gen. David Sejusa was proved.

The committee recommends as follows:
(a) 	Hon. Gen David Sejusa ceases to be a Member of Parliament under Article 83 (1) (d) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rule 101 (10) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

(b) 	The process for his replacement be initiated in accordance with Article 81 (2) of the Constitution.

(c) 	That Parliament do adopt the committee’s recommendations in this report.

I beg to report, Rt Hon. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and the Committee of Rules, Privileges and Discipline for your report.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter in relation to Article 83 and 86 of the Constitution, if I may read them. Article 83 states, “A Member of Parliament shall vacate his or her seat in Parliament- (d) if that person is absent from 15 sittings of Parliament without permission in writing of the Speaker during any period when Parliament is continuously meeting…”

However, Article 86 of the Constitution states, “(1) The High Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine any question whether- (a) a person has been validly elected a Member of Parliament or the seat of a Member of Parliament has become vacant.”

Madam Speaker, in the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005 section 86, this Parliament copied the same provision of the Constitution and put it in the Act. It says, “The High Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine any question whether a person has been validly elected a Member of Parliament or the seat of a Member of Parliament has become vacant.”

In the circumstances, the procedural question I seek is whether this Parliament is conferring jurisdiction of the High Court upon itself to move and declare hon. Gen. David Sejusa’s seat vacant. I am just seeking your guidance on that matter.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have addressed my mind to the recommendations. The committee says we should proceed under Article 83 but just as hon. Otto has said, to determine whether the seat is vacant can only be done under Article 86. On that, I am fortified by the case of hon. Abdul Nakendo v Patrick Mwondha, Election Petition No. 9 of 2007, where Justice Katureebe said that to determine whether the seat has fallen vacant is a preserve of the High Court. 

So I am wondering whether even when we proceed under Article 83 as determined by the committee, we shall not be proceeding under a different rule, which does not deal with declaring any seat to be vacant. Madam Speaker, as you respond to hon. Otto you could also respond to that. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: If a wrong rule has been cited, I think it can be corrected.

MR WAIRA: Madam Speaker, I have about three procedural questions to raise. The report indicates that Gen. Sejusa, among his activities, was a presidential advisor with an appointment letter. However, when you peruse through, you do not see any communication from the President. That means the committee never consulted the President. That is the first procedural issue.

Secondly, Gen. Sejusa represents the UPDF who are his electorate and voters. When you look through the documents, the electorate is just saying Gen. Sejusa is out of the country without permission but they are not complaining.

Madam Speaker, what I am wondering is: are we procedurally right to go ahead and confirm the report when there are such glaring gaps?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Article 86 relates to questions to be determined by the courts. It presupposes an election petition. That is what it presupposes. (Interjection) Yes, it presupposes that there is an election petition. If you petition the High Court to find out whether a seat has become vacant, that is when this applies. We are within our Rules of Procedure.

4.50
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support your ruling. First of all, the two provisions cater for different scenarios. Article 83 provides for a scenario where a Member of Parliament is vacating his or her seat. In this case, the conditions that lead to a Member vacating their seat are provided for under Article 83. This is exactly what Gen. Sejusa is facing. 

The other one, Article 86, is also providing for another scenario, and this scenario is not related to what we are debating. So, Madam Speaker, I would request that we proceed and deal with the report on its merits and then we make a decision on whether we go by the committee recommendations.

Madam Speaker, I will end by saying that I do support the committee recommendations. A Member of Parliament, as per our Constitution, is supposed to debate for the good governance and development of this country. If we continue absconding from our constitutional duty, then we are not doing what we were elected to do. I support the committee’s recommendation that whoever cannot do what he was elected to do should leave this House and those who can do what should be done should come here and join the House.

4.51
MS EVELYN ANITE (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the chairperson and members of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline for the job well done. I could see the legal brains at work, given their recommendations.

Madam Speaker, according to the report on page 12 - public service appointment - it is very clear and it is public knowledge that in accordance to the Constitution of Uganda, if you want to stand for an elective position in this country, specifically for the post of Member of Parliament, and you are a public servant, you are supposed to resign your position six months to the time of elections. I have seen on page 12 that there is a letter that the committee received saying that David Sejusa – (Laughter) - If I do not pronounce his name properly, you have to understand where I come from is West Nile and we speak Kakwa; so you do not have to fault me on that. 

Madam Speaker, David – to save myself from mispronouncing – was a worker of ISO and ESO and these are public service jobs and every public servant, including myself, had to resign their positions. I was working in the Office of the President at the Uganda Media Centre but I had to resign my job six months to the time of elections. In the first place, David Sejusa would have not been here; he was not supposed to have been a Member of Parliament by virtue of being a public servant.

Secondly, let us respect our Rules of Procedure. Madam Speaker, you have time and time again stated in this House that if a Member of Parliament misses 15 consecutive sittings, you will caution that member by writing to him or her or by asking the member to vacate his or her seat. Hon. David Sejusa has not only absconded from duty for 15 times but 26 times. With all fairness – and it is a sad moment that we are going to have remove a colleague. Today it is him and tomorrow might be me, but we are supposed to respect the Constitution because we are leaders and our voters are watching us to see if we shall respect the law. 

Madam Speaker, I want us to respect the laws that are in place; right now as we talk, the children in schools keep asking their colleagues, “You want to fight in the classroom like Members of Parliament?” They no longer respect us just because we do not respect ourselves. Respect starts from home; if we do not respect ourselves and decide to fight while the public is watching us and today if we decide to save Sejusa because he is our colleague – yes, he is our colleague but we have to respect the rule of law. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I will not say much because my colleagues will want to make an addition. I just want to emphasise that let us be the first people to respect the rules. Thank you.

4.55
MR ASUPASA ISIKO (NRM, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Parliament is being tested. The world is looking at us. Today it is one of our own we are discussing – hon. David Sejusa. He has absconded from his duty in Parliament and UPDF. The UPDF has written a letter to the Speaker of Parliament to the effect that hon. Sejusa is away not on UPDF business. 

Sejusa requested for leave of absence from Parliament for a specific period, which has ended. He has written but this time his lawyers have written to Parliament. Did Sejusa indicate to this Parliament that he had appointed lawyers to work on his behalf? Do we have such information here? If so, why didn’t Parliament serve the lawyers the other side when they were summoning Sejusa? In so doing, Parliament did not recognise the lawyers of Sejusa as being a point of reference. 

Therefore, what does Parliament have to do in this case? We are now at crossroads; do we talk for David Sejusa or for this country? What do our voters want us to do? Is the Army properly represented? Are we giving a good picture to the citizens of this country? Madam Speaker, I therefore wish to support the committee recommendations; the committee did due diligence with a lot of patience. They did a lot of communication left, right and centre – (Member timed out)

4.58
REV PETER BAKALUBA MUKASA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I begin by thanking the committee for this wonderful work. I stand to support their recommendations. 

It is very clear that the committee did everything possible to bring notice and attention to hon. Sejusa but he failed to respond. We all know that after 15 sittings and you fail to appear in this House, definitely you can no longer be counted. At times I ask whether our Rules of Procedure are very lenient because this is very clear. My worry is that much of the taxpayers’ money has been spent on something which is very clear. 

One key thing I see here, and maybe Government will help to explain, is what was stated by the lawyers, that “Our client with all the great respect he has for the Speaker of Parliament will not appear before the committee. Our client believes that the process is flawed because the Executive is exerting undue influence -” (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Our honourable colleague submitting on the Floor is a reverend and he knows the Cannon doctrine of forgiveness. (Laughter) Is it in order for the reverend, who happens to be a Member in Parliament, to abandon his faith and his profession and to choose not to forgive someone who has committed a sin? Is he in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when hon. Bakaluba took the oath, he took the same oath that all other Members took to defend and preserve the Constitution.

REV BAKALUBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. My learned friend knows that we are not in church; we are legislating and we are in Parliament and I am here as a Member of Parliament. I am not on the pulpit, so I am not referring to the Bible. (Laughter)

Let me continue reading: “our client believes that that process is flawed because the Executive is exerting undue pressure on the Speaker, contrary to the Constitution.” I am just wondering why the lawyers were expressing that. I do not know whether the chairman and the committee were interested in looking at that because this is very clear; you respect the Speaker but you think that government somehow was not handling him fairly. Maybe in future we need to know what is happening to Sejusa, whether there is a problem between him and the government and that is why maybe he had to disappear in this way.

As we speak now, in London it is very cold. He would have loved to come back and stay in Uganda. It is my prayer, as hon. Odongo Otto was advising, that we pray that government and Sejusa sit together and harmonise positions that will bring him back and – (Member timed out_)

5.01
MR DAVID MUHUMUZA (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank committee for the report. However, when the committee was reporting, they said the Speaker first granted leave to hon. Sejusa. I thought they should have called the Speaker again to ask her why she did not grant him the second request because had the Speaker granted hon. Sejusa the second request, we would not be here debating. 

The lawyers of hon. Sejusa, in their letter, said, “You are aware that our client developed misunderstandings with the current leadership over policy and approach on various issues and as a matter of Uganda People’s Defence Forces, our client will at an appropriate time explain himself.” Maybe if the Speaker was called upon in this committee to explain – 

THE SPEAKER: Are you taking issue with the conduct of the Speaker? (Laughter)

5.02
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join those who have thanked the committee for the report well done. 

As has already been said, it is very obvious that the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure specify how a Member of Parliament can be removed. The Rules of the Procedure of this House, which we debated, dictate what happens when you miss 15 consecutive sittings. However, we are faced with a test of credibility and therefore, I believe that all Members who have followed the report will understand and appreciate the abundance of caution that was exercised by the committee. I, therefore, hope they will support the report and the recommendations of the committee.

For me, it is not just about the period under which you granted and also withheld further permission, but like the report says, on page 11, it is even very difficult to prove that Gen. David Sejusa has ever been in this House. Therefore, this recommendation is long overdue. I really wonder whether there is anybody here who can prove to us that on the record, either in the registration book or in the Hansard, Gen. David Sejusa has ever been in this House for one to be able to convince anybody otherwise.

Therefore, I strongly support the committee and its recommendations because this is long overdue. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.05
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County, East, Masaka):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report. However, on page 13, the committee has made an observation which is very critical. When the committee was making recommendations, they made serious omissions on this observation. If we find that there are other officers in this house who have not resigned their offices and they are drawing double salaries, I think it is high time we got rid of such officers. Therefore, I would like to propose a recommendation in this regard, that let this apply to all, across the board, that all officers in this category be investigated –

MR PETER LOKII: Madam Speaker, my understanding is that we are addressing ourselves to the subject of the absence of the Member of Parliament from the House. But I am beginning to hear stories of whether people have employment or not, whether they are earning a salary or not. Is it in order for an honourable member to bring a new subject into the matter of the attendance of a member, which is at the heart of the discussion of the committee report? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the committee in its attempt to find him established that actually, he is also employed in another place; they were looking for him.

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. We swore to preserve and protect the Constitution; if we find anything unconstitutional, I think we deal with that. Therefore, I beg to move a recommendation that all other officers be investigated and if they are found in such a category, they cease to be Members of Parliament. (Applause)

5.08
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start by stating that I agree with the report of the committee on 9(a), which dealt with the question of whether or not Gen. Sejusa violated Article 83 (d). I agree that the committee substantially showed this House that he did violate, and through all your communication, that is true.

However, I want to refer to Article 1 of the Constitution, sovereignty of the people: “(4) The people shall express their will and consent on who shall govern them and how they shall be governed, through regular, free and fair elections of their representatives…”. 

With that, I want to come to Article 84, in respect to the recommendation of the committee in (b), where they instead state that we should go under Article 81 where the Clerk would initiate the process. I would have agreed if the committee had made a recommendation that the process of his vacation be in tandem with Article 84. What does Article 84 say? “Right of recall 
(1) Subject to the provisions of this article, the electorate of any constituency and of any interest group referred to in Article 78 of this Constitution have the right to recall their Member of Parliament before the expiry of the term of Parliament.

(2) A Member of Parliament may be recalled from that office on any of the following grounds-
(b) misconduct or misbehaviour likely to bring hatred, ridicule, contempt or disrepute to the office…” 

I have not seen, substantially, in the annexure of the report of the committee where the electorate- (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Amongi, where are the rights of the Speaker now? If the Speaker has noticed that you are not there, what happens? What does the Speaker do? Do I appeal to the UPDF that, “Please, write to me”? That is the argument you are making.    

MS AMONGI: Madam Speaker, I have no problem. I am giving a proposal that I would have preferred that the electorate of this representative come up and say, “We do not want this person”. I have not seen that convincingly. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Speaker, I thank my sister-in-law for giving me way to give her this information. 

My honourable sister-in-law should address her mind to the provisions of Article 84(7). Article 84(7) reads as follows: “The right to recall a Member of Parliament shall only exist while the movement political system is in operation.” Now we are in a multi-party democracy.

5.12
MR JACOBS OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to associate my sentiments and support to the committee. It is a very difficult thing, Madam Speaker. We all know we are probably passing judgement against our own but the law is applied as it is and not as it ought to be. 

I would love to respectfully differ with my other colleagues who are saying that Article 86 is more applicable. The framers of this Constitution first wrote Article 83, and Article 83 is about the tenure of the office of a Member of Parliament. Article 86 is purely on the determination of membership where there is a petition. This is about the tenure of office of a Member of Parliament, and it gives circumstances under which such can happen and one of them is when a member has absented himself or herself for 15 sittings. 

Article 86 - these constitutional makers were great minds in 1994; they could not have made a mistake to have allowed in Article 83 when they knew that the operating article would be Article 86. Madam Speaker, you would not be able to manage this House if the Constitution would establish your office without giving you swords - maybe your arms to operate, not swords; swords is negative.

I know that the decision this House is about to make- (Member timed out_)

5.14
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank members of the committee. 

The spirit of Parliament in handling this matter has been very good. The spirit of Parliament in handling the matter of hon. Sejusa has been very good. Actually, in in my view, it has been in defence of Gen. Sejusa, to give him the opportunity to speak. I think if Gen. Sejusa stepped here or even had other means of appearing or communicating using technology - There is video conferencing; I do not know whether the committee examined that avenue. However, the statement saying, “I will not appear in front of this committee” means - because of the assumed bias - that whether by technological means or directly, he would not. He had already made up his mind. 

As shadow Minister for Defence and Security, I, therefore, say the following: One, as Parliament, we have done our part. We have proven that it should be difficult for anybody from outside Parliament to come and pick a Member of Parliament and throw the person out. You remember the attempts by some people outside to say, “throw that one out”? For this one we have said, “no”. People even already fear to attempt. So, I think this recommendation is not bad. (Applause)

However, we have a problem. Madam Speaker, Members of Parliament should never allow the President to pick and play Members of Parliament and say, for example “Hon. Tumwine will be a Member of Parliament and also a presidential advisor and something else”. Hon. Tumwine is good. From the way he has interacted with people, if he contested for any position as a Member of Parliament I think he would be elected. So, this thing of appointing Members of Parliament from the UPDF must stop. 

I have said before that good people like Gen. Tumwine should have constituencies and be elected. We should never accept this situation again. Once a person is a Member of Parliament, they are a Member of Parliament. Giving this person another assignment is wrong. Look at this- (Interjections) - intelligence work is different from the UPDF. This is what we should know. The intelligence, ISO and ESO, are not part of UPDF- (Interjections) – Yes; they are not. By law, they are not. However, the tasks of any intelligence officer are more demanding, even more than the ones of a Member of Parliament. (Member timed out_)

5.18
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I was young I was in a drama club and I always enjoyed scenarios, which would make good movies and good drama in future. I have an interest in this report as a member of the UPDF and a long serving member of this House, in efforts on making sure that we set precedents for the future. 

I picked a few possible pieces for comedy drama and film in future; one, is about sending the papers to the pigeonhole and two, about the way the committee took in masqueraders to represent a very honourable Member of this House. The report specifically says – somebody has said it was in the interest of Gen. Sejusa. The report itself says they did not see any written instructions, but it goes ahead to quote those masqueraders and to use the report of those masqueraders. What more drama do we need? I find it difficult to believe the grounds on which the committee could quote messages from anybody without written instructions. So, when I was called in the committee, I said why all this drama – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Tumwine, for your information, if I were to show you the type of letters I get in my office, you would not talk about drama. There is more drama than that. They write to me; those lawyers also wrote to me. So, it is not as simple as it looks. [Hon. Member: “So, what is he saying?”] He is not happy with them using the letters of those fellows. 

5.21
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of absenteeism has bedevilled this House and it is high time we talked about it. Madam Speaker, at the right time, you will guide me on what constitutes the fact that someone is present in this House. The public has been accusing us of always being absent from this House. People come and sign and go away; they do not sit in this House. Isn’t that absenteeism? Why is this House so disturbed about Sejusa’s absence today when he constantly kept away from this House between May 2011 and April 2013? Why now? 

I am not a friend of Sejusa because in my view, I think Sejusa should have been punished yesterday. He kidnapped me together with hon. Sseggona and the current Katikkiro of Buganda, Oweekitibwa Charles Peter Mayiga, for a week. He invaded the courts of law with Black Mambas. He is the one who brutally arrested Besigye and tortured him. Sejusa has been committing offence after offence. The question remains, why is it that we are getting interested in this matter only today when Sejusa is being reported as being in disagreement with President Museveni? I do not condone absenteeism but why is Parliament crying the loudest in this matter? When you look at this report, Madam Speaker, you will find that – (Interruption)

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, is the hon. Member in order to continue making deliberations insinuating that you are wrong as the Speaker of Parliament when doing your work? Is she in order to insinuate that Parliament is witch-hunting an individual yet you have been communicating to us about different people like hon. Kipoi recently, using the Rules of Procedure? Is she in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are out of order and may I know why, with all those facts, you did not move a motion to remove him from this House?

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, you have guided and I rest my case. 

I want to add is that when you look at this report, hon. Charles Angina and hon. Muhwezi have not signed and I do not think that this is not deliberate. 

5.25
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The committee on page 2 quotes rule 101 of our Rules of Procedure; “101(9) A Member whose conduct is under investigation by the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline under this rule is entitled to be heard…” I do not think it will be good practice for this Parliament not to do everything in its power, including sponsoring the committee, especially after we had established that Gen. Sejusa, a Member of this Parliament was in London. You might have another MP who you will not be able to communicate to apart from finding him wherever he is. The rule says “entitled to be heard.” We have denied Gen. Sejusa this entitlement. 

Madam Speaker, the second point I want to make is that I can see people jubilating here. This Parliament is supposed to legislate for good governance. It is this Parliament that permanently made Gen. Sejusa a member of the High Command and we are now stuck with him. Under the UPDF Act, he is a member of the High Command. You are talking about the multiplicity of work; he is a presidential advisor, he is a coordinator of security, he is a Member of Parliament and he is permanently a member of the High Command and again, people were jubilating like they are doing today. They did not see anything wrong naming some individuals by listing their names in our laws. 

Madam Speaker, the point hon. Nambooze was making, and I do not think in any way she was accusing the Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not think you should make those allegations against the House. The constituency of the UPDF elects their members and brings them here. This House does not have a say in who will be a member of the UPDF. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, hon. Ssemujju, for giving way. The information I am seeking from you is: why would anyone want Gen. Sejusa to come back to this Parliament if hon. Ssemujju could be treated the way he was treated while there was a Speaker in the Chair? Why would anyone want Gen. Sejusa to come back to this Parliament if hon. Nsereko’s seat today is vacant because the Police have surrounded his home? So, if you do not treat the dogs well, why would the fox come back home? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR SSEMUJU: Madam Speaker, finally, the point I was making is that we represent Ugandans in this Parliament; shall we be understood like hon. Nambooze asked? Why are we acting now? Why didn’t we act yesterday as Members of Parliament? I sit on the Committee of National Economy where Gen. Aronda is a member. He has never attended a single meeting. These questions will be answered; you can be excited and that is your right – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this report is clear and the debate is also clear. However, I want to ask the chairperson to make an amendment. You see, when talking about “ceasing”, you are moving us from Article 83 to another Article. I do not know why you could not say, “has vacated his office by virtue of Article 81(d).” [HON. MEMBER: “It is already vacant.”] No, it is not yet vacant. 

MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Speaker, I concede that we use the word “vacate”. In which case, it will read, “Hon. Gen. David Sejusa has vacated his office as a Member of Parliament under Article 83 (1) (d)” or “is deemed to have vacated his office”. So, it will read, “Hon. Gen. David Sejusa is deemed to have vacated his office as a Member of Parliament under Article 83 (1) (d)”.

MR OBOTH: I would like to further propose to the chair, if he will find it appropriate. It is actually not about vacating office but the wording should be “the seat in Parliament”. If you will be glad to use the words, “vacated his seat in Parliament” as the word “seat” and “office” are not the same and not even similar.

MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO: I will concede, Madam Speaker. It only makes the construction better.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, with those amendments I put the question that this report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MOTION FOR THE PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS ON OVERSIGHT VISITS CARRIED OUT AT THE BORDERS OF UGANDA WITH THE EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY PARTNER STATES

5.32
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Ms Sarah Mwebaza): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I present the report of the sectoral Committee on East African Community Affairs on the oversight visits carried out at the borders of Uganda with the East African Community Partner States. I lay the minutes of the committee meetings regarding the report on Table.

Madam Speaker, I will start with the introduction but I hope Members have got the copies of the report. You may read through the introduction, as well as the background, terms of reference and method of work. I will start with 3.0, which is committee findings.

The committee noted some challenges and made some observations and recommendations arising out of its interaction with traders, the business community and leaders of Busia, Tororo and Malaba.

The committee noted the following challenges:

Poor state of roads

The national roads that link the borders of Busia and Malaba in Uganda are in poor condition and this affects trade and livelihoods of the people at the border. Further, the Tororo-Mbale-Soroti road that links nations was in a very bad state by the time the committee visited the area. As a result, the dust negatively affects business.

Evasion of taxes by traders

The committee was informed by customs officials that there are panya routes at the border, which are used by smugglers hence it is difficult to intercept them. The people who commit offences at the borders have relatives on both sides of Kenya and Uganda and they carry out cross-border trade.

Very high taxes

The traders complained that they are highly taxed by the Uganda Revenue Authority. The traders at the border claim that URA assumes the cost of goods in Kampala even when they might have been bought cheaper in Kenya. They stated that after the stress that they face on the Kenyan side, they are charged further in Uganda, which is their country.

Hoisting of the Kenya flag

The committee learnt that all business at the border is supposed to temporarily stop when the Kenya flag is hoisted. However, the business community from Ugandan side does not understand what is expected of them when the flag on the Kenyan side is hoisted. They are, therefore, sometimes arrested for disrespecting the Kenya National flag. The traders requested that they should be sensitised about this.

Hawking across the border

The committee was informed that many Kenyan hawkers carry out their trade in Uganda but when Ugandans hawk in Kenya, they are arrested by the Kenyan authorities, an act that is unfair to Ugandans and violates the Common Market Protocol, which is supposed to be implemented by all Partner States.

Currency issues

The local currency of Uganda can only be used in Malaba and Busia. Beyond that, it is not recognised as legal tender and the mixture of old and new notes as part of the currency of Uganda confuses its neighbouring states. Uganda should adopt one note for every currency denomination.

Harassment by Kenya Police

The committee was informed by traders that Ugandans are frequently harassed by the Kenya Police yet the Kenyans are treated cordially by the Uganda Police. In Kenya, Ugandans are taken to be guilty until proven innocent not vice versa. The committee was informed that quite often, cases are concocted against Ugandans while in Kenya. Further, passengers who travel by bus from Uganda to Kenya are not cordially treated by the Kenya officials

Lack of national ID

Ugandans lack national identification unlike their counterparts in the EAC. This has made them miss out on many opportunities and also, puts them in a difficult situation when asked to identify themselves since most of the Ugandans who cross the border do not have passports.

Lack of enough sensitisation
Most of the people at the border do not understand the meaning of “integration” and as a result, need sensitisation.

Harsh punishments in Kenya

The traders informed the committee that Ugandans who commit crimes in Kenya are punished harshly unlike the case in Uganda when Kenyans commit offences. The committee learnt that when Kenyans are arrested in Uganda, their police officials from Kenya come to their rescue. However, Ugandan police do not do the same for Ugandans arrested in Kenya at the border.

The cash bond

By the time the committee visited the place, there was a cash bond and it learnt that the Kenyan Government has executed a cash bond against traders. This is a non-tariff barrier, which is against the Common Market Protocol thus affecting their businesses.

Social service provision

Kenyans are able to benefit from social services in Uganda like education without any hindrances yet Ugandans cannot easily access the good hospitals and schools in Kenya. The committee was informed that Ugandans are discriminated against and are easily distinguished from their Kenyan counterparts who can identify themselves with their national IDs.

Dual Citizenship

There are instances where Kenyans access Ugandan passports and voters’ cards and own land in Uganda – with freehold titles – unlike Ugandans who cannot access any of the above in Kenya. They told us that that was also a challenge.

Price Differences

Given that Uganda is landlocked, Kenyan hawkers sell their goods at a much lower price than their counterparts who are hawkers from Uganda and the goods from Kenya do not face high taxes. Therefore, the Uganda traders lose out.

Corruption by Revenue Officers

The traders allege that revenue officers allow some traders to bribe them and harass others because they have not given any bribe. It was further alleged that the officers impound and sell their goods at times, without their consent.

Unreliable Banking Services in Malaba

Madam Speaker, by the time the committee visited the border of Malaba, it was informed that all banks in Malaba had been closed owing to disputes between the banks and Uganda Revenue Authority. And it was very inconveniencing to businesspeople at the border. So, they could access banks in Tororo.

Malaba Inland Port

The committee noted that the status of the land, which was reserved for the inland port at Malaba remains unresolved. Hence, the land cannot be utilised, thereby increasing delays and costs for traders at the border. As a result, there is over-congestion at Malaba and no space for dry cargo. This often leads to delays in transit.

The committee visited Mutukula border in Rakai District and interacted with the URA Customs Offices, Immigration Office, Tanzania Revenue Office, Tanzania Immigration Division, the one-stop border point of Tanzania side, the business community and local leaders of Mutukula and Rakai. While at URA Customs Office, the committee was informed about the following challenges:

That the communities are not aware about the East African Common Market. It was also noted that the implementation of the Common Market is slow. 

The cross-border traders were reluctant to pay taxes.

There were no clear demarcations of the boundaries between Uganda and Tanzania at the border.

The non-tariff barriers like small roadblock checks still exist in both countries, Uganda and Tanzania.

The committee was also told of the poor state of roads, especially on the Ugandan side. Madam Speaker, these are the roads that were agreed upon by all the Partner States that could work as interconnections so that they may ease the trade along the borders.

There were delays in acquisition of work permits in Tanzania.

High charges on foodstuffs from the Tanzanian side because Ugandans are ignorant about the existing laws on the Common Market Protocol.

The URA customs apply preferential treatment to goods from other Partner States. The goods are also rated at zero. For example, they are not charged import duty.

URA frequently interacts with the local people but the Ministry of East African Community Affairs should champion these interactions. That is what the committee was told.

Most of the businesses in Mutukula are informal and companies are not registered. The informal businesses are not captured in the books of URA. 

The Ministry of Works, which is the lead agency in the formation of the one-stop border point at Mutukula is very slow.

The goods from Partner States are now zero-rated. The main goods from Uganda to Tanzania are roofing materials, bars, building materials, Mukwano products, Movit products and Rwenzori mineral water. We are told those are the main goods, which cross from Uganda to Tanzania. There is also increase in the flow of goods, mainly the produce from Uganda. 

The committee went to the Department of Immigration in Mutukula and we were informed that there is a low volume of people and goods going through the Mutukula border.

The distance to the seaport makes it difficult for the movement of goods. People who mostly go through the border post are from Rwanda, Burundi and Northern Tanzania and students. Students, however, no longer pay for passes to go through the borders.

The committee went to Tanzania Immigration Division. The immigration officer at the Mutukula border on the Tanzania side is found in the Kagera region in Misenyi District. And it provided the following services:
    (a) Facilitating the entry and departure of citizens and foreigners.
    (b) Conducting patrols around the border
    (c) Conducting inspection of different means of transport, for example, cars, buses and trucks.
    (d) Investigate matters related to immigration.

We noted the following challenges in Mutukula:
The porous nature of the border. The border area is wide with no clear boundaries, which makes work difficult.

Lack of identification for Ugandans. The cross border communities are not easy to identify as they live on either side of the border and have no form of identification. We were told that some people construct their houses between Uganda and Tanzania and others say they sleep in Tanzania while their sitting rooms are in Uganda. So, it becomes very difficult to identify.

Lack of unified customs and immigration information. The immigration systems used on either side of the border differ, for example, the visa system, of Uganda and Tanzania.

Lack of financial institutions at the border. Lack of banks or other financial institutions at the border causes an inconvenience to the traders.

Need for Sensitisation

Most people around the border do not understand the meaning of the EAC integration and that is what they told us. 

High taxes

The traders complained that they are highly taxed by the Uganda Revenue Authority. There is no clear tax policy or guidelines in Uganda. The traders in Uganda have no adequate sensitization also about the policies, which are already in place.

Harassment by revenue officers

The traders alleged that revenue officers allow some traders to bribe them and harass those that do not offer them any bribes. The same issue which was at Busia border.

Madam speaker, after that, the committee interacted with the officials and the traders of Rakai District. They raised the following challenges and they told us that in a joint communiqué signed by all partner states, it had been resolved that a focal committee be set up at the border with a focal person to listen to the issues affecting the integration but this has not been implemented yet.

The committee was informed that the officials from Tanzania overcharge the Ugandan traders. The people were concerned about the requirements of the Common Market Protocol, which are not being followed.

The Ugandan traders informed the committee that the Tanzania officials harass them and requested that the political leaders of Tanzania be asked to talk to their people and they referred to the Minister for East African Community Affairs.

The boda boda riders informed the committee that they suffer high penalties arising from confiscation of their motorcycles when they cross to the Tanzania side of the border and moreover, at times, they are hired to take their clients across the border.

The Wanainchi from Uganda have no identification unlike their counterparts from Tanzania. There is need for them to acquire national identity cards so that they are not mistreated. 

Madam Speaker, the reason this became a challenge is that they told us that when Ugandans say that they are Ugandans, at times, they call them Congolese or Sudanese because they do not have national identification. So, it has become a very big challenge to our people who are doing business at the border. 

The traders informed the committee that relations with Tanzania officials at the border in Mutukula are not harmonious –

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Chair, I note that the issues are all the same; the same things you reported in Busia, in Malaba, are the ones you reported in Mutukula. Is there anything different:  no identity cards, harassment, taxes? Perhaps, you could go to the recommendations.

MS MWEBAZA: Okay, let me go to the general observations and then the recommendations.

I am on page 18, section 4.0, general observations of the committee and recommendations. 

The committee noted that the challenges faced by the border community in the integration of the community are almost similar in nature, and it made the following observations:

The Kenya side at the Busia border already has a new structure for the one-stop point with offices but there is no structure on the Ugandan side. Information was availed that the plan for the structure on the Ugandan side is in place. However, the Ministry of Works is directly in charge of implementing the construction.

The security systems of Kenya and Uganda have not yet been integrated. The level of sensitisation on the EAC integration is still very low. People across the borders are not aware of the benefits that could be reaped.

There is a general lack of trust exhibited by both the Uganda and the Kenyan side in Busia and Malaba. The Customs and Immigration officials at all the borders of Uganda with the other partner states coordinate well with each other, even when the one-stop border points are not yet functional.

The committee observed that the Tanzania side at the Mutukula border post already has a new one-stop border structure in place to be completed this year, and I know it is complete but there is no single structure as yet on the Ugandan side.

The security systems of the partner states on the Mutukula side have not yet been integrated. 

The sanitation on the Ugandan side in Katuna is in a deplorable state. Further, the toilet facilities are not well maintained, making the business environment unbearable.

The general infrastructure of Bukwo is pathetic. The committee also visited Bukwo but I did not read, you read through, hon. Members.

The committee had to drive all the way to Malaba to spend two nights in Kitale Kenya, in order to access Suam border instead of driving straight to Kapchorwa without crossing into Kenya.

The unnecessary long queues of vehicles clearing to enter Kenya led to the delay of more than three hours at the border of Malaba.

While in Bukwo, Members noted that the people are not yet sensitised about the EAC integration. Sensitisation through the media is very difficult as there are no Ugandan radios and television stations in Bukwo. One, therefore, has to travel to Kenya in order to access these services.

The committee commended the newly constructed immigration office building by the Uganda Government at Suam border. However, Members observed that the materials used to construct the building were substandard. The contractor delayed to roof it and the timber used was ruined by the rain, thus compromising its structure.

The building architectural plan does not allow the immigration officials to clearly view what takes place along the road, forcing them to operate from the verandah in order to catch a glimpse of the people’s movements including smugglers.

The people at the borders of Uganda with the EAC Partner States are one and that the boundaries are just imaginary. They have relatives and farmlands across borders and they traverse back and forth daily.

Owing to the abominable roads in the area, the people of Bukwo can only access social services, like hospitals, in Kenya. They thus prefer going to Kitale Kenya for goods and other services because Kitale is easily accessible. 

Reports from the security officers indicated that there is great improvement in the security of the area. The rampant cattle-rustling is long gone.

Ugandans and Kenyans at Suam border enjoy a friendly relationship. There is no power supply in Bukwo and yet, just a few metres from the border in Kenya, people enjoy electricity supply.

Poor infrastructure has generally retarded everything in Bukwo to the extent that there is no substantive revenue generated from Suam border. The committee noted that the ignorance of the tax system is the biggest problem affecting the business community at Rwakaka border between Manafwa District and the other side of Kenya.

There is no joint management of key natural resources like Mt Elgon national park by the two countries. The committee noted that quite a number of people were dislocated from Mt Elgon National Park in order to expand and this has rendered people homeless. The Uganda wild life authority officials are adamant about the pride of the natives who are returning from Kenya and have not accepted to interact with the district officials to chart a way forward. These returnees are namely: the Terait and Yatui Ndorogo who are becoming a security threat the two countries.

Madam Speaker, I understand there was some migration or insecurity, which was in that place and some Ugandans went the other side of Kenya to stay there for some time.

When they tried to come back, the returnees are not yet accepted and integrated in the community; those two tribes and they have become a security threat to the people in the area.

Recommendations

Continuous cross-border meetings should be organised by the political leadership at the borders so that solutions to the challenges are sought amicably and agreed upon. 

The committee recommends that the laws in the EAC should be harmonised in the Partner States to enable free movement of goods and services across borders.

Price stabilisation should be carried out to check smuggling of goods across the borders.

The Ministry of EAC Affairs and the Ministry of Trade and Industry should recruit frontline officers at the borders to follow up on the issues of the EAC integration.

The government should, through the Ministry of Trade and Industry and the Ministry of Works, ensure that the issue of the inland parking yard at Malaba is explained and resolved.

The construction of one-stop border post at all the borders should be expedited in order to minimise delays and to establish a unitary immigration regime.

Madam Speaker, it is only Uganda, which does not have a one-stop border point in all the five member states and it was agreed and it was signed by the Heads of State that Uganda is still lagging behind.

The national identification project should be expedited to enable Ugandans be identified like their counterparts in the EAC. Madam Speaker, this has become a challenge and all countries were blaming us over that issue.

People should be constantly sensitised about the meaning and the benefits of the EAC.

The infrastructure development at the proposed Muruhumba Border post - this is on the other side of Kabale between the border of Katuna and Gatuna, between Uganda and Rwanda - should be prioritised and funded by the Government of Uganda.

Uganda Revenue Authority should investigate the allegations of corruption and bribery made by the traders against customs officers at the borders and punish the culprits.

Government should budget for, and fund, staff housing units to cater for staff working at all the border posts. 

The law should clearly specify where weigh bridges should be located along main roads from the borders in order to save time. 

The general environment on the Ugandan side of Katuna should be organised, cleaned and the sanitation improved.

Government should expeditiously tarmac the Kapchorwa/Bukwo-Suam Road in order to improve the livelihood of the people. 

Charges on agricultural products should be harmonised at all border posts. 

The Lwakhakha Border should be officially opened by Government and its benefits exploited. This can help us when they start working on the Northern route to Lira and Southern Sudan.

Uganda Revenue Authority should put up billboards at the border posts specifying goods that are meant to be taxed and those that should not in an effort to sensitise the people. 

Uganda should open up other customs points to decongest Malaba by facilitating and improving the infrastructure of Lwakhakha and Suam, so that they are used as access routes to the Northern corridor.

Madam Speaker, the committee hereby proposes the following as way forward:

The Ministry of Works should expedite the Construction of one-stop centres at all border points for speedy, efficient and effective service of the people. 

Provisions should be made therein for accessibility by persons with disability. We visited some border posts and we found that there were no provisions for persons with disabilities. 

There should be focal persons, as I already said. 

All leaders should be sensitised and they should engage fully in community sensitisation on issues of the EAC in order to enable the country to cope with other partner states and reap largely from the EAC integration.
	
All partner states should adhere to their commitments as enshrined in the Treaty establishing the East African Community.

All key players in the integration should join hands and enhance the sensitisation of the people on the EAC integration benefits and implication of protocols signed to the common persons.

Government should improve/construct roads linking up to the Partner States. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the committee notes that similar challenges are faced by the border communities along the border posts visited in Malaba, Tororo, Busia, Mutukula, Rakai, Katuna, Bukwo and Lwakhakha. 

A lot more needs to be done to sensitise the people about the EAC integration and the benefits that can be accrued from it. 

Further, the spirit of reciprocity should be appreciated and implemented by all partner states. The implementation of the Common Market Protocol should be expedited to make the integration a reality.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move and I present the report for debating and approval. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Chair and your committee. Any comments, hon. Members? Let us hear from Zombo -another border person. I see a lot of border people here. Boda bodas, some of questionable citizenship. (Laughter)

6.04
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. I thank the committee for this report and for the job and effort they have put into this report. I would like to say that this is a big challenge to us because if I look at the Common Market Protocol, which came into force in 2010 and is supposed to be fully implemented by 2015, I think there is a lot of work to be done. The presentation from the committee gives a lot of challenges and I was listening carefully but I did not hear any achievements. So, it really makes me worried that we may not achieve what we have planned to do by 2015. 

I would, therefore, advise that we should put our analysis into context to see the framework for achieving this protocol- the free movement of people, of goods, of services, of capital. How much has been done if you put it into context? What are the problems? And what should we do in order to achieve what we have planned for?

My other recommendation is that in future, I think we should have joint oversight with other countries we share borders with - maybe Kenya, Rwanda and Tanzania - so that it may give us the morale to see the progress they have made and we have done nothing. It should really energise us to participate more. For example, if I take the recommendation of focal persons to be placed at these borders, we do not know what the other countries are doing. Are they going to do the same or are they better than us that they do not need this? 

Madam Speaker, I would like to once again support this report but my advice is to get more into details - (Member timed out_)

6.07
MR STANLEY OMONYA (NRM, OKORO COUNTY, ZOMBO): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like also to add my voice to thank the committee for the work well done and I just want to comment on two areas: one is about the porous nature of our borders. This is a very serious issue, which we need to work on and it cuts across all our borders - be it with Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda, DRC or South Sudan. Because of the porous nature of our borders, you find that people are just crossing from one side of the border to another or vice versa and this breed insecurity. 

I will give you an example, Madam Speaker, on our border with DRC, that is the Zombo-DRC border. You find criminals coming from the DRC conniving with criminals from our side and they do havoc to our people. So, really we need to do something about that and especially the ministers of internal affairs of the two sides of the bordering countries. They need to do something about that. 

Another issue I want to talk about is on the integration of the East African Community. This is another serious challenge. Actually, our people do not understand what EAC integration means. Many think it is actually the integration of the leaders - the presidents. When you hear the presidents meeting, then they talk of the East African Community integration. People will think that it is the big people who are just trying to integrate - (Member timed out_)

6.09
MS SARAH MATEKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good work but I will start by inquiring from the chairperson whether all borders are going to have one entry point and if you have selected the borders, which are going to have that, which borders are those?

We have always had a problem of the no-man’s land especially at the borders. I have not heard you talk about it. Maybe, in those other areas there is no problem but for us, we have had a problem of the no-man’s land where people go to cultivate and you find both countries fighting. 

I think this issue of identity cards is long overdue. Recently, my sister was arrested in Uganda and we were told that she is an illegal immigrant from Rwanda. It seemed very funny because she is a Ugandan and she was at the border planning to cross to Rwanda but they said no, “we are going to deport you”. So, I had to intervene. I think we need identity cards because they are long overdue.

On the issue of land, the person who said that “Uganda is a land of freedom” was right. Uganda is indeed the land of freedom because anyone can come to Uganda, buy land and settle there but it is hard for Ugandans to go and buy land in Rwanda or Kenya and you settle there. I think we need to do something. 

If it is integration, I think we should have one law that is uniform so that we are able to accommodate one another. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.11
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I seek your indulgence. I am not comfortable with the heading of the report because it says “Oversight duty carried out at the borders of Uganda.” In Buvuma, we share a border with Kenya and my next question would be, why not go to the border with Kenya in Buvuma? So, I request that we correct it to read “at the border posts of Uganda” as opposed to borders. 

Madam Speaker, the committee noted an issue to do with mistreatment by the Kenyan Police. In most cases, the people who come to Uganda actually enjoy Uganda better than the Ugandans but when we go to other countries, even within East Africa, we tend not to enjoy the freedom those same people enjoy in their countries. I am not saying this in bad spirit of the East African Community but this is happening. Take an example of Buvuma, where we also have Kenyans but on several occasions, Ugandans and specifically people from my constituency, have lost items to do with fishing-gears and others but it is hell rescuing those items from Kenya. Actually, it is impossible. So, I thought that the committee can also be of importance on how we can harmonise especially the different security forces and the Police on how our people can benefit best.

The other term of reference was to create awareness about the East African Community integration. I have not seen much of the report on how this term of reference can be achieved.

I saw that the building architectural plan does not allow immigration officials to clearly have a view therefore they choose to operate at a verandah. I do not see how the architectural plan can prevent – (Member timed out_)

6.14
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to comment on this important topic. First of all, I thank the committee for the comprehensive report on the situation at the border posts between Uganda and her neighbours especially in the East African Community. And I do agree with the committee on the need for Uganda to set up the one-stop border centres in order to speed up the movement of people, goods and services and also the very important issue of infrastructure especially roads and railways, again for the same purpose: to speed up the movement of people, goods and services in order for us Ugandans and also our neighbours in the region to reap the benefits of the Common Market Protocol. 

I want to request the Members and the Rt Hon. Speaker to note that Uganda’s exports within the region have already risen within the region and also within Africa and it is expected that in future, the export markets within the East African region and Africa might be even more important than even Europe and America. So, it is important for us to develop these important markets for our country.

On the issue of national IDs, these are very important not only for movement within the region but also within Uganda. We are accessing loans at banks and we need identification. There are various reasons why we need to have these IDs. 

On a recent visit to South Korea, Madam Speaker, I saw that when a citizen returns to the country, the citizen places a smart card on a machine which verifies their identity including the fingerprint and the citizen enters without any interface. All this is automated. If we did this –(Member timed out_)

6.16
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for a very good report. I think we, Ugandans, are going to lose out on the East African Federation and the Common Market Protocol by our own making. First of all, if you consider employment, Kenyans here have more employment in Uganda than Ugandans have in Kenya. It is very difficult to get employed in Kenya and we are talking of common market. 

When we talk of production of goods, what kind of goods are we sending to Kenya other than Kenya bringing more goods to Uganda? So, if we are to catch up and if East Africans are to benefit, we also have to produce more so that we sell. 

If you consider Uganda’s laxity of doing work, when East Africans say, “let us do A,B,C,D”, Ugandans cannot do it as mentioned in the report. Ugandans are always behind. So, we, Ugandans, must pull up our socks if we are to benefit from this. Otherwise, it will be better for us to be alone. What is the use of belonging when we are not benefiting from this East African Common Market Protocol?

We have been talking about these identity cards year in, year out and up to now, we have not done it. What will identify us from the Kenyans? So, Ugandans have to work very hard if we have to catch up with the Kenyans. We cannot blame them because it is a matter of survival for the fittest. The one who works harder gets more. So, we must work hard so that we benefit. Thank you very much. 

6.18
MS EVELYNE KAABULE: (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I thank the committee for the report. The first issue I would like to talk about is on evasion of taxes by traders. You mentioned that the committee found out that customs officials are aware of the “panya” routes at the border but what is surprising is that they cannot apprehend the smugglers yet they are aware of the “panya” routes. What stops them from intercepting the smugglers, yet the “panya” routes are known?
 
Secondly, people have talked about national IDs but I think this is getting out of hand. I would like to task the Minister responsible for Internal Affairs to tell us what is happening regarding the issue of national Ids, because we have lost a lot of money on this and we are not getting answers. 

Regarding the issue of boundaries; at Mutukula border, you say there are no clear demarcations of the boundaries between Uganda and Tanzania. This is self-defeating. You are talking of a border. How do you determine a border without boundaries? I also need clarification on how you determine the border yet you say there are no clear demarcations of the boundaries.

On high taxes, you say there is no clear tax policy or guidelines in Uganda. This is really disturbing. I thought we have one of the best tax policies in the region. The only problem would be with implementation but when you say there are no clear tax policies in Uganda, yet at the same time you are saying there is no adequate sensitisation - (Member timed out_)

6.21
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, People with Disabilities Representative): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity and I wish to thank the committee for the well-researched work in this report regarding the East African Community integration.

The issues that have been raised by members of this committee are relevant to all Member States in the East African Community save for South Sudan where they did not visit the borders in Moyo and other districts.

I think the challenges, which have been mentioned in this report are not insurmountable. If our leaders in the member states can come and work together in harmony, I think we can realise a lot of achievements as manifested in the working relationship between Uganda and Rwanda.

The report mentions that there have been meetings between the Ministers of East African Community Affairs for Rwanda and Uganda. We feel this is the way forward. We cannot talk about sensitisation of the population unless we practically come and address the problems, which we have.

Time and again, H.E the President has been one of those pointing out that borders are a product of the colonial administration. Otherwise, the people of Africa have been living in harmony for quite a long time. Therefore, although boundaries were created, they have not been very instrumental in helping us achieve unity.

It is my view and conviction that the citizens of our countries in the member states should have softer regulations to enable them interact with their counterparts across the borders. This is because these people interact in their everyday lives for their survival in petty trade and other social interactions.

Therefore, I believe that if we have regulations at the borders, they can help our citizens to integrate easily in the East African Community –(Member timed out_)

6.24
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga West County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to commend the chairperson and the committee for the work done. 

I would like to register my disappointment with the department or ministry responsible for implementation. For example, they have indicated that somewhere, across the border, they have focal persons who help to guide but we do not have them. What are we doing and yet, we signed the protocols? So, I call upon the responsible ministries to do the needful.

Secondly, we are collecting a lot of money in the Immigration Department but it is very dilapidated. You may wish to visit the immigration centre where the minister sits. Why doesn’t Government use this money, which it accumulates because a lot of money is contributed but we do not plough back? So, I call upon Government to plough back and make sure that they facilitate these departments to have good working conditions.

Last but not least, we have been asking Government when our border market of South Sudan will be operationalised because our people are being harassed and imprisoned in a very primitive way. We should establish our market as this Parliament planned. What is preventing Government from implementing this good initiative? Thank you.

6.26
FR JACINTO OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Madam Speaker, I must thank the committee for the good report. I am very delighted to learn that the citizens of other countries especially from East Africa frequently and freely enter Uganda without any harassment. I think that is to be applauded. 

It is a spirit, which we as leaders should encourage among citizens of other countries; to immigrate in Uganda because I do believe that any civilised country should always be open to become a cosmopolitan nation to absorb citizens of other countries because these citizens of other countries do enrich us. They bring investment, make business boom and also enrich our cultures. 

I have seen in the last five years that we have received many Asians from the Asian countries and this has enriched the country. We have seen many Eritreans, Ethiopians and other citizens of East Africa. I think this is a development, which we as Ugandans must encourage by all means and I am glad to note that around Kampala, when we meet these foreign nationals, they are very happy about Uganda and they praise our hospitality.

On the other hand, I am somehow disappointed because we do receive frequent reports of our citizens when they cross over to other countries like Kenya, Tanzania and South Sudan or other countries, they are harassed! As a nation, I have not been informed whether we lodge some formal protests to these countries or nations when our citizens are manhandled.

Therefore, I am appealing to the government, through the relevant ministries, that they should put mechanisms in place so that the safety of our citizens abroad, especially in the neighbouring countries, and their freedoms are guaranteed and that our traders are protected.

Secondly, I would like to comment on the state of roads leading to the borders. This is very disappointing –(Member timed out_)

6.29
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the issues they have raised in the report. I am wondering about the role of the members of EALA. This is because they make laws but do not consult their voters; they do not give us feedback. Perhaps, that is why we have these questions lingering around. When we talk of issues of integration and all that, these should be giving us feedback, as Members of Parliament such that we take these issues back to our constituencies. So, what is the role of the EALA members?

Madam Speaker, I am also concerned about the loss of interest by our own Police in rescuing our own people when they are arrested in those various countries and yet, the committee has said that when their own citizens are arrested in Uganda they respond very fast. What is happening to our Police; are they de-motivated? Do they respect our citizens? What can be done to the Police to ensure that they respond quickly? It is even happening here in Uganda; whenever there is a problem and you call Police, they take several hours to respond. So, there is a problem with the Ministry of Internal Affairs and I think the minister should respond to this for the sake of our own citizens.

On the issue of integration, it still comes to why Ugandans do not understand the issue of East African integration? Is it because we do not have a full minister? Since hon. Kategaya died, we have been waiting in vain to get a full cabinet minister in charge of the East African affairs. So, I do not know who is able to respond to these questions. Who is responsible for the East African Affairs? (Laughter)

On the issue of sanitation, this is saddening, especially on the part of Uganda. All the border posts – I just went to Mpondwe; when you go across to DR Congo, their border post is well-built and they have infrastructure –(Member timed out_)

6.31
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Mwebaza and her committee for the well-researched work. It is very unfortunate that our borders are very porous and this Parliament has been pronouncing itself on this since the Eighth Parliament. I wonder what the Ministry of Internal Affairs is up to, to ensure that our borders are not as porous. This is because the porosity of the borders will also disadvantage local production in this country; people who want to make local products here are not able to get any profits because smugglers get them cheaply.

Let me give you an example; in this country, when you are driving back home, you will see toilet paper being hawked on the street and we buy them since they are cheaper than those ones made here. We have industries, which make toilet paper here and yet, those hawked come in through smuggling. I wonder why we have to be generous. 

Last month, I heard the President waiving the need for work permits. And yet our country has been very generous all the time. Actually, there is a saying in my language that “Opongwille”, meaning “Do to me what you expect me to do to you.” So, if we are not benefiting from the neighbouring countries, why should we offer them such advantages that will actually disadvantage us instead - (Member timed out_)

6.34
MS JESSICA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for their report. However, for me, this report has got a very big reflection on how we are losing out on our expectations in this Community. This is because it reflects the magnitude of the challenges we are facing. So, the question I am asking is: How much have we prepared the Ugandans to compete favourably with the neighbouring citizens? 

And now, what are we doing? For us to be able to compete favourably, we must prepare Ugandans to benefit from the job opportunities, market for our commodities and the safety of our people. If you relate this to the challenges, we are really losing a lot. So, for me, I will wait to hear the remedies, which we are going to put in place because we are already in the Community; where we are, we cannot withdraw from it.

I also wish to know how we are organising individual Ugandans who are moving from one country to another because many of our people have died in South Sudan. This is because people go on individual basis and therefore, their security is not assured. 

On the issue of the national IDs, we need these most especially given the threats we are facing as a country – not only for the East African Community. We need IDs because many people come to Uganda. Therefore, we need a progress report on how far this has gone.

Regarding sanitation, this is extremely shameful that it is Uganda, which has got a wanting sanitation situation at the borders in the East African Community. I think we need a timeframe to - (Member timed out_)

6.36
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the Committee on East African Community Affairs. But I would like to seek clarification from the committee chairperson; you remember that the South Sudan Government applied sometime back to join the East African Community. At first, it was rejected and they reapplied. After that reapplication, we do not know what happened. I wish the committee could clarify whether South Sudan has been admitted to join the Community or not.

Madam Speaker, even a young country like South Sudan gives its citizens national IDs; whenever they cross to Uganda and they are asked for IDs, they produce them. But for us in Uganda, being one of the oldest countries, we still do not have national IDs and yet, it is very important. 

On the issue of security, the people who border South Sudan and DR Congo, especially those in West Nile and Acholi, suffer seriously. You will find soldiers from South Sudan could cross to Uganda any time, without permission and yet, the UPDF are very professional whenever they cross to neighbouring countries. The South Sudanese soldiers are extremely rough; there is a case when a boda boda cyclist knocked a South Sudanese national at the market of Ilego. The way the South Sudanese soldiers came with battle tanks and guns blazing, showing primitivism! Therefore, we need to protect our traders, especially those bordering South Sudan and –(Member timed out_)

6.38
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for highlighting the predicament we find ourselves in. Much has been talked about East African integration but we do not seem to be walking the talk. There has been a lot of talk about the East African integration but what is available at the border points, according to the committee report, is that Uganda is lagging behind other Partner States. The question, which bothers me is: Where is the comparative advantage for Uganda within the East African Community?

Off the head, Uganda is blessed to be a bread basket, not only for East Africa but also beyond. But our border posts, which are the main access to these markets, do not reflect our interest in developing our economy and integrating it within other Partner States. The whole purpose of integration is for the freedom of movement of goods and products. We are not trying to enhance our comparative advantage within the region and you find in other countries, there is a lot of assistance in exports. 

In Sudan, we have petty traders and within the region, we have petty traders. The Kenyan market has penetrated even our rural areas as far as grains are concerned and a lot of these products, which we should be processing and accessing the market within this region.

This report really shows us that we need to get serious. We need to look at our advantage within the region and we need to actively advance the interests of Uganda. If the government does not look at this report as something that is truly damning in that all this time, what have we been doing we have been talking about East African integration. Are we just looking at the super structure or are we looking at developing the Ugandan economy in a way whereby our comparative advantage will be felt within the whole region?

So, Madam Chair, thank you for this report. I pray and hope that the Government of Uganda can look at it seriously and look at the whole economy as far as integration in East Africa is concerned.

I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.41
MR PHILLIP WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I ought to thank the committee for the report. However, I have issues with the report. 

First, I think that the committee report is making very serious statements, very casually. It is making a lot of accusations against our neighbouring countries without citing any one single example. Hopefully, the detailed report has got some examples of overcharging, imprisoning without reason. Particularly, Kenya and Tanzania have been very much accused and there must be some report that will help Government follow this up but as it is, I find it very difficult to agree with some of the accusations that have been made in this report.

I would have expected this report to be more political than it is. It is sort of a trade report – (Laughter) - we should have, for instance, the issue of sensitisation, many of us do not know about this Community and many Ugandans do not know about the Community. Many MPs do not even talk about the Community in their constituencies but we are talking about the federation, we are hurrying and fast-tracking but we do not understand the Community. Like the chairperson said, in Mutukula, people do not understand the Community. So, it would have been our work to sensitise the public about this.

I think that this particular sectoral committee should concern itself more in sensitising Ugandans to understand the Community and leave some of these things for the Committee on Trade. It would be better for them to work on that because some propositions that I see about stabilising prices – how do you do that? It is the market forces to determine the prices, and you or Uganda cannot decree to stabilise prices to be the same as Kenya. You know Uganda makes very few things while Kenya makes a lot. So, these are issues, which the committee is recommending but very difficult to implement. 

One concern in my constituency, which I think we should concern ourselves with, Madam Chairperson of the committee, is the issue of Kenyan traders and business people driving in the villages with their trucks and buying maize and other crops in the gardens. It is good market but the country does not benefit from that type of buying as much as it would have benefited because if they buy maize or coffee in the garden, then the processing and packaging is not taken care of and they just take our crops, including our jobs because if they take maize unprocessed -  

Madam Speaker, the NRM Government has always talked that they should not export unprocessed food and – (Member timed out_)

6.45
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and may I propose that the future report goes into detail. 

I think this report, in certain sections, was over taken by events. The presidents of the East African Community have made several pronouncements. Can you go into detail and tell us the implications of those pronouncements because the people of Malaba – the clearing firms are all now conditioned to go and open offices in Mombasa but in Mombasa, Uganda clearing companies require a licence, they are not allowed to – the cost of facilities is very high and yet, now, we are talking of single clearance facilities for quick movement of goods.

Can you really educate us on the implications in terms of monetary, economic and employment of the reforms of the President of Kenya, Uganda and Rwanda?

Secondly, can you give us the status report of the number of Ugandans and Kenyans in prisons because of cross-border trade, so that we engage our Government? I know that many of my people are detained in prison in Kenya because of other activities.  

If you go to the airport at Entebbe, there is a cargo section and a passenger section but you go to our border posts like Malaba, it will take you four hours to cross because cargo, passengers and petty traders use one way. Right now, we have a project under the East African Transport Facility. What are you talking about in this report? You have mentioned that this Parliament approved the loan but there is delay in implementation. And even in the implementation, there is no establishment of cargo and passenger routes, dry and wet cargo. Worldwide, a landlocked country like Uganda – the economic hub of growth is at the border point and then, you come at the centre but for us, it is at the centre.

Finally, the Bills that are passed by the East African Parliament should all be brought here so that when we are legislating, we integrate in the domestic laws. But you now look at the East African Parliament has passed a Bill on one border post and –(Member timed out_)

6.47
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this report.

I would like to thank the committee for the work they have done. Throughout the report, the committee talked about sensitisation but there is no mention of the Ministry of Local Government in as far as sensitisation of the people is concerned and yet, I feel that they are very key in this job of making our people know what they are supposed to do as far as the integration is concerned. 

Madam Speaker, many times, our people move from the countryside going to do business across the border but there is nobody in charge to tell them what exactly they are supposed to do. When you read the report, it is clearly stated that when they are hoisting the flag, some of our people do not know what they are supposed to do and they end up being harassed. 

My proposal is that the Community should find it useful to really link up seriously with the Ministry of Local Government because more than 80 per cent of our people are found under the leadership of the local government.

Secondly, when you read the report, Bukwo District has been mentioned many times as a district that is really suffering from very many things. One is that there is no power, roads, televisions – nothing completely, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Even no radio.

MS ALUM: No radio, no hospitals. So, I would like to really implore the House that we should find something to do about the situation in Bukwo District, because that is a district which is also part of us.

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, I have the following comments: One, I note that the report has a lot of general claims and some issues do not have substantiation. For instance, on page 7, paragraph 3.2.1, you say that there are no tax policies in Uganda yet, we in this House sit every year, review the East African Customs Management Bill, we do the Finance Bill, etc. That is fallacious. We are the ones who do these tax policies, so, it is not right to say that there is no tax policy. 

On the other matter of harassment of the Ugandans by the Kenyan Police, I wish you had given us some names of the victims and the dates so that we can follow it up. Otherwise, if we adopt this report in this form, the Kenyans may wonder what it is we are doing. 

Then the issue of the construction of the one-stop centres, this is a responsibility of Trade Mark East Africa Limited. Maybe, Ministry of Works will be the supervisor but this is their responsibility.

Then on the issue of Ugandans being arrested, we do not know under what circumstances. Maybe, they are just trespassing. They do not know the borders; maybe, they are just walking. 

So, I want to propose that we use this as an information paper so that we can improve, unless the committee is ready to make some substantial improvements. For instance, the issues of the East African Legislative Assembly, have they addressed any of these issues? Have they made any laws on these areas, which you are pointing out? So, I do not know what the Chair thinks but there are too many generalities for us to adopt this report. Let us hear from the Chair.

6.51
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Ms Sarah Mwebaza): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that observation. On the issue of clear tax policy, which you mentioned, that is what we were told as a committee. It is for Uganda, on certain types of goods which leave Uganda or which come to Uganda. The traders were telling us that the policy is not clear to them on which goods pay which amount of tax. 

Then secondly-

THE SPEAKER: No, those are contained in the Finance Bills. 

MS MWEBAZA: Okay, then secondly, Madam Speaker, the issue of the arrests by the Kenya Police was told to us by the traders. The speaker of Busia town council was in the meeting and we told him that for the arrests, it is the Ministry of Internal Affairs and he said the cases had been reported to the Police at the border. That is what we were told. 

On the issue, which was raised by hon. Nyakikongoro about EALA, no Bills were presented here in the House and the minister told us that he would be presenting most of the Bills that are passed by EALA. 

However, I beg your indulgence that save for what you have mentioned, which needs to be substantiated, I request the House to adopt the report, then the other areas, which you have mentioned can be clarified later in another report.  

6.54
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, on the issue you have guided - for example, if you look at page 17, “Confiscation of goods by the Kenya authorities: more often than not, the Kenyan authorities have confiscated the goods of Ugandans and harassment is rampant especially when traders fail to pay bribes.” I think these are very serious statements against our neighbours. 

Madam Speaker, I buy your guidance: we can either ask the committee to go and improve the report or even change the wording because if you tell Parliament that traders are making these claims, it is different from making a statement of fact that Kenyans are confiscating goods of Ugandans and demanding for bribes. The way this report is, it needs a lot of improvement. Otherwise, it will cause the institution of Parliament problems. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the government side. 

6.55
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Members for their contributions but in particular, I want to thank the committee for a comprehensive job - (Interjections) – yes, there may be weaknesses but they are reporting; they are saying, “The traders told us,” and that, to me, is information that can be followed up. 

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, that of Trade and Industry, that of Works and Transport and the ministry I am now acting in, East African Affairs, will follow up these issues as raised by the committee. 

I would like to congratulate the committee on having taken time to visit the borders. Much as they have not covered all the borders, I think this is a good job done and I think this is one of the inputs - (Interjections) – Please, can I be allowed to deliver my baby?  

I think even the issue of sensitisation - the committee by meeting people at the border and talking to them, is part of sensitisation and getting people involved in knowing what borders mean and what the Community means. 

I am very happy with the report - (Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much for giving way. Madam Speaker, in seeking for clarification, I would like to support view no.1 of your proposal. Now, my clarification here goes to the Prime Minister and the Chairperson of the committee.

 A serious incident occurred that affected member countries of the East African Community at the border post and affecting lives, causing challenges to the citizens, especially Tanzania, Rwanda and Uganda where Tanzania expelled some citizens of Rwanda and Uganda. The majority of the citizens of Rwanda who were expelled from Tanzania, instead of going to Rwanda came to Uganda. Also, Ugandans who were expelled came here. This has not been mentioned in your report. Doesn’t this tantamount to something that can undermine; one, the spirit of the East African Community? Or what are the reasons for Tanzania doing so? We would like to hear this. And these things also happened at the border. 

So, I support the idea that let the committee go back with the report, re-do it, come back and include some of these serious issues of security.

Lastly, the clarification about the challenges of traders from Malaba and Busia when they enter Uganda; did you try to find out where they were going? Are they coming to trade only in Uganda? There is a point called Elegu at the Uganda Sudan Border. Kenyans, Rwandans, Ugandans, all East Africans are suffering there because the border infrastructure is horrible. I was there recently and the road is practically closed. Even the people of Uganda Revenue Authority, our own people, the immigration, are crying. They are saying they have written reports to the centre but they have not been helped. The revenue we collect from Elegu, all this much, why don’t you- Hon. Prime Minister, are you a Leader of Government Business or you are a leader of government idleness -  because this problem of giving reports and you are not acting is the serious sign of idleness of the government.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, hon. Fungaroo, for confusing me and in the process, also seemingly confusing yourself. I think we are talking about this report and this is the report of a committee, which has done a good job and we judged them on the basis of what they did. 

There are many issues that cannot be answered by this report and we should not just get into those at the moment. There are some areas that have been covered in this report but which have already been overtaken by events. The meeting in Mombasa and the recent one in Kigali by the Heads of State of Kenya, Uganda, Rwanda and the Republic of South Sudan – have overcome some of the issues that are being talked about here now. For example, goods from Mombasa to Uganda, which used to take 18 days, now take only five days. This is simply because of a clearance that has been undertaken by the heads of state on the process of clearing goods. I think we are going to see the immigration and border disputes and problems clarified more than has been the case.

Secondly, on the issue of the one-stop centre clearance of goods, I would like to say this is already in a pipeline because now the goods arrive at Mombasa and after the message has come in, both clearance and payments can be executed without people travelling to Mombasa –(Interruption)

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, minister for being a gentleman and giving way. Yes, I know that there is reduction in the number of days that goods take to cross the border. However, I would like to point out that last year, the URA told our committee that they were to install tracking devices on cargo and other goods.

I would like to know whether that has been done. I am asking this because we still see reports of loss of revenue, smuggling and importation of goods that are substandard into the country. We would like to know, which goods are entering and how they are entering Uganda. Whether they clear taxes or not – because the Commissioner General promised us that they were going to install electronic tracking devices onto all cargo and goods crossing the border to Uganda and also all those going out. Is this being implemented?

MS BANGIRANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. Some of the goods that come here are not destined for Uganda; they are on transit. So, the issue of border posts also affects goods that are on transit to other countries. And certainly, the poor borders also affect the movement of such goods.

So, we would like to know – the goods from Mombasa to Uganda may take five or eight days. How about the goods that leave Uganda to other countries - how long do they take at the border, given the poor situation that is pertaining at our borders and how much time is lost at those borders?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Let me make clarifications on these ones first –(Interruption)

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, minister for giving way. I am a Member of the Committee on Trade and patiently, I listened to you giving an explanation about the one-stop-border point in relation to the clearance at Mombasa. I notice that there are two issues that we are looking at. The committee is looking only at the one-stop clearance centre and not the clearance at Mombasa that is under the Single Customs Territory. That is different from the explanation you are giving.

Madam Speaker, I would request that if we are to have this report adopted, we need to have some briefing by the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry about the Single Customs Territory. This is because there are issues in here that have been bundled up under this arrangement but happen to be under the Single Customs Territory, which is a very new initiative.

Two, we also need to be briefed about the East African Community trade relations with other blocks within the region - the PTA, SADAC – because when, for example, the chairperson talks about the issue of the lack of a tax policy, my understanding is not about the lack of a tax policy in Uganda, but on the understanding by traders of the trade relations between the East African Community and other goods moving from other blocks where Uganda is also a member.

So, if we are to comprehend the issue of the East African Community Integration vis-a-vis the issue of the Single Customs Territory, we need to get a statement from the minister so that Parliament can move as a team. Otherwise, from the way I see the explanation being given, we are mixing up the two: the policies on the Single customs Territory, the East African Integration and our relationship with other trading organisations in the region is not clear -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have a proposal – because there are issues here, which are factual: no identity cards, no banks, no petrol stations those are factual. But there are also others that are a bit problematic. So, I would like to propose that we receive it as information from the committee pertaining to their fact finding visit to the borders. After that, we can task the relevant authorities to take them up.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, the committees of Parliament must be saved from being given assignments beyond their capacity. There is work going on. The Summit will take place here by the end of this month, actually on 30th. Some of the issues that are being raised are matters on the agenda and here I am, as Minister of East African Affairs wanting now, to brief the House on the progress that has been made in regard to what has been raised in this report. Can I do that?

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Minister, do not smuggle that in. You are supposed to come here officially to inform us on the status of the integration. That has to be done officially with a slot on the Order Paper. But when you do it now, you will be smuggling.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Okay, as you wish.

THE SPEAKER: So, hon. Members, I would like to propose that we receive this report from the committee on their fact-finding mission and advise Government to take up all the areas that have been identified. Also, some of our committees can take up some of the areas, which they think they can handle. It is useful for us to know it and know how to move.

7.08
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Kasule Lumumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee. I would like to raise an issue to do with the quality of our reports and the guidance by the technical arm of the Parliamentary Commission. When you look at this report critically, it is a sign that the clerk attached to this committee is either incapable or did not give proper technical guidance to our colleagues. I am saying this because there is no way a committee would make sweeping statements without substantiating, yet, the clerk knows very well the implications of the sensitive issues of the federation. 

So, Madam Speaker, I request you as the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Commission to interest yourself in the work of the clerks. Quite a number of chairpersons of committees are complaining about the clerks; they never put in enough time and do not give enough technical guidance to Parliament and yet, we really need it. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Members. All the points have been noted and they are going to be addressed. Actually, I was sitting here in my Chair drafting a letter to the Clerk this afternoon, on some issues. 

Okay, hon. Members, I thank you for today’s work. House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(House rose at 7.11 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, 21 November 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 

