
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Wednesday, 3 November 2021

Parliament met at 2.09 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thank you very much for coming for today’s session. I thank you for your commitment towards the work you are doing for this country. The country is proud of you and let us continue with the same spirit.

Today, we have a busy Order Paper and I would recommend that let us go to the point so that we move faster with the Order Paper. You will allow me to adjust the Order Paper because yesterday, we had made a promise to the women regarding their Motion. Allow me to bring that Motion first because it has been pending and all the women around the country are looking at us. 

Since we had the same kind of debate here yesterday, we can start with that. I got a number of Members who would like to raise matters of national importance. Allow me to handle those matters after the first motion and the Bill. Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO ADDRESS CHALLENGES FACING THE GIRL-CHILD AND CHILDREN IN GENERAL IN THE DIGITAL ERA

2.13
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This motion follows the minister’s statement that she brought to this House. It was an information statement on the Day of the African Child. It is a motion for resolution of Parliament, urging Government to address the challenges facing the girl-child and children in general in this digital era.

“WHEREAS Article 34 of the Constitution recognises the rights of the child, that include the right to health, right to education and right to protection from exploitation and Parliament enacted the Children’s Act, Cap 59 and other pieces of legislation to observe, protect and promote the rights of children; 

AND WHEREAS Uganda ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Optional Protocols thereto which contain a set of international legal standards for the promotion, protection and fulfillment of the rights of every child in her jurisdiction;

AWARE that Government and this Parliament have signified their commitment to Goal Five of the Sustainable Development Goals, aimed at achieving gender equality and empowering all women and girls;

NOTING, however, that girls remain disadvantaged and do not enjoy their fundamental human rights fully, hence the International Day of the Girl-Child, celebrated on October 11th. This day underscores the need to address these challenges and to promote the empowerment and fulfillment of the human rights of the girls, including reaping the benefits of the technological revolution that has re-shaped everything in current times;

CONCERNED that the COVID-19 pandemic has worsened the pre-existing challenges facing the girl-child, exacerbating the exposure of girls to trafficking - both internally and internationally - child marriage, teenage pregnancies, poor menstrual hygiene and other forms of gender-based violence, as families find ways to alleviate economic burdens. For instance, a report of the African Peer Review Mechanism attributed 10 per cent of maternal mortality to teenage pregnancies in Uganda. A UNICEF report on teenage pregnancy in Uganda reveals that 1 in 4 of the 19-year old girls have had a baby, putting their lives at risk and forcing them to drop out of school. The Foundation for African Women Educationists - Uganda Chapter conducted a survey – the Post-COVID-19 Lockdown Report on school-going girls. This report reveals that there was a 366.5 per cent increase in teenage pregnancies amongst girls aged 10 to 14 years and 22 per cent of girls were forced into transactional sex due to poverty;

FURTHER CONCERNED that since the pandemic, nearly 15 million learners are locked out of school and do not have access to alternative learning opportunities via radio, television, the internet and community-based interventions, due to lack of internet connectivity or electricity. A UNICEF survey reveals that only 10 per cent of the school children have access to some form of alternative schooling, including online schooling;

COGNISANT of the fact that while information and communication technology provides new opportunities to young people through digital spaces, it also facilitates online child abuse through cyber bullying, child grooming and luring children to pornographic sites, hence the digital era has been regarded as being responsible for the mushrooming of child pornography, where girls are often the victims;

FURTHER COGNISANT of the fact that these challenges, coupled with the fact that the pandemic is accelerating the transition to online learning, networking and working also accelerated girls’ risk of being left behind and this compromises the girls’ rights to education and access to enabling technology;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that Parliament of Uganda urges; 

1. 	Government to provide the necessary resources and develops programmes to skill the girl-child, whose education has been affected by teenage pregnancy or child marriage. 

2. 	The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, working with the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology and National Guidance, to establish mechanisms to eliminate online and technology-facilitated gender-based violence and discrimination. 

3. 	Government to engage with multiple partners to build coalitions and make necessary connections to advance gender equality in the digital era. 

4. 	Government to approve the draft School Health Policy.

5. 	Government to implement the Trafficking in Persons Act, 2019 and the Anti-Pornography Act, 2014. 

6. 	Government to ensure there is continuity of learning and considers the immediate safe reopening of schools.”

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Opendi. Is the motion seconded? The motion is seconded by hon. Anifa Kawooya, hon. Brenda Nabukenya, hon. Solomon Silwany, hon. Muhammad Nsereko, hon. Juliet Kinyamatama, hon. Henry Musasizi, hon. Rita Atukwasa and by everybody in the House. (Applause) This is the most popular motion. 

Hon. Opendi, would you like to speak to your motion?

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information available is that poverty is one of the key reasons most of the girls have been dropping out of schools. Social protection is required to target the poor families especially girls if we are to keep them in school.

Despite the various legislations, like the Children (Amendment) Act 2016, the Domestic Violence Act and the Education Act, we still see child marriages. We still see a number of our girls unable to go to school. The completion rate of girls at Primary Seven, according to the report available, is at 52 per cent.

Despite the free education that the Government of Uganda established, statistics show that 13 per cent of girls have never attended school. We still have patriarchal cultural traditions that uphold the interests and needs of men above those of the girls and the women in this country. We have also seen that COVID-19 lockdown resulted into various challenges for the girl child. 

The FAWE report that I will lay shortly shows that just in five districts, we have over 68,000 children getting pregnant. Kampala was the highest of these five districts with 24,000. This is just three months from March to June 2020.

So, we do not know what the statistics are now. Kampala was the highest with 24,059 girls getting pregnant just between March and June 2020. We had Wakiso with 21,595; Mukono with 8,639; Kamuli with 7,847 and Kasese with 6,957. Some of these girls know who made them pregnant. However, about 2.8 per cent of these girls were just raped, which was very unfortunate. 

We also heard from this report that close to 03 per cent of these girls were impregnated by people close to them; their fathers, brothers and uncles. This is incest, which is against our laws.

I just want to say that as we debate this motion, we have had cases of women and girls also coming here to accuse male colleagues of negligence; failing to provide for these babies and women. I appeal to my colleagues, my brothers here, to lead by example. You cannot produce a child and fail to provide for the child. If you have doubt about the paternity of this child, please go and undertake a DNA. If it is 99.9 per cent yours, please take responsibility. We do not want to start listing you here. 

I want to end by saying that from the pandemic, it is clear that keeping girls in school will definitely reduce child marriages and teenage pregnancies. This is why there is a call that Government considers reopening schools immediately.

From the map that has been circulating, it is only Uganda where the schools are completely closed. Other countries have opened up. We need to learn to live with COVID-19. Most importantly, the girl child, despite the existing legislations, is still disadvantaged. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Opendi. At least one thing I can say is that your brothers here have not gone for the young girls. All that we are urging your brothers here to do is to take responsibility. However, it is not for everybody but a few. They are not young ones. 

Can we have the first seconder, hon. Rita? 

2.25
MS RITA ATUKWASA (Independent, Woman Representative, Mbarara City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to address challenges facing the girl child in the era of digital communication. 

I rise, in a way, to say that whereas you used the words, “teenage pregnancy”, most people try to get comfortable with it. I would like to say that most of the girls that we are speaking about that have become pregnant were defiled. That means that in the situation that they are in, there are criminals behind. Very few of them, however, have been apprehended.

The issue of teenage pregnancy, if not well addressed, will drive us back almost 10 decades in terms of gender equality. When most of these girls get pregnant, they fall into a cycle; not only of poverty but of ill health.

One out of four teenage girls - that is 25 per cent as by the UNICEF report, have given birth. You can imagine – when you see them moving, one out of four – those are our children. We need to come forward as Government and Parliament to be able to reach out to - 

What happens is that the cycle of teenage pregnancy gets intertwined with the cycle of poverty. Most of those in the cycle of poverty are women. Very shortly, these girls are going to graduate into womanhood. So, what kind of Uganda shall we envisage in that level of poverty? What happens to these girls? We have poor maternal health; we will have stigma. You know it very well that the first thing that happens to a girl child when she gets pregnant is getting out of the home. Even the parents sometimes do not want to associate with them. They go wandering, actually not even in the hands of those that have made them pregnant. They go wandering on the streets.

What happens to these girls? They have high risks associated with pregnancy, poor maternal health, breathing at birth and some even die in case they do get opportunities for caesarean section and safe abortions. 

When you look at the country’s statistics, most of those arise out of teenage pregnancies because the girls are so desperate. They are not accepted to get rid of the babies but alas, some end up dying. 

HIV/AIDS is glaring in their faces because it is common knowledge how you get pregnant. It is through unsafe sex. So, for how long will this continue? Gender based violence crowns all of it. A girl, who is a teenage mother, roaming in the street has triple jeopardy of circumstances of gender-based violence that can come to them; economical, psychological and physical. 

On the digital era, whereas it is a good opportunity to enhance development, access to education, access to information and marketing online, most of these girls can neither afford a smart phone nor have computers at home. They are unable to use them. It provides the opportunity but we want to go further and look at it. What is exactly happening? To those who have attempted, it becomes a trap to actually engage them into being trafficked for sex work.

As Parliament, we need to come up and make sure that the anti-trafficking law is implemented to keep these girls safe. 

In conclusion, the gender digital gap is glaring in our faces. The era will not go back. It is here to stay. The schools that have started online - I know most of the schools in Uganda are not at that level but the world is leaving us. What is it leaving us for? Is it just for our own selves or we need to catch up?

So, I call upon you, honourable members, to not only overwhelmingly support this motion but go back to your constituencies and speak about it on radio stations. Most of these radio stations have very politically-inclined discussions. However, parents and girls are hurting – not forgetting the boys. 

Can you be that mouthpiece to tell your other fellow males – because these girls are impregnated by men not women like me? Can you be the voice to tell them that they are pushing our nation into another epidemic that we might not be able to deal with?

Finally, Madam Speaker, is the issue of stigma. You are relatives, friends and opinion leaders. If a person ever comes to you and tells you that their daughter is pregnant, please, encourage them to support them and may all these girls go back to school. May we encourage the population that it is not over for those who have a window to be able to go back to school?

Madam Speaker, I implore the House to not only support but also spend some money in our constituency programmes – from what the Government has and what you have – to skill these young girls. The Directorate of Industrial Training, that has the money, could extend special programmes to this population so that they can learn to make different kinds of things.

In Mbarara, for instance, we have a lot of banana fibres. Can they make table mats? Can they make cossets to cover our sweet drinks in bars so that they are not infested with houseflies? Please, support women groups that do handiwork by being a point of purchase for the products they make. I beg to submit and let us support this motion. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Atukwasa. Members, as you have heard, do not just end the debate here. Go and speak about it; speak about the girl child. Go on radios and educate the population about the girl child. Encourage them and remove the stigma out of these girls. They are human beings; they may be tempted, they could have been raped – However, let us go out as leaders and speak about it.

Once you support a woman, that is the most reliable vote that you have. They are the most reliable people that you have in the communities. A woman will always do - a family is always run by a woman. Making sure that children go to school is being done by a woman. When you do that, you are making a contribution to this country. Let us support the girl child. As leaders, let us speak about it. Let us come out and protect the girl.

2.33
MS JULIET KYINYAMATAMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise to second the motion for a resolution of Parliament to urge the Government to address challenges facing the girl child and children in general in the digital era.

First of all, I would like to appreciate you, honourable members of the Eleventh Parliament, for overwhelmingly supporting this motion. I am very sure that the mothers and girls that are watching out there are impressed and know that they are our concern wherever they are.

I am very sure that honourable members know what has been happening with the girl child and the motion that we are trying to elaborate on or what we are trying to urge the Government to do. I am going to rush to solutions or the way forward or our prayers.

First of all, we urge the Government to make sure that there are community mobilisation and sensitisation programmes that are created to tell the country, especially those that are behind the teenage pregnancies and defilement, about the importance of education. Maybe they have forgotten or it does not seem important to them anymore. 

However, when we go back as leaders and partners of this country – like the NGOs – we can revive the sense of why we need these girls in schools. We can cite examples of where we have come from as women and Uganda and why we need education for all.

Let the Ministry of Education and Sports, first of all, understand why we need education in this country. Let there be a packaging or branding of why we need education by the ministry so that communities have corroborated information that they need to give to our communities.

You may find radios having different information and the NGOs also with different information. We need one message out there that can be broadcast everywhere by television stations so that Ugandans get to know and have one packaged information about the mistakes that have been done and the pandemic.

There has been a big debate on why we see an increase in teenage pregnancies and people have mixed feelings about the pandemic. We need an answer from the ministry. We need one clear message that will inform the biased minds out there.

We need to urge Uganda Communication Commission (UCC) to make sure that it controls programmes that are on radios and to regulate internet information. As mothers, you know what is happening. You may not know about programmes like Uncut, Kalakata and others but when you get home, our children tell us what has been on television and UCC is watching yet they have all the powers and laws in place that can be used to enact informative information for our children.

Therefore, UCC should wake up and take up its mandate. In case it fails, the Government should take up the role of controlling it and forcing it to do what it is supposed to do.

There should be scholarships for these girls that have dropped out of school. That will solve issues of social stigma. There should be incentives to the children because imagine you are unable to take care of yourself and now you have a baby and the family is unable to take care of you and the baby. How do we encourage these girls to go back to schools that are reopening?

Madam Speaker, this programme should be well thought out and implemented. If we want these young girls to go back to school without social stigma, we have to give them incentives. Either you make sure that there is food for the babies that are with the mothers or make sure that - you know PTAs have always put some fees for every student – the little fee that is put there is removed for these young girls to go back to school. 

It is a situation where you have a burden of social stigma, you are unable to go and explain why you cannot pay that small fee and you have a baby at home. Therefore, there should be a special package for teenage mothers before reopening of schools.

Madam Speaker, finally, there should be a formal way of engaging our girls and boys during holidays. There should be different health camps that keep them engaged. We can use sports. When you go to our villages or sub counties, you find that most programmes that were there were sold out. You will find that Members of Parliament have pressure to provide playgrounds for our teenagers out there. 

Therefore, imagine what these teenagers have to do in case they are not engaged in any activity. Of course, they will go and engage in other bad habits. It is high time the Government purchased playgrounds at parish level and we engaged these teenagers. If we do not engage them, they will be engaged in what seems very interesting for them. This is where they find traps of defilement and other things.

Madam Speaker, when you look at the statistics of girl children and the abuses they are going through, you find that it is the NGOs that are providing this information to us. You heard in our motion, everyone talking about the United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund (UNICEF) and all these other NGOs but you cannot find any statistics concerning a girl child on the website of the Ministry of Education and Sports and other Ugandan Government websites. You wonder whether we are interested or not. 

Statistics inform the policies that should be put in place and so, I think this should be looked into. We need to clear that gap. Otherwise, if you have no information, you are not going to believe a Member of Parliament who is here to show you the gap. Otherwise, if you take initiative as Government and do research, you will be informed.

Thank you, Madam Speaker and the entire House for supporting this motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Juliet Kinyamatama. Let us limit the debate to two minutes to allow a number of people to speak to the motion.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, we have a male seconder; hon. Ngoya John Bosco. Allow me, on that note, to lay this report, which is titled: “The situation and impact of COVID-19 on school-going girls and young women in Uganda.” It is dated May 2021, conducted by Forum for African Women Educationalists (FAWE) and supported by GIZ, Oxfam and UN Women. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. John Bosco Ngoya, you have three minutes.
 
2.41
MR JOHN BOSCO NGOYA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion and speak to the plight of trafficked children, many of whom, unfortunately, are from Karamoja.

Statistics indicate that about 68.7 per cent of the girl children on the streets who hail from Karamoja are facing very deplorable conditions. Many of you have images of them begging for things on the streets.

Yesterday, we had a good motion of paying tribute to the late hon. Florence Alice Lubega. That is one child who broke the patriarchy. We have many of these children out there on the streets loitering and looking up to us. They are not asking for a penny but policies, intervention and protection.

The closest the nation rose to the occasion was in 2007 during the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) when these children were rounded up and taken to reformatory homes. The mere fact that they were rounded up exposed a lot of things. Many of them have got lost because they have not been accounted for.

In 2014, seven of those who were rounded up and taken to Kapiringisa, have to date, not been accounted for. Just this year, on 10 April; there was another round up done by Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) and two girl children - Lema Betty, aged 13 and Loge, aged 15 from Napak District have not been accounted for.

On 25 October this very year, there was another round up carried out by KCCA. We do not know where these children have been taken.

It is for this particular reason that I rise to second the motion urging Government to do something for the girl child and all the children in general because they are craving for our support.

I know for a fact that a lot has been done by Government but the great job being done now is by NGOs. I would like to recognise Moroto Diocese for doing a lot of work with street children here in Kampala though there are other NGOs that have been supporting. 

Government seems to have affirmed the fact that there was an Act that was passed here in Parliament; “The Prevention of Trafficking in Persons Act, 2009.” It looks like we have invested a lot in humanitarian assistance and relief but we are not looking at this one particular child who has the possibility to rise and probably contribute to the nation. 

It is my prayer, therefore, that:

    1. We investigate and prosecute the traffickers and the trafficking rackets. Many of our children have gone up to Nairobi. We are hearing about how being taken to the Middle East yet we do not have record of that. It is my appeal that, that is done;

    2. We resource the skilling of the girl child. I know that with COVID-19, many of them may not necessarily be able to make it back to school. However, if we have a deliberate attempt by Government to ensure the skilling of this particular child or the many who are out there, perhaps, we would be able to curb this particular vice. I beg to submit.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. John Bosco Ngoya. I now open the motion to a debate. Since this is a more popular debate, we will limit it to about 10 people because we have a lot on the Order Paper.

2.46
MS JANE PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover and the seconders of this motion. They have talked about the reasons that lead the girl child into facing many challenges. I would like to address my mind to only two.

One of such challenge is poverty at the household level and travelling long distances to access schools. We must look at this issue from two perspectives; the prevention bit of it and provision. 

From the prevention, I would suggest the following: Parliament, together with Government, should come up with policies that will keep our children and girls in schools longer. By so doing, especially after the era and impact of COVID-19, we should provide opportunities for girls who get pregnant to continue with education after nursing their children at least for a year; but not going to classes when they are still expecting.

We should strengthen the senior teachers’ counselling aspect in all schools –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I need clarification on “Not going to class when you are expecting.” 

MS PACUTO: Madam Speaker, it is my view that they can continue after nursing their children for at least a year. The children also have a right to be breastfed. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Somebody can breastfeed a baby and go to class. We can allow them to go to class, study as they breastfeed.

MS PACUTO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, for giving way. It is of course human to allow a mother to breastfeed a child. It does not matter how young but I would like to give you information based on the experience in my area, Dokolo. 

However, during that one year, the same child mother may get pregnant again. While she is breastfeeding and staying at home, that girl child is likely to be impregnated again. So, let us take precautions when talking about allowing the girl to breastfeed. 

MS PACUTO: Thank you, my senior colleague. I take note of that. Madam Speaker, there is also a need to – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, listen to the honourable member. 

MS PACUTO: Madam Speaker, now, as we go to the implementation of the Parish Development Model, I agree with the colleague who brought up the idea of skilling these girls. I recommend that skilling centres that are easily accessible for these girls are set up. They should be incorporated into the Parish Development Model. If there was a way that we could review the UWEP Programme so that it is not just for disbursing funds to women and girls but also giving equipment in order for these girls to be skilled, that would be great. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MS PACUTO: The Ministry of Gender has the department for cultural leaders. We also have cultural and religious institutions in this country. Let us make use of these institutions whereby cultural leaders are encouraged to train or come up with positive cultural and social norms to train these girls on how they should grow up and transit into womanhood. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. In this Parish Development Model, we must localise the training areas for these girls. If we are saying we should skill them, the skilling areas should be within where they come from. If it is a long distance, they will again get “accidents” from these men on the way. 

2.51
MS BRENDA NABUKENYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. First, I thank the mover and the seconders of the Motion in regard to the girl-child. We have a high dropout rate of the girl-child. 

Concerning the question of sex education in school, I know it is contentious but it is one area we need to revisit. Young girls and boys engage in these acts at an early age. You realise that at the end of the day, it is the girl-child that drops out of school or gets affected more than the boy-child. 

I think Parliament should seriously consider this debate and we see how to reinstate such because when you go to the rural schools, you will find that a girl in primary school is as old as 13 years and more and yet, she is actively engaged in sex. Therefore, if we do not address it and think it is okay, we are going to see more girls dropping out of school as a result of getting pregnant. 

Madam Speaker, we have been having many organisations or MDAs coming to the Committee on Education and Sports. We realise that if the loan scheme is not expanded to benefit institutions as low as vocational institutes - technical training - those who teach courses that run for three months, we will not be able to have the young girls who get pregnant. At times, it is very hard to reinstate them in school directly but you can involve them in skilling and training projects. 

Therefore, I ask my colleagues that at the time of discussing the budget –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MS NABUKENYA: I ask my colleagues that at the time of discussing the budget, we should make sure that we extend the funding or the bursaries to lower training institutes so that the young girls and boys who have not been able to access funds to continue with education and skilling can benefit. 
Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

2.54
MS BETTY NALUYIMA (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I commence, the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children wishes to thank you, our Member, for ensuring that this Motion is debated here. I also thank everyone for supporting it. 

Back to the point, I think many of us sometime back, early in October, realised that Wakiso was one of those districts that was affected. There was an incident whereby a father defiled a girl. I remember many of you heard about it. 

As we are in the budget process, I request that sensitisation is done; the mindset change should be done in all our communities. Let us advocate for local governments to be facilitated. 

When I called the probation officer at Wakiso, she told me that she was stuck in ensuring that she is facilitated in order to see that this girl who was affected is given adequate support. Therefore, it is a challenge of funding to the different officers - probation officers, community development officers and even the vice-chairpersons at each local council. 

On this very matter, I urge us to support the local officers everywhere. They should be encouraged to see that they do their job, which should also include sensitising communities in mindset change. 

As we plan for the girl-child, let us also ensure that somewhere we educate the boy-child to understand matters concerning the girl-child because each time we advocate for the girl-child matters - let us emphasise them so that the boy-child understands issues concerning the girl-child and we have a better society. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would like to hear from the boys. (Laughter)

2.56 
MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Member rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us first hear from the boy-child. (Laughter)

MR SSASAGA: Madam Speaker, I am a teacher as well. It is very difficult for a breastfeeding mother to be in class; say senior one or two. Probably, the efforts of this Parliament should be geared towards supporting the Directorate of Industrial Training, which is underfunded. If we can support vocational training and it is spread throughout the subcounties and parishes, the girl-child will definitely get equipped. 

What usually breaks the girl-child is some petty cash for them to buy pads. If we can support the reusable pads and distribute them the way we distribute nets or masks, most of them will stay in school. If they have the skills, they will be able to get their own incomes to support themselves. 

In most cases, the boda boda riders and those men in the village take advantage of the girl-child. Most girls that have got pregnant during the COVID-19 period have been tempted in order to get some little money to support themselves. 

I was very disappointed with the Head of State when he addressed the nation. He said that if we have one girl-child and we get two out of one, that is better. That was a wrong message to the Ugandans and the girl-child. Therefore, we should put our efforts towards supporting – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us discuss how we can protect the girl-child. Let us not get diversionary. Let us talk about how we can help the girl-child and also empower the boy-child because when you talk about the girl-child, you need sex education. When we were growing up, there was an aspect of sex education - where we were told that if you do this, it is bad. Why don't we revive that? 

2.59
MR MEDARD LUBEGA-SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank colleagues for bringing this motion. However, I want us to give it a broader spectrum than this. One, I am speaking as a father to that girl child. Two, I am speaking as a father to that boy child, who is the defiler but also the victim. 

Just look at this young man who is called a father in society, reflect and go back to those boys that used to produce during school and what names we gave them. I think it should be more comprehensive and I want to support my brother, hon. Ssasaga, when he talks about vocational training. 

One, it should begin with the policy and law. For example, make vocational training compulsory for all those would be school going children who are not going to school for whatever reason. This is because if vocational training is organised in such a way that it is flexible, every girl in the village will be able to access some form of schooling at the parish, technical or vocational level and that person would be equipped. 

During those classes, they would be given a component of sex education and counselling on the effects of pregnancy and childbirth. We should be looking at a model that is able to protect both the boys and the girls. 

Madam Speaker, I know it has some cost implications but it should be designed in such a way that this girl or boy is equipped. In particular, the girl child should be trained to generate some income that would protect her against further temptations from men that would lure her into similar acts. 

I would suggest that Government comes up with:

    1.  A comprehensive policy and legal framework;

    2. A budget that is able to establish an education scheme parallel or away from the conventional education for these children to be trained and protected. 

Other than that, we would be wasting time. I thank you.

3.02
MR HILLARY KIYAGA (NUP, Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues, Uganda’s next problem is the boy child. Actually, it is the current problem because the boy child has been neglected and as a result, he will look for a way of attracting attention. 

That aside, as we go forward to discuss factors affecting the digital world and the girl child, we need to put into consideration a few things. The low and poor internet coverage in Uganda cannot facilitate whatever we need to instil in a girl child. 

The lack of reliable electricity supply - Some of us represent people who do not have electricity. Therefore, as we talk about digital platforms, they need electricity to access them. 

There is the high cost of internet; somebody needs Shs5,000 to buy one gigabyte and Shs200,000 to buy data for a month yet we are talking about poor people. 

Therefore, as we talk about the digital era, we need to put into consideration all those things affecting digital platforms and how a girl-child must benefit –(Interruption)

MR KAYEMBA-SSOLO: Thank you, my brother, for giving me way. I want to give my brother more information about the boy-child. (Laughter) The boy-child is not favoured from childhood until death. We have empowered the girl-child which is okay but these girls have overused that power. I have a friend called Muwonge Mbuzinume who married a girl –(Interruption) Order on what? Muwonge Mbuzinume was always beaten by this girl because she was over empowered. Therefore, as we are empowering the girl-child, let us tell them not to drop their morals and discipline because if the girl had remained with morals, Muwonge would not be beaten every night. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One thing I have picked from hon. Kiyaga is that as we talk about the digital world, we should also put emphasis on electricity reaching almost all the areas and also reduce the cost of internet. That should be included in your motion. 

However, the girl child we are talking about is the small young girl you are raping left, right and centre who has fallen out of school. Just imagine yourself as a parent, hon. Solomon. I do not think these young girls are beating people outside there; those are women, they are not girl children. We are talking about teenage girls who have fallen out of school because of COVID, who are raped in the streets because they have no access to services. However, if you are talking about the woman who can fight back then that one will not be raped. Therefore, we are talking about a young girl; your daughter outside there. 

3.06
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Ruth Aceng): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the mover and the seconders of the motion and to reassure this House that the School Health Policy that is being worked on by the Ministry of Education and Sports will soon be passed because we have been working together; I know that.  

Madam Speaker, last week was Safe Motherhood Week. Allow me to thank the Health Committee very much. We were reflecting on our actions and our inactions towards mothers and the girl-child, reviewing our statistics and taking note of what has transpired during this COVID-19 era. 

Whereas we have made progress, there are still many challenges. One of the challenges that we must never shy away from is that for the last 25 years, nearly all governments world over have focused on the girl-child. We have empowered the girl child, we have kept the girl child in school, we have emancipated women and we forgot the boy child. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, what happened? The boy-child went into a retreat to think about what to do. Good enough, we are in the digital world. They got their gadgets, they went into drugs and the result now is that they are doing what we fear to the girl-child and they are not aware that they are doing anything wrong because we forgot about them. It is time to focus on the boy-child and put the children at the same level. (Applause) Put the children at the same level because they are all children. We need to hold them –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for giving way. 

Last Friday, the state minister in charge of primary education was in Amuru, launching a programme “stopping teenage pregnancy in Uganda”. One of the issues raised by the boy child and girl child was that during the lockdown, they were all rendered redundant. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports promised to buy radios and televisions to ease their learning but nothing was done. At the end, during evening hours, they move to the trading centres, discuss about love affairs and that is how many of the young girls got pregnant. That is the information I want to give you –(Interruption)

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think it is very important for some of these things to go on record so that the Hansard is very clear.

Honourable colleagues, you remember very well that in the 10th Parliament, the Government presented a supplementary budget to buy radios for learners in the whole country but Parliament rejected that budget.

So, is it in order, really, for the Hansard to show that the Government refused to buy radios for our learners when Parliament here refused to clear the supplementary?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Aceng, can you finish your submission?

DR ACENG: Yes. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was just saying it is time to treat the children equally so that we can bring them up when they are knowledgeable and we empower them with information, so that they are able to know what is wrong from the very beginning.

However, it is also important that parents focus on the children equally. Madam Speaker, I thank you. (Applause)

3.12
MS PAMELA KAMUGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion moved by hon. Sarah Opendi.

Colleagues, there is no better time than today for this motion. It is common knowledge that the world is advancing digitally and this needs to be punctuated. Technology is not bad per se but there is need for regulation to protect the exploitation of the girl child and children.

As you are all aware, there is need to regulate the content which is alluring our children and they are irresponsibly consuming these materials. A call to the Government for regulation is not a cause to pause technology advancement, but to put mechanisms that can alleviate the risks emerging from unregulated use of digital materials.

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you. (Applause)

3.13
MS CISSY NAMUJJU (NRM, Woman Representative, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I thank the mover and seconders of the motion.

Madam Speaker, I love that the girl child has been empowered with education at all levels and there is inclusiveness in the employment world. However, the extreme focus on the girl child has led to neglect of the boy child to an extent that they lack the basic knowledge on how to live harmoniously with learned and educated girl children.

I, therefore, pray that the nation, especially the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, balances the concept of empowering the younger generation so that we do not lose the boy child while focusing on the girl child. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity and I support the motion. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Namujju, thank you very much. Hon. Namujju is talking about the inclusiveness and harmonious living of these children. However, even when there is harmonious living, you need to tell them not to do bad manners.
I was so surprised when I saw a story of how a boy impregnated his own sisters. It is because these children are not educated; they do not talk to them. As parents, we should be able to talk to these children. 

3.16
MR SOWEDI KITANYWA (NRM, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to begin by thanking the movers as well as the seconders of the motion.

Madam Speaker, I am addressing myself to two major issues. The first is the issue of parenting. All the children we are talking about did not appear on earth by a miracle; they were produced by parents. Unfortunately, the parents have delegated their powers. Most parents have turned into “internally displaced parents”. (Laughter) They no longer care about their children.

It is very important for the Government to come up with parenting programmes so that the parents can be responsible. Parents should not simply produce and leave the children to grow on their own. 

It is surprising that it is during the coronavirus period that we have recorded many teenage pregnancies when the children are with their parents. It means that there is a problem with parenting.

Secondly –(Member timed out.)

3.18
MS KEVIN KAALA (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues in thanking the mover and seconders of the motion. I stand here – I am a little bit uncomfortable because we are always talking about the girl child. We have forgotten the boy child, yet it is the boys, including the ones who are in this House, who are causing all this. They are doing this to our children. (Laughter)

So, I request us to go back and do our roles. Let us speak to our girl children and boy children as well. If we concentrate on the girl-child while we leave – why did God have to create a boy and a girl? All these are our children. Honourable members, we do not need Government to tell us to speak to our children. I do not need the President to tell me to talk to my boy or girl. 

These days, the number of single mothers is increasing because the boy child is left out. A mother is left to raise these children alone. Also, during the time of marriages, it is only the girls who are talked to and the boys supposed to get married too are left alone and yet, sometimes, they do not know some things. Therefore, I stand here to say that while we are talking to our girl children, let us speak to our boy children as well. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us limit this debate. It is one of the most popular Motions I have seen. The problem is that we are now repeating the same things. Remember we have a very important Bill coming next. 

3.21
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the reason I am insisting on hearing from the male Members is because they are the trouble causers. (Laughter) They should speak for themselves to show the public that they are not going to do the same things again. 

MR GAFABUSA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I thank the mover and seconder of the Motion. I rise to support the Motion. I just want to talk about two things: parenting, which my colleague has talked about already. The other is about our criminal mentality and why, as a country, we are not able to put criminals or suspected criminals to book. 

When we talk about teenage pregnancy, we are talking about rape, defilement, incest and all that comes with it. All these are well catered for in our national laws. The Penal Code Act of Uganda covers all these. You wonder why the girls we are talking about are scattered in our villages and homes. However, how many of us have seen a teenage pregnant girl and taken responsibility to find out who is responsible for the pregnancy so that as a community, we take on that person?
We are talking about the girl-child. Mind you, there are some boys who are defiled by these women. The only difference is that the boys do not show. While the girl-child is defiled or raped and she gets pregnant, the boy child does not get pregnant. There is no sign you can see but boys are also defiled. They go through the same thing as the girls. We should be looking at how we can stop this criminality in our country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, I know you are all excited about what you do. 

3.24
MR DAVIS KAMUKAMA (NRM, Bunyangabu County, Bunyangabu): I stand to second the Motion. First and foremost, a girl-child is the most important treasure that we have in this nation. By that factor, we need to handle them like a glass. We need to provide information to both the girl-child and the parents on the way the latter should bring up their children. For example, I have a young child of seven years. I normally advise her not to play with boys during dark hours because when they go playing in the dark, there are things that happen.

So, we really need to equip these children and parents with such information. For example, those who cannot go back to school, let the Government provide skilling centres to help them learn tailoring, catering and other skills. This will help in ensuring that the girl-child does not just diminish like that. I beg to submit.

3.25
MR DAN ATWIJUKIRE (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the Motion but – (Interruption)

MR OKIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise under Rule 59 of our Rules of Procedure, Subsections (b) and (c) on Motion without Notice. I think a lot has already been said on this particular Motion. I see Members repeating themselves, yet, we have very many important businesses still to discuss in this Parliament. We have a pending Bill on the Order Paper. We have issues of compensation of the LRA victims still pending on the Order Paper. I do not know whether we are proceeding rightly by continuing to debate this item and repeating ourselves.

I would like to move that we adjourn this debate and look at the important businesses that are on the Order Paper. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a ruling to be made on this procedure. You made these rules yourselves. What the Member is saying is that we are repeating ourselves on the same issues. It is a Motion that has been accepted by everybody. The other thing that is left is to hear from the Leader of the Opposition, the Government Chief Whip and from the minister. What is their commitment? When we get that, we will then move to the next item. 

Honourable members, I have already made a ruling on that. If you want to debate, we have subsequent business coming. I know you are a parent and you would love to debate about the girl-child or boy child. 

Leader of Opposition, do you have anything to say? 

3.28
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, the time we have spent on this Motion is worth every inch of our space in this House because our business is to legislate for posterity. Posterity is the duty we owe to generations, especially our children. We must give the next generation reason to believe that when we came here, we cared and moved in a direction that would ensure that their future is safe. Therefore, I would like to applaud the mover and those who debated the motion.

I would like to say that legislation and policy have to migrate to address the inevitable and obvious challenge of the day. Some of our laws are archaic and therefore, it is our duty and space - I would like to see this debate condense into legislation that will change the tide on the issues that we have debated this afternoon.

I would like to support the motion and suggest that we would like to see a change in legislation on ICT and undertake necessary reforms in education. Government promised a vocational school per sub county 10 years ago. I do not know how many have been built so far. These should be the issues evaluated; whether we are preaching water and drinking wine. Thank you.

3.30
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion and thank the mover and all colleagues who have contributed. There are two aspects which I feel are missing; one is the issue of mindset change towards our barbaric customs in society and then the issue of giving the victim a second chance in life, especially regarding early pregnancy. 

I have an example which I thought I should share with this House. About three years ago, I read a story of two young girls who had travelled all the way from Lira to Namugongo to intercede to the Uganda Martyrs for their parents so that they could get peace. I followed up the girls, one of them was taken by Italian nuns and I took up one with my family. I do not need to put her name on record although some colleagues know because they met me with her at Serena Kigo when we were at a family outing sometime back.

Madam Speaker, when this child came, she stayed at our place, was given good care and went home looking good at 12 years. Her uncle raped her. (Interjection) - I can call it aggravated defilement but it was a monstrous act. The uncle defiled her and so this young girl missed - She was in her primary seven and she performed poorly. When they came, my wife told me that we had two visitors at home and the story goes on. 

When I tried to pursue the matter, I found out that they sat and agreed as a community that they must perform a ritual where she had to forgive the uncle. Therefore, what they were going to do is that she would lie on the ground and the uncle would go on the roof of the house where she was defiled from and urinate on her. (Laughter) Here in Lira.

I raised the issue with the authorities and the uncle ran away and has since been at large. Up to now, we are still pursuing him. However, the community became violent towards me that I am trying to break up a family by protecting the girl.

I would like to thank a colleague in this House, hon. Yeri Ofwono who helped me put her back to school and – (Member overwhelmed and sobs_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, there are many touching stories about what happened.

MR TAYEBWA: I am sorry, Madam Speaker, but I approached a few Members of Parliament from the area and we worked with hon. Yeri Ofwono, put her back in primary six and now she has been admitted at Namagunga in Senior One. (Applause)

I emphasise that for purposes of giving the girl-child a second chance where many people would not do it. I have heard colleagues saying that once it happens, take her to skilling. If I had determined that Aya Gloria goes back to weaving or tailoring, she would not be having this chance.

I can assure you that this young girl is going to be a star and we are looking after the child and all is going on well. I felt that I should share that story to emphasise how painful it is. Women should also understand that girls love their fathers more than their mothers. Therefore, men, let us protect our girls. Let us do whatever we can do to protect the girl-child. 

Hon. Opendi and team, I promise you my full support for anything that will protect our children.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I request that you allow - considering the debate that we had – that we amend the prayers and say that in the process of protecting the girl-child, we should also protect the boy-child. When you look at this motion, it came from the minister’s presentation on the Day of the Girl-child. Therefore, we cannot amend the motion but we can amend the prayers in the motion to include the boy-child. I beg to submit and I am sorry for whatever has happened.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Government Chief Whip. Honourable members, there are very many touching stories outside there. We have heard of fathers who sleep with their daughters and of brothers who sleep with their sisters, especially during these COVID-19 times. We, the parents, have moved away from our parenting role and we are not talking to these children – Some order, please. 

We need to take responsibility as parents and talk to both the girls and boys because they are equally important in the community. The moment you talk to the girl alone, the boy will feel rejected and say, let me hurt them. He will go and do harmful things to the girls.

We need to revive sex education. I remember they used to tell us that if you play with the boys, do not do this and that. These pornographic films on televisions are teaching children a lot of things. Can’t we limit them? Can’t UCC do something because our children are at home 24/7?

Honourable members, we will amend the prayers to include all that has been said including the boy-child. What is important is the issue that hon. Ssasaga mentioned; about reusable pads. Girls get stigma of not going to school immediately she gets her periods. They feel that shame and they cannot afford the pads. (Applause) As Government, can’t we provide that? Can’t we have the policies that help Government in all these? A Member said that in the Penal Code Act, the law is very clear on what should be done about rapists and defilers. However, are we implementing it? The cultures must be broken where they say, “The moment you see breasts, then one is ready for marriage.” It is this House to make those rules. 

3.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Sarah Mateke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to thank the movers of this motion and its seconders and also my colleagues for the various issues that you have raised.

I would like to inform this House that things to do with children are multi-sectoral in approach. I would like to commit myself here that we are going to work with the different sectors, both in Government and non-Government, so that we can see how we can address some of these issues.

The boys are also children and equal to the girls but we cannot take it for granted. The girls are more vulnerable than the boys. When you stand here, everybody talks about the teenage pregnancies but no one is talking about those who have impregnated these young girls. From January 2020 to June 2021, we have registered 21,000 defilement cases. Who are these being defiled? They are our girls.

I would like to put it clear that most of the things that Members raised were addressed on the day we were celebrating the International Day of the girl-child at Kololo. Some of the issues were put forward clearly by the Guest of Honour who was the First Lady and Minister of Education and Sports. Other things were raised by my senior minister. 

Madam Speaker, at an appropriate time you will allow me to lay on the Table the speeches that were made that day so that they can add to the motion.

As I conclude, one of the things that we need to address most – (Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable minister for giving way to help me draw this clarification from you. Honourable members, as you may realise that as we all stand up for the girl-child, there is something that is glaring daily. It is something that we have tried to address in every Parliament. I am glad that you are a new minister in this docket.

Every single day as we drive into this city and go home, at every traffic light, there are children. We may be talking about children that we might not see but we see these daily; at Nakulabye, Wandegeya, Jinja Road traffic lights and everywhere. They are either performing child labour, begging or carrying children on their backs.

The point of clarification I am trying to seek from the honourable minister is; when shall the ministry do us a big favour to start fighting this surge? It is very embarrassing to our country. It is the biggest embarrassment. We can talk until cows come back home but everyone will laugh at us saying, “Even near you at Parliament, there are girl-children that are glaring at you as convoys and our beautiful cars pass.” We should start it by ourselves and say, “This must stop now.”

As Parliament, we seek a commitment from you to tell us when this shall not be a scene that embarrasses our country and when it shall stop. Thank you.

MS MATEKE: Thank you. It is very true, we have all seen that. However, I would like to inform this House that there was a programme for resettling the street children. Government released funds and some of these children were taken back. Most of them were from Napak. Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) was the one they gave funds. They took back these children to Napak to our institution called Kobulin, which is in Karamoja –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter here.

MS CECLIA OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the minister since and I think she is wrapping up the debate. Since this is a general debate, I thought the minister was also making a contribution to the motion. Now that she is wrapping up, if you allow me and with the permission of the movers – if the Minister of Health could allow the mover to listen to my amendment to the motion.

Now that the mover is able to listen to us, I would like to move a motion under rule 61 to amend the prayers before the minister wraps up the debate.

I have about two or three proposes for amendment of the prayers. I do appreciate that there are various laws, which are in place already in our statute books but we are just talking about general information. We do not have specific information, which is official that we can lay our hands on and use this debate to make tangible change. It is on that basis that I wish to move that:


    1. The Minister of Education and Sports, after the schools reopen, presents to Parliament comprehensive and detailed reports of how many girl-children have dropped out because of pregnancy. Based on that figure, we can plan as to how we can help a girl-child across the country. What has happened in the North has happened in the South and our girls will need help.
    2. I propose that the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, who is specifically responsible for the girl-child, and I believe the boy-child, to also bring a comprehensive report to the House giving us details of how they have implemented the provisions of the law pertaining to the rights of the girl-child. May we know the challenges that the Government is experiencing, which is making it difficult for the various laws to be implemented? To all these things we are talking about, there are laws in our statutory books that take care of genital mutilation.
We have laws against rape and various – (Interjections)– Madam Speaker, protect me from the boys. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected. 	Please, conclude.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the House should expect a comprehensive report from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

Finally, I propose that the Attorney-General, who can coordinate the various agencies, presents a comprehensive report on the status of the practical implementation of the Penal Code, which we already have in place. I am coming up with this amendment because I would like us not to just debate and stir up Motion and lament. We should move from reading the Book of Lamentations to reading the Book of Revelation, where the girl-child will feel a difference from this debate. 

Madam Speaker, we can make a tangible debate and take decisions based on facts as well as reasonable and well-researched information. That is why I am requesting the various ministries and agencies to bring to this Parliament information that we can base our debate on and plan accordingly. All this debate must be translated into budgetary provisions so that we can ensure that the relevant ministries implement the laws and we make a change. 

Before I close, I would like to say that I tried to call the girl child that had dropped out of school in Dokolo. I was shocked that not only was the girl breastfeeding but she came pregnant, again. 

I beg to move that I get guidance from the movers of this Motion whether the various amendments I have moved are acceptable. (Member rose_) I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister in charge of Children, she was submitting on a procedural point. She wanted an amendment on the prayers. It is basically that. I know you want to raise a point of procedure on whether it was right for her to debate once the ruling was made. It is on the final amendment – they are amending the prayers. 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, in the same spirit of hon. Ogwal, I think it is just one record that we need to correct in the proposal of amending the prayer to have a comprehensive list of girls that have dropped out of school as a result of pregnancy.

I think we did not need to go to the stage of dropping out of school since the schools have not reopened. We need the list of those that have been victims and the steps being taken by the Government to help them as a result of that predicament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We should probably get the list for us to budget and support those affected girls. It is not just getting the list. We need an action on this so that we are able to know how many people we are budgeting for in terms of skilling. Can you conclude?  

MS MATEKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In conclusion, I would like to inform my colleagues that Government is committed to the issues of the girl-child. 

I also request you to be the ambassadors to protect the issue of parenting. We even have a parenting policy in place and we can give you copies. Let us respect the families and put parenting first, starting with us. All this will be resolved. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. Let us be an example. It should not be that when you leave Parliament here, Macho will go to a bar and go back home at midnight. The children do not know you and the next day they will start calling you Uncle. Do you see that kind of thing? (Laughter) Start with parenting. 

Honourable minister, we need action on these matters. Let this not remain on paper and debate in this House. If you need resources, we need to budget for this because this is tomorrow’s generation. If we leave these children to get wasted, then we do not have a good Uganda. Bring the analysis and we budget for it and have this sorted out. A girl is a precious kid, just like a boy. 

I now put the question that the Motion for a resolution of Parliament urging the Government to address challenges facing the girl-child and children in general in the digital era be adopted by this House, plus its amendments. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
Motion adopted.

MS OPENDI:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to thank the boys and girls in this House for the support for this Motion. 

We look forward to the detailed report from the ministries of education and gender because this report was conducted by FAWE. When the schools open, we can definitely be able to get even more data on how many girls have dropped out of school and how many dropped out due to pregnancy and child marriages. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

MR MACHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas we are discussing for the betterment of the girl-child, I am happy that there is massive empowerment of women in this country.  We are leading in that aspect in the whole of Africa. 

Three weeks ago, I raised an issue on the Floor of Parliament concerning the Shs 5 billion in the Office of the Prime Minister. You ruled that the information should be brought so that we know what is happening. However, the time has surpassed and we are seeing wars on social media. There are a lot of complaints by the Minister in charge of Relief and Disaster Preparedness. I believe this is the temple of legislation, where Ugandans can get to know and hear what has gone wrong so that these issues are settled. 

Although some people call our Cabinet fishermen and women, in Busia, the fishermen and women do not fight in water but in the boat. Madam Speaker, I would, therefore, like to know whether we are proceeding well when there is a war outside, which would have been solved in-house. 

I believe when the retired UK Prime Minister, Tony Blair, hears what happens here, he may run and die. I do not know whether we are proceeding well, Madam Speaker. 
 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are actually proceeding very well. (Laughter) The matter is on the Order Paper; check item 10. So, do not smuggle in something. Your issue will come and you cannot say it is far. It is the Speaker who manages the Order Paper and the Speaker is talking. Therefore, you go by the Speaker’s ruling. Next item.

STATEMENT BY MINISTERS ON COMPENSATION OF VICTIMS OF THE LORD'S RESISTANCE ARMY AND THE NATIONAL RESISTANCE ARMY INSURGENCY IN VARIOUS PARTS OF THE COUNTRY

3.59
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, I would like to request for a small breather. I am still collecting data and information from the sub-regions and so, I request that you give me at least one week within which I can present a comprehensive report. [Several Members rose]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this business of you going away whenever matters that concern you have been handled - Why don't you wait for the House to end? Yes, point of procedure, honourable member.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Whereas we welcome the prayers by the Deputy Attorney-General on this matter, I would like to inform you and the House that it is now more than a month without us having any activity regarding this matter being conducted by the Office of the Attorney-General.

The Attorney-General had promised that he would be meeting us, Members of Parliament from the different regions, at regional and district levels and there are committees that were put in place. However, the Office of the Attorney-General went mute. He does not even respond. We created a Whatsapp group to communicate but he went mute all of a sudden. 

This is a very serious matter that I feel the Deputy Attorney-General is overwhelmed with. He went to Lira alone because he was the only officer from the Office of Attorney-General there. In fact, he moved alone. He did not even move with an assistant; not even a technical person to support him.

Madam Speaker, it is at this moment - (Interjection) – let me take information from hon. Ojara PP and then my sister briefly.

MR OKIN: Thank you, hon. Jonathan Odur, for allowing me to give more information. Yes, you said that this matter has taken more than a month without it being handled but I want to say that it has taken more than 10 years. 

Especially in the Acholi sub-region, we have had situations where the Acholi war claimants were actually awarded costs in 2003, if I am not mistaken. However, from 2003 up to date, the Attorney-General is still asking for more time to handle these compensations. Madam Speaker, I think the Attorney-General has to get more serious because this matter has lagged behind for q a number of years. 

Otherwise, I just wanted to give you the information that this matter has taken more than the time you have actually mentioned; it has taken more than 10 years and so, it is overdue and needs to be addressed.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you very much hon. PP. Okin Ojara. My Woman Member of Parliament, the hon. Linda Auma, please give me information briefly before I conclude. (Laughter)

MS LINDA AUMA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am surprised. Hon. Jonathan Odur has now hijacked the powers of the Speaker of the House. You know, honourable members – Hon. Linda Auma, please give your information. (Laughter)

MS LINDA AUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Jonathan Odur, for allowing me the opportunity to give information to this Parliament in regard to what the Attorney-General said about the timeframe pertaining to these compensations.

We have been interacting with the Attorney-General at various levels. However, it should be made clear that the Attorney-General's Office is not serious. The data he is collecting is already in the courts of law. In addition, on several occasions, even in the Tenth Parliament, the Attorney-General’s Office told this Parliament that it was still collecting data. 

The Government of Uganda has been spending a lot of money on the Attorney-General’s Office to go for this verification but nothing good has come to this Parliament. I would request that the Attorney-General gets serious this time. The Attorney-General is supposed to be the legal adviser to the Government of Uganda but not to confuse it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are now debating the matter. The Attorney-General has just asked for one week - hon. Jonathan Odur and hon. Santa Okot, please sit down. You know, you cannot give what you do not have. He does not have the information and he is asking for one week. Let us give him that week.

4.06
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A week ago, I spent a good deal of time in Acholi land visiting the communities and listening to the elders. I would like to tell my brother, the learned Attorney-General that while he is probably the fifth Attorney-General to handle this matter, the voices of the people in that area are very compelling. We have every reason, as leaders in this country, to act with sincerity and sensitivity. (Applause)

Whereas I see no reason to deny the Attorney-General the one week requested, probably he should be given another minute to explain what he is going to come back with. This will let Members go home with a fair spirit that on coming back, after the one week, the deliverables will be as per the expectations. Otherwise, I have no reason to deny him that one week but with a ridar that we get to understand the contents upon his return. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much but note that what you may get from Attorney-General, as a deliverable in one week, may not be conclusive. He does not work alone; he has to work with the Ministries of Finance and that of Local Government. 

I do not want this House to be lied to; he will not fulfil what he will tell you. However, you are putting pressure on him yet he does not work in isolation because it is an inter-ministerial activity. So, he is saying that let us give him one week. You are coming back next Wednesday to report to this House on whether you have paid at least two people or not because continuing to talk about this thing of compensation – I gave my personal advice. I told you to go on ground and sort out this issue and I am still emphasising on that. 
The moment you do not come back here with that, then we shall leave you to the House. (Laughter)

MR KAFUUZI: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATE OF HEALTHCARE SERVICE DELIVERY IN UGANDA AND THE BUDGET IMPLICATIONS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter there.

MR MUWUMA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I was moving on a procedural matter, before the Attorney-General gave way. Instead of handling this matter piece-meal - because the statement is to do with LRA and NRA victims –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Milton MUWUMA, can we handle that next week?

MR MUWUMA: No. Madam Speaker, I am very compliant and agree with you, but the procedural matter I wanted to raise on this matter is to do with the Alkene victims also being brought at the same time, instead of us handling it piece-meal. That is my procedural matter.

Madam Speaker, yesterday, we were in Iganga with the minister in charge of Luweero Triangle. We raised this matter before her. She told us that –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the procedural matter you are raising, hon. MUWUMA?

MR MUWUMA: Madam Speaker, the procedural matter is that as we agree with receiving the report next week, can we add the issue of Alkene and UPA victims and we handle it comprehensively, instead of us engaging in piece-meal. That is, it, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Health?

4.10
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

In the month of July this year, you directed the Ministry of Health to make a comprehensive statement on the state of public healthcare service delivery in Uganda and the budgetary implications. 

Allow me, first of all, to thank Parliament for the interest and commitment in improving healthcare service delivery, as this will go a long way in contributing to the goal of the health sector, which is universal health coverage by 2030 –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, this report was uploaded on your iPads; so the minister may not read it page by page. She will make a summary because it is presumed you have gone through it.

DR. ACENG: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the guidance. I was saying that this will go a long way in contributing to the goal of the health sector, which is universal health coverage by 2030, in line with the Sustainable Development Goal 3. 

My statement will focus on key areas and they will be:
    i. Service delivery;
    ii. Status of hospitals; 
    iii. District health infrastructure construction;
    iv. Medical equipment;
    v. Emergency medical services;
    vi. Human resources;
    vii. Supervision and monitoring service delivery;
    viii. Pharmaceutical services and health commodities; 
    ix. Disease surveillance and epidemic control and response;
    x. Laboratory services and 
    xi. A summary of the major challenges.

In that respect, I request that you allow me to skip the background and move straight to service delivery.

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Health Service Standards provide for seven levels of health service delivery and these are:
    1. Specialised hospitals;
    2. National Referral Hospitals;
    3. Regional Referral Hospitals;
    4. General Hospitals;
    5. Health Centre IVs;
    6. Health Centre IIIs and 
    7. The Village Health Teams.
The existing health centre IIs in sub-counties without health centre IIIs are being upgraded to health centre IIIs, while new health centre IIIs will be constructed in sub-counties without any health facility.

In addition, sub-counties, divisions and town councils with populations of above 20,000 or difficult terrains will be considered for two health centre IIIs. The health centre IIs that do not fall in this category will be used as outposts for the village health teams.

Madam Speaker, I have given a table there, showing the health service delivery standard. The target is the number of population, number of beds required at the level, the staffing norms and the healthcare services provided at all levels up to the health centres.

I will now go to the hospitals. Currently, there are 72 functional public hospitals. They include five specialised hospitals, five national referral hospitals, all located in Kampala, 16 regional referral hospitals and 46 functional general hospitals.

To address the specialised hospitals, we have Mulago Specialised Hospital, Mulago Women and Neonatal Specialised Hospital, Uganda Cancer Institute, Uganda Heart Institute and Children’s Surgical Hospital, which will be commissioned this Friday by His Excellency, the President.

The rehabilitation and equipping of Lower Mulago Hospital is still ongoing, affected by several challenges. The current progress is at 95 per cent. COVID-19 pandemic interrupted the construction works at the hospital, as we had to use the intensive care unit.

The 450-bed Specialised Women’s Hospital is functional but with challenges of inadequate funding and inadequate staffing, due to lack of specialists and this affects the delivery of services. 

Uganda Cancer Institute and Uganda Heart Institute are also constrained by lack of funds and inadequate human resources. 

Under a Public-Private Partnership arrangement, the Children’s Surgical Hospital was constructed in Entebbe. It was completed in April 2021. It provides free pediatric surgical services to the nation and the East African region. 

It is currently being run by Emergency, which is an NGO, in conjunction with Government. Emergency will run it for 10 years, thereafter it will be handed over to Government. Currently, Government provides counterpart funding of 20 per cent of the operational costs.

I will not go through the National Referral Hospitals. On regional referral hospitals, they are 16 in number and they provide services to a catchment population of between 2 to 2.5 million people.

Aware that the population in different sub-regions increases yearly, this necessitates the upgrading of some general hospitals to regional referral hospitals. The Ministry of Health will continuously evaluate the needs for the region and population statistics and address this, based on availability of funds.

Madam Speaker, there is a table there, showing the regional referral hospital, its catchment population and the districts served. There are remarks there. In the remarks section, you can see number three, Hoima serves a population of 2.8 million people. So, there is need to upgrade a general hospital in that area to decongest. 

Similarly, Jinja Hospital serves a population of 4.3 million. That region needs a regional referral hospital to decongest. 

The Fort Portal Region needs a regional referral hospital to decongest the area. We have identified the areas by mapping and seeing accessibility.

In Mbale region, there is need for a regional referral hospital. 

In Mbarara region, there is need for a regional referral hospital to decongest. 

Entebbe, which is in Wakiso, also needs another hospital to decongest.

There is need for funding for expansion and renovation of Soroti and Jinja Regional Referral Hospitals, which have very poor infrastructure. 

A total of Shs 20.7 billion was allocated to the 15 regional referral hospitals and Bombo Hospital this financial year for procurement of CT Scans. The procurement process is ongoing and then engineering department of the Ministry of Health has been assessing the hospitals’ infrastructure for installation of the CT Scans.

We take note here that the assessment report indicates that there is urgent need for Shs 8 billion for construction, remodelling of some of the infrastructure if we are to have the CT Scans installed. Money was provided for CT Scans for regional referral hospitals but not for the infrastructure where we are supposed to install the CT Scans. 

The major challenges affecting service delivery at the regional referral hospitals are inadequate human resources, especially specialists, inadequate staff accommodation, dilapidated structures, lack of structures for intensive care unit equipment, old and obsolete medical equipment and high utility bills.

I will now move to the general hospitals. Currently, there are 46 functional public hospitals and I have attached these as Annex I. Government commenced the construction of Bukwo and Buwenge General Hospitals in 2008. These have not been completed up to date. Funding is not being provided.

Under the Uganda Health Systems Strengthening Project, funded by a World Bank loan, this was between 2011 to 2016, nine hospitals: Mityana, Nakaseke, Kiryandongo, Entebbe Grade B, Nebbi, Anaka, Iganga, Moyo and Moroto Regional Referral Hospitals were renovated, equipped and handed over in June 2017.

Kawolo Hospital has been renovated and expanded and it is due for commissioning. Rehabilitation of Busolwe Hospital is commencing this financial year. 
Government has been putting in effort to improve the following hospitals through provisions of development funds: - Let me quickly say here that the development fund amounts are quite little - Adjumani, Apac, Atutur, Bududa, Bundibugyo, Entebbe Grade A, Gombe, Kabarole, Kagadi, Kalisizo, Kambuga, Katakwi, Kiboga, Kyenjojo, Lyantonde, Masindi, Pallisa and Tororo. However, this was inadequate as most of the infrastructure including staff houses is very old and dilapidated. 

In the National Development Plan III of 2020 to 2025, the Ministry of Health plans to renovate and equips 17 General Hospitals including Abim, Apac, Atutur, Bugiri, Bundibugyo, Iganga, Itojo, Gombe, Kagadi, Kambuga, Kiboga, Kitagata, Kitgum, Kyenjojo, Lyantonde, Pallisa and Masindi. 

The estimated cost for major renovation and reequipping such hospitals is Shs 30 billion for each hospital. This translates into Shs 410 billion. It is to be carried out in a phased manner once resources are made available.

I will now move to district health infrastructure construction. Currently, there is a high demand to establish hospitals in every district. While this contradicts the WHO guidance and the Ministry of Health Service Standards, which recommends a general hospital for every 500,000 population, the National Hospital Census 2016 showed that each general hospital was serving a population of 230,000 people, which is about half of the recommended number of 500,000 per hospital. The hospitals need to be made fully functional to serve at the recommended capacity.

His Excellency the President directed that each district should have a general hospital and each constituency a Health Centre IV and each subcounty a Health Centre III. 

In line with the above directive, an analysis was carried out by the Ministry of Health and I have provided a table to that effect. In that table, if we look at the general hospitals serving 5,000 population, the number of health facilities is 159. Currently, we have 46 Government hospitals, 69 for PNFP, 44 are private, local governments without a Government facility are 74 and the number of health facilities to be constructed and upgraded would be 74. 

A total of 74 districts do not have a public or a Government hospital. However, 15 of these have a PNFP hospital and that is Agago, Amudat, Bushenyi, Ibanda, Kalungu, Kiruhura, Maracha, Mayuge, Mpigi, Napak, Ngora, Oyam, Rukungiri and Zombo. These facilities are receiving primary health care grants from the Government. I have attached this as Annex II.

Due to the difficult geographical terrain in some regions, access challenges and a growing population, Government will consider construction of hospitals in districts without in a phased manner. Priority will be given to districts that deserve special attention because of their geographical location like the island districts of Buvuma and Kalangala and those with a high population greater than 300,000 which include Isingiro, Kakumiro, Kassanda, Kikuube, Oyam, Buyende, Mayuge, Mpigi, Serere, Rukungiri, Namutumba, Luuka, Ssembabule, Wakiso, Bukwo and Buwenge. 

The estimated cost for construction and equipping is Shs70 billion per hospital. The total cost for 70 hospitals would be Shs5,180,000,000,000. The recurrent cost including wage and non-wage, recurrent medicines required per hospital per annum would be about Shs 3.8 billion. 

So, should Government construct all the 74 general hospitals, this would translate into Shs235. 3 billion recurrent cost per annum. I have attached the table there, which shows the cost of infrastructure, the cost of equipment and the total cost for the 74 general hospitals, which is Shs7,180,000,000,000 and subsequently, the recurrent cost required to maintain the hospitals. 

Allow me to move to Health Centre IVs. The ministry is committed to having a functional Health Centre IV in all the 353 constituencies. Currently, there are 167 public health centres IV in 161 constituencies. Six constituencies (Buliisa – Buliisa Health Centre IV and Biso Health Centre IV; Jinja North Division – Budondo and Bugembe health centres IV; Bubulo West – Bubulo and Bugobero health centres IV; Ntoroko – Karugutu and Rwebisengo health centres IV; Rukiga – Mparo and Kamwezi health centres IV; Rujumbura – Bugangari and Buhunga health centres IV) have two health centres IV each. Furthermore, 62 constituencies have hospitals, leaving 135 constituencies without health centres IV. I have attached this as Annex 3.

Most of the existing health centres IV have inadequate infrastructure and require upgrade to enable them function fully. 

The estimated cost for construction and equipping of a health centre IV is Shs l3 billion. The total cost for 135 health centres IV would be Shs 1.755 trillion. The current operational cost, including wage, non-wage recurrent and medicines required, per health centre IV per annum is Shs 644 million. Should the Government construct all the 135 health centres IV, this would translate to Shs 86.94 billion per annum. 

Of note, staff restructuring is ongoing and the costs for these facilities may change accordingly. 

Construction of the health centre IV can be carried out in a phased manner based on population, geographical access and availability of resources.

Madam Speaker, I have provided Table 5 for the estimated cost for development and the recurrent cost for 135 health centres IV. I will not go through the table.

Subcounties without health centres III

The Government policy is to have a health centre III in every sub county. Currently, there are 2,184 sub counties, town councils and divisions. Of these, 1,202 have public health centres III, 325 have PNFP (private-not-for-profit) health centres III, while 982 sub counties, town councils and divisions do not have health centres III.

A total of 331 health centres II in sub counties without health centres III were targeted for upgrade to health centres III in 2018. A total of 158 health centres II were completed in the Financial Year 2018/2019 and Financial Year 2019/2020, under the Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfer Reform Programme. The remaining 173 are being upgraded in a phased manner, under various programmes such as UgIFT, URMCHIP and Karamoja Infrastructure Development Project.

Madam Speaker, on construction and equipping health centres III, currently there are 982 sub counties and town councils without any health facility. Out of the 982 subcounties, only 12 have been allocated funds under the UgIFT programme this financial year and seven under the Karamoja Infrastructure Development Project, phase two. There is therefore need to mobilise resources for the remaining 963 sub counties. 

In May 2020, the Ministry of Health submitted a request to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for funding for the construction of 134 health centres III in sub counties without any health facility. We are still waiting for the response. 

The estimated cost for construction and equipping of a health centre III is Shs 2.75 billion, hence the total cost for the remaining 963 health centres III is Shs 2.6 trillion. The Ministry of Health will continuously update the health facility inventory to capture newly upgraded health facilities and develop a comprehensive plan for upgrading and constructing new facilities.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of staff houses, since 2015, more than 500 staff housing units have been put up at different hospitals and health centres. For the ongoing upgrade of the health centres II to health centres III and construction of health centres III, two twin-staff houses will be provided to ensure that the critical staff are accommodated and available at all times. There is need to provide accommodation for health workers in all health facilities in the country as it promotes attraction and retention.

Medical equipment

Madam Speaker, most health facilities are functioning below expected standards due to lack of basic equipment and utilities. According to the findings of the 2018 National Service Availability and Readiness Assessment conducted in 166 health facilities across the country, 18 per cent of the health facilities lack a power source, 27 per cent did not have improved water source, mean availability of functional medical equipment was 37 per cent – [Mr Macho rose] 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Macho, why don’t you leave the minister to finish her report?

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure because the honourable minister is presenting while her colleagues in the Cabinet have totally boycotted listening to her report. Out of 84 ministers in Uganda, we have only four seated in the august House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We restricted the number of Members to be in this House.

MR MACHO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Today the issue is on health and I can see the Ministers of Health here. We have an issue on security and I have seen the ministers here. The Minister of Internal Affairs is here. Therefore, can we just finish the report?

DR ACENG: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am on the issue of X-rays, on page 23. Up to 47 per cent of hospitals do not have functional X-ray machines and for those that have, more than 70 per cent are obsolete. With support from the Global Fund, the Ministry of Health procured and distributed digital X-ray machines to Kaabong, Bududa, Kamuli, Katakwi hospitals and Rwekubo Health Centre IV in Isingiro District. There is urgent need to procure X-ray machines for all the old and new hospitals without them. One digital X-ray machine costs Shs 600 million. 

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Health plans to establish a mechanism for national, regional and general hospitals to acquire automated equipment on placement basis where the Government will only pay for reagents while the vendors carry out maintenance and replacement of damaged and obsolete equipment. We believe that this will eliminate the current system where equipment is extremely expensive, breaks down, incurs huge maintenance costs and causes many interruptions in service delivery. 

Madam Speaker, I will not go through the regional equipment maintenance workshops. I request Members to read. Allow me to go to emergency medical services, as it addresses the ambulance systems.

The establishment of a functional ambulance system is one of the top priorities of the ministry. Prior to the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, there were 178 ambulances across the country against an overall national need of 460 ambulances.

As part of the COVID-19 preparedness and response plan, 120 additional ambulances were acquired through procurements by Government of Uganda and from loan offered by the World Bank, development partners and donations from Japan, India, China and the business community. These have been deployed according to our policy of regional ambulance system.

Under the Regional Ambulance System, 20 to 30 ambulances are managed under one call and dispatch centre to ease coordination, maintenance, control and accessibility. This will change the management of ambulances from being health facility-based to a regionalised system coordinated at the 14 regional call and dispatch centres, which are the regional hospitals. These will be responsible for fuelling and maintenance of the ambulances.
 
The first national ambulance station with a call centre is currently near completion at Naguru National Emergency and Trauma Centre. The ministry is working with the Uganda Police and Uganda Communications Commission to functionalise the 911 medical emergency universal access number.

The ministry has also established a highway road traffic accident response system in partnership with the Uganda Red Cross.

In respect to capacity building, 860 lay fast responders have been trained in Kampala and Masaka to respond to emergencies. Four hundred sixty professional health workers have been trained in basic emergency care. Among these, 233 were in addition, trained in providing care to COVID-19 patients while in transit. 

To strengthen the emergency medical service system, the Ministry of Health provided scholarships for the training of emergency physicians and emergency medical technicians at Mbarara and Makerere universities and Lubaga Health Training Institute. 

Five emergency physicians have qualified and are ready for recruitment and deployment. However, we need the Ministry of Public Service to capture this in the structure.

The Ministry of Health’s plan is to have each regional ambulance coordination centre responsible for 20-30 type B basic life support emergency care ambulances aiming at one type B ambulance per 100,000 population - that is at a constituency level – and one type C (intensive care ambulance) per two million population.

Fifteen boat ambulances have been planned for the islands and five aeromedical type C ambulances, in the long term. Those are that aeroplanes. 

Table six shows the ambulance requirement and gap per region. When you look at the regions, for example Masaka Region, which is number two on the table, you notice that the under number of local governments is 10. The population is over two million. The ambulances required would be 25; type B, 20 and type C, five. The new ones that we currently have are 10 but they require 15.

I can pick another region; Fort Portal: the number of local governments is 10 and the population is 3.3 million. They would require 34 ambulances in their region; 33 type B and one type C. The currently have three new ones and the gap is 31.

I will not conclude the table. I will request Members to go through it.

In 2019, an ambulance census was conducted and it established that there were 178 Government ambulances and another 172 private ambulances from Private-not-for-profit hospitals (PNFPs), NGOs and Members of Parliament. However, most of these did not meet the norms and standards of an ambulance. 

The 178 Government ambulances will be phased off and replaced by the new type B ambulances that meet the set standards of an ambulance. Based on this, and as seen in the table above, the Ministry of Health can report that the country has a gap of 340 ambulances. 

There are new hospitals that were upgraded to regional referrals after the strategy was developed. These are Kayunga and Yumbe. The mapping out of the catchment areas and preparations to set up call centres is ongoing. The ambulance requirements will be communicated.

The gap of the 340 ambulances include 315 type B road ambulances, 20 type C road and marine ambulances and five type C aeromedical ambulances.

Other areas that need to be addressed include inadequate operational funds for ambulance response, inadequate skilled human resource for emergency and critical care and the establishment of the 14 regional call and dispatch centres.

Each type B ambulance costs Shs 280 million. Therefore, a total of Shs 88.2 billion will be required to procure them. And additional Shs 11.4 billion will be required to procure the 20 type C road ambulances. The costs for the five type C aeromedical ambulances are being worked out. 

We further submitted a cot of Shs 3.4 billion to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for setting up one national and two regional call and dispatch centres to start. We are still waiting.

Table seven gives a summary of the estimated ambulance needs in the country by service area and region. In the interest of time, I will not go through it.

Page 30 is on human resources. The staffing norms in the public sector were established in 1995 and revised in 2006 but are not adequate to effectively respond to the service needs, which have changed due to rapid population growth and changing disease burden. Overall, the staffing level in the public health facilities is at 65 per cent.

I have provided a table, which gives the number of facilities, established norms, filled positions, gaps and vacancy rates.

Madam Speaker, the Ministry Of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provided additional Shs 40 billion for Primary Health care wage Grant to the Local Government in this financial year 2021/2022, which will enable recruitment of up to 2,500 health workers. This has been allocated as follows:

    i) Shs 27.2 billion for recruitment of health workers in the least staffed health facilities to uplift staffing levels to an average of 75 per cent of the staffing norms;

    ii) Shs 10.6 billion for the recruitment of health workers in the newly upgraded health centres III. Each upgraded health centre III is expected to recruit a minimum of 10 additional Health Workers;

    iii) Furthermore, Shs 2.3 billion has been allocated for recruitment of health workers in 15 refugee serving health facilities that have been transitioned into Government facilities. These health facilities are expected to recruit up to 100 per cent of the staffing norms.

In the financial year 2018/2019, Government increased salaries for medical personnel. This attracted and motivated some health workers though there are still challenges in attracting specialists. 

I have provided a table showing the salary enhancement for health workers effected in in the financial year 2018/2019. It is still far below the proposed enhancement to attract and retain health workers in Uganda. 
Madam Speaker, I request that I do not go through the table details. 

Whereas there are improvements in staffing levels, there are still shortages in critical cadres such as doctors at 51 per cent, Anesthetic officers at only 30 per cent, Dispensers at 44 per cent, Pharmacists (50 per cent), Theatre Staff at 32 per cent. The cadre in the public sector with the largest numbers of unfilled vacancies of all health workers are the medical specialists, in particular the Physicians, Internal Medicine, Community Medicine, Anesthesia and Orthopedic Surgery. 

The proportion of unfilled vacancies for specialised and super specialised cadres in the public sector is at 70 per cent. The health workforce requirement for the public sector has been projected based on the current norms and I have provided it in Annex 10. That table gives the cadre speciality, the numbers in post, estimated five-year gap and what we need to do up to 2025 for us to fill in the positions. 

Training 

The Ministry of Health has costed 10-year health sector training plan for 2021-2030, which is not adequately funded. Over the last four years, the ministry has awarded several scholarships: 

    i) A total of 721 scholarships were awarded to health workers under the URMCHIP Project; 39 for Bachelor of Anesthesia because that was the cadre list in supply, 29 for Bachelor in Bio-Medical Engineering, 101 for Diploma in Anesthesia and 173 for Certificate in Theatre Techniques, among others.  

    ii) One hundred and eighty-three students were sponsored to pursue different courses in cancer-related disciplines, including 14 specialist Oncology fellowships and 10 PhDs. 

    iii) Mulago Specialised Women Hospital was allocated Shs 500 million for training of Embryologists and Neonatologists so that we can functionalise Invitro Fertilisation services. 

    iv) This financial year, the ministry has allocated Shs 403 million for scholarships to facilitate training of critical cadres targeting 10 Anesthesiologists, 12 Intensivists, 400 critical care nurses and other cadres in the country. 

    v) The Ministry of Health offers scholarships for training of specialists annually. On average, 20 specialists are awarded scholarships annually. 

However, it is important to note that the above numbers remain very few compared to the country needs. It is, therefore, imperative that more resources are committed to train specialists in the subsequent years. 

Madam Speaker, with your permission, allow me to skip the issue of reducing absenteeism and negligence of duty and I move to pharmaceutical services and health commodities on page 36.   

Government has been gradually increasing the budget allocation for essential medicines over the last five financial years from Shs 219 billion in the Financial Year 2015/2016 to Shs 387 billion in the Financial Year 2019/2020. There is still a chronic shortage of laboratory reagents, supplies and equipment for all hospitals and health centres and a high dependency on donor funding for management of HIV/AIDS and TB. 

The available Government of Uganda funding for essential medicines and health supplies is Shs 9,285 per capita, of which, 36 per cent is for antiretroviral drugs. This is far below the recommended $12 (Shs 44,000 per capita). Development partners contribute up to 64 per cent of the funding for medicines and this is mainly for antiretroviral drugs for HIV testing kits, TB drugs, antimalarials and reproductive health commodities. 

The projected funding gap for essential medicines and health supplies, over the period 2020-2025 is $1,000,851 or Shs 5.7 trillion. There is an urgent need to increase Government funding for medicines and health supplies. 

Beginning Financial Year 2018/2019, a medicines credit line was established at the Joint Medical Stores for private not-for-profit health facilities. This constitutes 50 per cent of the primary health care grant subvention to the PNFP health facilities and has increased from Shs 7.4 billion in the Financial Year 2018/2019 to Shs 14 billion in the Financial Year 2019/2020. It has gone a long way in improving service delivery in the PNFP subsector. 

To improve storage of medicines, 19 medicine stores were constructed in districts that did not have. These were in Ntoroko, Zombo, Nakaseke, Buikwe, Luuka, Pallisa, Serere, Napak, Nakapiripirit, Bukwo, Alebtong, Agago, Lwengo, Lyantonde, Isingiro, Buhweju, Sheema, Rubirizi and Buliisa with support from GAVI.  
In addition, the National Medical Stores is constructing a new warehouse with a drive-in vaccine store at Kajjansi with support from the Global Fund and GAVI and locally generated revenue. This will increase the capacity of pallet positions from the current 8,000 to 20,000. 

To curb loss and wastage of medicine, the National Medical Stores introduced the last mile delivery of medicines, which are witnessed by the GISO representatives of the health unit management committee, internal auditor and health unit in charge. 

In addition, the community has been sensitised on the embossment of medicines to check on theft and discourage pilferage. The ministry is also scaling up the e-logistics management information system at health facility level to enhance traceability and accountability of essential medicines and health supplies. This will be linked with the enterprise resource planning system of the National Medical Stores. 

Madam Speaker, I request that I skip the section on disease surveillance and epidemic control without forgetting to say that the major challenge of control of epidemics is lack of a dedicated budget line. All epidemics are managed through requests for supplementary funding which has a lengthy process and impairs timely planning. We have all witnessed this during this COVID-19 season. 

Laboratory services 

The health sector has fairly adequate laboratory infrastructure from national to health centre III level. However, challenges of human resources, equipment and supplies still exist. 

At the national level, there are three major specialised reference laboratories. We have the National Public Health Laboratory at Butabika, the National Tuberculosis Reference Laboratory and the Uganda Virus Research Institute Laboratory. 

To improve efficiency, the ministry selected 100 laboratories strategically located throughout the country and designated them as hubs. A transport system was designed around the hubs to collect samples from different health facilities and deliver them to the hubs for testing and remission of results is through the same system. This is the system that has been supporting the country. However, the sector will require Shs 62 billion for laboratory equipment and Shs 2,508 billion annually to avert the chronic shortage of laboratory reagents supplies and equipment for all hospitals and health facilities. 


Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by reiterating the major challenges in the health sector. These are:

    i) The shortage of critical cadres, specialists, anaesthetic officers, dispensers, pharmacists and theatre staff.

    ii) Inadequate financing to the sector.

    iii)  The increasing number of local governments, which necessitates additional funding for setting up infrastructure and functional district health management system.

    iv)  Dilapidated health infrastructure that requires refurbishment and re-equipping.

    v)  Inadequate medical equipment at all levels of care with low maintenance capacity and inadequate funding for the original equipment maintenance workshops.

    vi)  Lack of proper imaging equipment like the CT scans, MRIs, X-rays and ultrasound machines.

    vii) A number of districts and constituencies do not have hospitals and health centre IVs to improve access to comprehensive emergency obstetric and neonatal care services. Furthermore, the existing health centre IVs are not fully functional due to poor or inadequate health infrastructure.

    viii) There is lack of adequate staff accommodation.

    ix)  Inadequate funding for establishment of the national ambulance service system.

    x) There is need to strengthen community health extension workforce at the village health level as frontline teams for community health. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable Minister of Health, for the comprehensive report. It is also good that you are bringing it during budgeting time so we should be able to capture a number of things that have been mentioned. 

We appreciate and we know all the challenges that you are going through. Therefore, we need to ensure that we capture the challenges and make budgetary provision for them so that we have the health sector improved. Members, you have heard a report. Do you have anything that you want to say? 

5.00
MR MAPENDUZI OJARA (Independent, Bardege-Layibi Division, Gulu City): Madam Speaker, I would like to begin by thanking very sincerely the honourable minister for giving a detailed but also very honest report to this Parliament. 

In the report, the honourable minister touches on many things but I would like to just touch on two things. She talked about the staffing levels and I would like to give the example of Gulu Regional Referral Hospital. The regional referral hospital is supposed to have four senior consultants and 14 consultants but there is none and it goes on. 

This is not just only in Gulu but runs across the country. However, there is even a bigger problem. When you look at what the honourable minister states in the report, she says that right now, the senior consultants are paid about Shs 7.3 million.  

The Government is failing to attract senior consultants because when you look at how other institutions are paying them, it is different. When you look at the example of universities, they pay senior consultants about Shs 17 million. At the regional referral level or at the ministry’s level, they are paid Shs 7.3 million with a difference of almost 10 million. It becomes extremely difficult to attract, recruit and retain such cadres. 

My suggestion is that maybe the ministry needs to look at the possibility of recruiting consultants - If it is extremely expensive to deploy them in all the regional referral hospitals, you can employ one that can serve Gulu Regional Referral Hospital and Lira, then you employ another one for West Nile. However, places like Karamoja can have one each. That can take us a long way. 

Secondly and finally, Madam Speaker, there is even a bigger problem in as far as mental health is concerned. Right now, the mental health doctors or psychiatrists that we have in this country are not more than 50. Actually, when you look at the ratio, it is as if one psychiatrist is serving 1 million Ugandans. I think that is not fair. 

In addition, when you look at the level of funding, the amount of money that is being given to the mental health component is just about 01 per cent of the total budget of the health sector. I think it is important that this Parliament gives what it takes for the Ministry of Health to perform satisfactorily and continue saving lives. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us give each Member two minutes.

5.03
MS MARGARET MAKHOHA (Independent, Woman Representative, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to take the opportunity to appreciate the minister for the good statement. 

However, I have a concern on page 17 where she mentions some of the districts with geographical discomfort. She mentions Buvuma and Kalangala among the islands. I want to bring it to the attention of the minister that Namayingo is also among those districts on islands. We have Dolwe Island without a health centre III. It was recently upgraded from health centre II to III but with no equipment, no staffing and no beddings. Even the medicine taken there is for a health centre II. 

Therefore, if we leave out Namayingo from getting a district hospital, it will be unfair. We have different islands and those people need your service. 

It is my request that as you plan for the district hospitals, you should not ignore Namayingo because we are a hard–to-reach area bordering Tanzania and Kenya and with islands which are very distant from one another. Therefore, Madam Speaker, it is my humble request that this House considers Namayingo for a district hospital.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Margret that will be captured. That is the Woman MP of Namayingo which is also an island.

5.05
MS AGNES TAAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the status report. I wish there were more words to describe the status of the hospitals in this country. When you reach Bugiri Hospital, you actually get sicker. We have the report but how I wish the minister gave us a plan showing how they are going to renovate those hospitals or expand per year. However, the status is as it is and yet every time the budget comes, they are shown as unfunded priorities. 

Madam Speaker, we are bleeding and dying. The hospital is along the way to Busia and receives accident victims from time to time. There are no toilets and the theatre is in a very bad state. 

Madam Speaker, maybe I just need to kneel down and beg this Government to come and renovate the hospital in Bugiri. Please honourable colleagues, support us and give us money for the hospital. 

Madam Speaker, please consider the people of Bugiri. The hospital is surrounded by districts without general hospitals. Bugweri, Namutumba, Namayingo and Busia do not have hospitals - districts that receive people from all the districts of Uganda. Whenever there is any insurgency, people run to Bugiri and all tribes are there.

Madam Speaker, why doesn’t the Government look at Bugiri and renovate the –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, the state of the hospitals is bad – all of them. Even the minister, herself, is lamenting. Talk about Lira Hospital or our hospital – Atutur – Busolwe, Bugiri or Kiryandongo. All the hospitals are in dire need.

Members, we raise this issue not for us to continue lamenting. Let us look at what the solution is. (Applause) What is the solution? What are we going to do, as Parliament? It is something that we know – by the way, it is also bad manners for you to stand when the Speaker is speaking. 

Hon. Jane Aceng may be the 10th or 15th Minister of Health. We cannot put the blame on her but this is the House that does appropriation. Why don’t we say: “We are not passing this budget without having this money for health”? (Applause) Now that we have figures, each of us knows what our hospitals need. Why don’t we support the health ministry and say we need these kinds of things? 

I want whoever is standing to speak – I really felt bad for hon. Agnes Taaka because I know what she means. Mine is even worse. I do not even have a district hospital but I cannot kneel. What we need to do is to come up with a solution. Whoever is going to speak must do so with a solution. (Applause)

Honourable members, are we together? [Members: “Yes.”] Let us not repeat whatever has been said. [Member: “Clarification.”] When you bring those things of clarifications… Let us talk about how we can improve the health sector.

5.10
MS ASINANSI NYAKATO (FDC, Woman Representative, Hoima City): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

Whereas we appreciate the statement of the minister, I also want to put her on notice that Hoima does not have a district hospital. We survive on a referral hospital, which was established way back in 1935.  

Madam Speaker, in the minister’s statement, I expected her to also tell us when the isolation centres are going to be established in all the district hospitals.

A month back, in Hoima Referral Hospital, a mentally disturbed man, aged 35, fell in a lagoon at the hospital and died from there because the previous isolation centre for the mentally disturbed was given out to the COVID-19 response team.

Madam Speaker, Hoima, being a central place and oil city – in fact in the entire East Africa region – I propose and request the minister to think about the people of Hoima City, in as far as establishing –(Member timed out)-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am not accepting any point of information because you are speaking for Hoima.

5.13
MR MOSES ATTAN (FDC, Soroti East Division, Soroti City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister, in her statement, raises a need for Shs 8 billion in order to have CT scans fixed. We have a supplementary budget proposal in this House. 

I move that the Executive presents an addendum to the supplementary and we provide for the Shs 8 billion to have CT scans –(Applause)- fixed in the regional referral hospitals, given that money was appropriated by this very Parliament and Ugandans, even Members of Parliament here – almost lost their lives due to lack of CT scans in the regional referral hospitals. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, this Parliament appropriated money for intensive care units and Soroti Regional Referral Hospital has a ready structure under lock and key. I move that the Minister of Health provides Soroti Regional Referral Hospital with the intensive care units.

It is emerging that there are no technical persons to manage and maintain ICU equipment. Would the minister consider to recruit and provide the technical persons to manage the units? I thank you.

5.14
MR GEOFREY KAYEMBA (NUP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Now, in Greater Masaka, which has nine districts, we have only one Government hospital. A place like Bukomansimbi, which is near Kalungu and Ssembabule, has one health centre IV only. So, why don’t we upgrade these health centres IV to hospitals to help nearby people?

Secondly, I propose more payment to these health workers so that they can be more committed and work for the good of our people. I beg to submit.

5.15
MS JULIET KAKANDE (NUP, Woman Representative, Masaka City): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As a House, we should remember that Uganda is one of the signatories to the 2001 Abuja Declaration, which obligates the Government to allocate at least 15 per cent of its budget to the health sector.

Madam Speaker, much as the COVID-19 pandemic is bad to us, it has at least made us know that 9.8 per cent out of our budget can be allocated to the health sector, compared to 5.7 per cent which was there before the pandemic – that was in Financial Year 2018/2019.

When you consider the challenges being spelt out by the minister, I found out that we have a problem as far as funding is concerned. Let us take an example of the regional referral hospitals. 

Normally, they get drugs every after two months but by the end of the first month, you find that the drugs have been used up and people start suffering. All that should be the duty of the ministry and the Committee on Budget and the whole House to accept that at least by next financial year, we uplift the budget to –(Member timed out.)

5.17
MR CHARLES MATOVU (NUP, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for her report. I might have not heard the minister talk about Lubowa Hospital. My request to the minister is about upgrading Kajjansi Health Centre IV to a regional referral hospital. The reason is that whenever road carnages occur along Entebbe Express Highway and Entebbe Road and there is no nearby hospital to handle victims of such accidents. So, I request that Kajjansi Health Centre IV be upgraded to a regional referral hospital. 

Secondly, I have an island in my constituency called Bussi Subcounty, which houses several other small islands. The people that I represent in Bussi suffered a lot during the COVID-19 pandemic. They were not granted access to the nearby hospitals. I request the minister to look into upgrading that health facility in Bussi to a Health Centre IV because we had –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, how I wish we could debate a solution in general. Let us look at solutions in general and not about a hospital for example, in Bukedea. We are leaders of the people of Uganda. So, when we start personalising this, we are at a loss. If it is an issue of a budgetary aspect, let us increase the budget the way hon. Kakande put it. 

If we increase the budget, we can, for example, say that let 15 per cent go to hospitals to resolve these hospital issues once. That is better than looking at a hospital, a dispensary and/or a village hospital. It should be something general.

5.19
MR RONALD KANYIKE (NUP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The suggestion to the House is that there must be goodwill as far as budget allocation is concerned. We have witnessed many supplementary budgets being approved for State House and security, leaving the Ministry of Health aside. 

There must be goodwill in this country for the hospitals and the health department –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Since you came here, how many supplementary budgets have you approved for State House? 

MS KANYIKE: Two of them. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is no such supplementary budget that has been approved here. Talk about hospitals. What should we do for the hospitals? 

MR KANYIKE: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. The solution I am bringing on the table is that the money given to State House and security must be cut and –(Member timed out.)

5.21
MS FLORENCE KABUGHO (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Minister of Health for presenting a very good report. You will excuse me but when we talk about the hospitals in our districts, we are worried that even if the budget is increased, other hospitals that have not been captured in this report may be left out. For example, Kilembe Hospital was swept away by the floods from River Nyamwamba but I have not heard anything about it. I pray that is also put into consideration as we talk about increasing the budget for the Ministry of Health. 

Secondly, Rukoki Health Centre III’s theatre got burnt. This health centre serves about six subcounties and the people there are suffering. Those subcounties are hard-to-reach areas. Coming from the hills to Kasese Town is really a bad experience. So, I pray that this hospital also be captured in the report as we talk about increasing that budget. Thank you.

5.22
MS SANTA OKOT (PPP, Aruu North County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I thank the minister for presenting an elaborate report about the health status. However, I got very surprised because I had expected the Minister of Health to include the issue of Nodding Disease in her report. This is not the first time the issue Nodding Disease is coming out. 

This disease has affected children in the four districts of Omoro, Pader, Kitgum and parts of Lira. When I went to the North recently with the Leader of Opposition, the parents of these children asked about the report on the samples, which were taken from their living children and their dead ones. 

The disease is not called Nodding Disease. We call it Nodding Syndrome because of what it does to the victims. We have about 5,000 children in Pader, Kitgum and Omoro districts likely to perish to this disease. We want to know what causes it and the name of the disease. The parents requested us to come and ask Government what it is doing about this situation. 

I want to appeal to the Minister of Health and the Government that Pader District be given a hospital. Pader District has only one Health Centre IV, which serves 24 subcounties yet, we have this category of children with us. I can see the minister shaking her head but we have this problem in the district.

I thank the Ministry of Health - the Health Centre IV that we have has a good laboratory, theatre and maternity ward but it has the worst general ward. The ward is shared by both male and female patients. 
During the campaigns, a woman asked me, “Santa, if you are a mother-in-law and you are admitted in that ward but in the opposite direction there is your son-in-law who is so badly off that he cannot put on his pants, what would you do?” This is what they asked. That is the state in which Pader Health Centre IV is. 

My appeal to the minister is that since Pajule Health Centre IV is already at that level - it takes not much money to elevate it to a district hospital. Kindly, do that because it will help save our children who are groaning with this disease. I beg the honourable minister to consider this seriously. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the procedure on? 

5.26
MS SUSAN ABEJA (Independent, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is about population consideration. Honourable minister, we are sent here by our constituents and we are from districts. It is touching when our people are watching and they hear you announce constructions in some districts and you do not pronounce other districts to be considered. You even said that other sub counties which are highly populated are going to be given two health centres.

We would request that since the NRM manifesto talks of constructing a district hospital, let each and every district get a district hospital. (Applause)

Secondly, we have some health centres which are being inconvenienced by other sub counties. A case in point is a health centre III called Okwang. All the surrounding sub counties and parishes come to our sub county for health services. Therefore, if it is possible, help us and upgrade Okwang Health Centre III to a health centre IV because it is surrounded by very many sub counties. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is an issue of a manifesto versus funding. Let us look at the issue; you are the ones who appropriate the money. Why don’t you appropriate money for these hospitals?
5.28
MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for the statement and particularly her ministry and the Government for the efforts they are putting in, especially in curbing COVID-19 in the country.

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Health has put a lot of measures and vigilance on COVID-19. How I wish you had put it more on other related diseases, especially on primary health care. The country would do better.

I would also have loved to see the minister presenting to us the performance vis-à-vis the targets because I am sure the ministry had targets vis-à-vis performance indicators. We would be happy then.

Honourable members, we have seen the figures. I request that when the supplementary comes for the Ministry of Health, we all support it. Previously, we have been passing these supplementary budgets but the ministry sometimes takes us for granted. Some of us who are from the hard-to-reach areas do not have services.

Madam Speaker, the services in this sector are still horrible. We should not be hoodwinked that we are doing well. When you look at the general medical services as perceived in the country, we are still very far from the chain of a good health system. In other words, honourable minister, you need to put in a lot of effort. As Parliament, we shall give you the money but please –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As we plan to give money to the Ministry of Health, we must also do our oversight role and not just give money and it ends up with other people. Once the money is given, you Members of Parliament must play the oversight role and make sure that the money does the right thing and that there are deliverables. 

MS JANEPHER MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, there is one burning issue I would like to present to the House. We have noted that PPDA rules are not going to work. We are going to use our own Ministry of Defence to have these hospitals –(Interruption)

MR KIMOSHO: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether we continue to proceed well when you call a Member to speak and another Member insists on the microphone - It takes away the sanity of this Parliament. Are we proceeding well?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I saw you standing, finish your submission. I was calling hon. Apollo Masila not hon. Apolot.

5.32
MR DAN KIMOSHO (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I thank the honourable minister for her elaborate statement; she is clearly very honest and open. However, I would like us, as Parliament and as a country, to re-examine our priorities. When you look at the figures that the honourable minister is presenting to us, they are lacking. 

If you compare them with Shs 1.4 trillion which the Government guaranteed recently in Lubowa and the hospital is still in its foundation and there is neither hope nor a clear roadmap for it, it is high time that as Parliament, we rose up to the occasion, put forward these issues and requested the minister concerned to come with a statement. 

Madam Speaker, when you reach that place, you are told, “No one can touch.” Therefore, who is supposed to touch when it is Government money spent to help Ugandans to improve their health?

Finally, we are concentrating on the conventional methods of health: treatment, diagnosis and the rest. I would like to put it to the minister that we have serious challenges in the health sector. There are many upcoming and unregulated things that affect the health of our people. A lot of drinks are being advertised all over the radios and men are being told that when you take it, you become like a horse; you can ride through a building. (Laughter) As a country, the Ministry of Health needs to examine the long term impact of these drinks or else our people will perish because these have a long-term effect in terms of affecting their health. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.34
MR JOHN MUSILA (Independent, Bubulo East County, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just on the point of correction, I am John Musila the Rastaman and I am very comfortable if I am called that way. I wish to also join other Members to thank the minister, Dr Aceng for her very elaborate report. However, I think it is the presentation; the calm way she does it and her innocent posture is what sunk into us very heavily. (Interjection)- Madam Speaker, protect me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, leave hon. Musila to present.

MR MUSILA: There are two issues which I wanted to learn from the minister; mental health, insanity or the psychiatric problems in this country as the population increases.

As we have so many stresses in life and I or any other person can mentally deteriorate. However, I have not heard from her statement how many regional referral hospitals she has planned for. Even at the national level, we only have Butabika Hospital and yet we have very many – There is a report which cites Busoga and particularly Jinja, to be having the biggest number of mad men and women, by the way. (Laughter)

Therefore, as the country grows in population and as we go out to Vote the –(Laughter)– I wish that we should pertinently have a Vote at either regional main hospitals or another national – (Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what issue is the Point of order? That is a maiden speech.

MR MUSILA: Another mental referral hospital. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is a maiden speech. (Laughter)

5.37
MS CHARITY BAINABABO (UPDF): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the minister for the health status report. However, I would like to inform the House that wherever there are Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) barracks, we treat the civilians who live in our neighbourhood from the minimal resources that are provided by the Ministry of Defence. Therefore, I wish to request the minister that UPDF be accorded a status of maybe a health district or one that befits it so that we can be able to do the work.

Secondly, we are building a military hospital so I also request that if it could be captured for support – well, it will be for the military but it can be utilised by the general public - If the ministry could capture it in the national budgeting, it could benefit many people.

We also have an orthopaedic centre in Mubende. If the ministry could also capture and support it, it would also help the general public. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you getting what hon. Charity is saying? 

5.39
COL DR VICTOR NEKESA (UPDF): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In addition to what hon. Charity has said - I am addressing this because I am now talking as a doctor but not necessarily as a military officer. We have issues where there are crises in health usually. Talk of the COVID-19, past crises and others that come on and they call the UPDF medical personnel to take the lead. 

They are at the vanguard but the opportunities in terms of facilitation are not as good as for the civilian counterparts as well as not being considered for other offers by the ministry. 

Therefore, I call upon the Ministry of Health or Parliament to consider UPDF staff when giving funds because they do a lot of crisis management for Uganda. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By the way, like what Dr Nekesa is saying, when you look at the COVID-19 ward, it is managed by Col. Dr Kyobe and he is doing a very good job. We must appreciate that gentleman –(Applause)– I do not know him but when you call, he is there 24/7. We must appreciate the UPDF for the effort you have put in, especially, during this time of COVID-19.

5.41
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke East County, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank honourable minister, mama Corona. I am talking on behalf of the general country. I know that we agree to these health centres across the country. We expand and build more.

However, the challenge we have in the country is the mortuary for the dead. This is one of the things we should take very seriously. In the whole of Lango Subregion, we have about two. When somebody dies, they have to rush immediately. We also have a challenge for the ambulances. 

One other thing I would add is that as we build all these health centres, let us try to fence them because there are land grabbers around all these. For example, in one of the health centres IV in our district, the land is already being grabbed by many people because it is wide open. It is the same challenge across the country.

Thirdly, these health centres lack clean water such as boreholes. I request that as we build these health centres, let the boreholes be drilled. Thank you.

5.43
MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate I did not get the opportunity to speak when we were discussing my children. Your office is aware that there is a motion on its way –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a motion coming up on the children on the streets.

MS NAKUT: Let the Members not assume that this issue is going to be repeated because it has not received the attention it deserves for our children who are enslaved in begging.

On health, for the 15 districts that are going to be excluded from the plan because the Private-not-for-profit hospitals (PNFPs) exist there, I think that it is unfair. Even though these receive Primary Health Care (PHC) grant, it is not adequate to run the health system.

I met a man who had been referred from a PHC hospital because he needed money for an operation for his stomach to be stitched. He had been wounded by a bullet and his intestines were out. He was carrying them looking for money to go for an operation because there is no hospital that Government has in the place so that people of that kind can be helped at no fee.

Therefore, if we are giving our responsibility to PNFP hospitals, let us give them the required funding to match the funding we give the Government hospitals. 

I have visited Nyapea Hospital. They have received less than a half of what other PNFP hospitals receive. There are health workers who were working without any protection during the season of COVID-19. 

Therefore, if we want PNFP hospitals to serve our people and we are saying that they are doing a good service, let us match –(Interjections)– including funding for human resource.

5.45
MR ENOS ASIIMWE (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the honourable minister for the very detailed report on our health sector. When you look at what she has presented, the problem is purely financing. Let us deal with that.

The only way to deal with finances is either to go for the National Insurance Bill to be resolved here or we change our priorities just like we did with the road sector, UPDF and other sectors of our country. Let us deal with that then we shall have a solution to the medical sector.

Secondly, I would like the honourable minister to help us, with the little resources you have, expedite on the health management system. That will solve the issue of the turn-around time of processing the orders from the hospitals and that will save on the losses that we are making from theft of Government drugs. That will also help us in saving time in dealing with the patients.

Lastly, yesterday you had promised to give us an update on the vaccines that you have and when you intend to roll out the campaign. On that note, Madam Speaker, my simple request or prayer would be that you give Parliament one week so that we go back to our constituencies and push the campaign to have the vaccination done within the shortest time possible. This is in order to convince the President to open the economy fully – as he has promised – in January. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.47
MS SARAH NAJJUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker –  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that hon. Sarah? 

MS NAJJUMA: Yes, Sarah Najjuma from Nakaseke. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you stand up? 

MS NAJJUMA: I am standing but I am just short. (Laughter) Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the minister for her elaborate report. 

However, when I look at Table 2 on page 11 on the regional hospitals that are going to be upgraded to regional referral hospitals, I am surprised that Nakaseke is not on the list. This has been an issue and the minister is also aware of it. Nakaseke Hospital treats people from all the neighbouring districts such as Nakasongola, Kyankwanzi, Kiboga, Luweero and Wakiso. I am sure we have the catchment population. 

On the issue of renovation, I thank the Government that Nakaseke Hospital was partially renovated but the old block was not renovated since the war. The staff quarters are also in a very sorry state. I request the minister to take note of that. 

In the 10th Parliament, Madam Speaker, I raised an issue here about National Medical Stores. I think something must be done about the medicines given to hospitals. Sometimes, we get shortage and sometimes, the National Medical Stores gives out medicine that is not requested by the hospital. 

Since we have regional offices for UMEME and UNRA – something must be done for National Medical Stores. They could get regional offices where we can submit our concerns. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, who purchases medicines for National Medical Stores? 

DR ACENG: National Medical Stores does the procurement and distribution of medicines. Madam Speaker, I request that Members go back and look at the budget. Instead of blaming NMS, please, look at the budget. I gave you the budget per capita, which is Shs 9,000 per capita. I request Members to look at that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Of course, that is not enough. The other thing is that National Medical Stores says that the money that was supposed to be used for buying medicines was taken to the Ministry of Health’s vote. Go and look at it; it is not for now. 

DR ACENG: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I also suggest that you have a management information system that will help you monitor the operations of all the hospitals. You could connect it to all the hospitals so that you are able to monitor the medicines that are delivered as well as the efficiency of the doctors and nurses. This will help you to understand what is happening in all the hospitals, from one centre. It would really help you. 

DR ACENG: Madam Speaker, I mentioned it. It is available but it needs funding. 

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter under Rule 81 of the Rules of Procedure: motion for closure of debate. 

When you read Rule 81 with Rule 52 of the Rules of Procedure – Madam Speaker, you have been generous and you have given us time. Rule 52(2) says: “A statement made by a minister may be debated provided that such debate does not exceed one hour.” Madam Speaker, you have been very generous in this debate and you have given us over an hour and 20 minutes. 

I, therefore, rise under Rule 81 –(Interruption)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: [Hon. Patrick Nsamba: “Order.”] Hon. Nsambe, he rose on a procedural matter. 

MR SILWANY: I, therefore, rise under Rule 81 so that we close this debate because Members are starting to repeat what they have already talked about. We have agreed that the priority is the budget that needs to be tackled and the ministry needs to be supported so that the issue of health is sorted out in the country. 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right –(Interjections)– could I be protected, Madam Speaker? Let us have – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When I see senior Members of Parliament behaving the way you are behaving, I start feeling shy. A Member has a right – and it would be to the best interest of hon. Nsamba because you have a Motion coming up. What we are saying is that whatever is being raised is all surrounding money. 

If we are discussing how to improve the health sector, it is all about management. That is what we have got to accept. We need policies and the management information system to monitor. Instead of us releasing that and going to the next item, we are all saying: “Order.” Hon. Nsamba, you were part of these rules. 

MR NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, hon. Silwany is also a senior Member of Parliament and he knows very well that if you are to move a Motion, you call for the Motion. However, he moved on a procedural matter, which is different. That is why I was putting him to order so that he moves the Motion properly, according to the rules. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. He moved a procedural matter for guidance and I gave him the guidance. I am seeking a secondment to his Motion. 

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, since you have given me the guidance to go ahead and move the Motion, I now move a Motion that we end this debate under Rule 81 of our Rules of Procedure and then we move to another thing, if the Motion is seconded. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the Motion seconded? It is seconded by hon. Dan Kimosho –[Hon. Betty Aol: “It is not seconded. We still have issues on health. Some are policy issues.] Do not shout on the microphone like you are - Honourable minister, can you respond to some of the issues that have been raised? 

DR ACENG: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I appreciate that this is a delicate issue because it concerns life. Allow me to clarify a few issues. 

Number one, I did not say that some districts will not get a hospital. I said all districts will get a hospital. However, I clarified that there are some that already have PNFPs. They could be using that as we build others in those that do not have. 

I also clarified that there are those that are extremely disadvantaged like the islands. Therefore, my sister from Otuke, I did not say that you would not get a hospital. I said all districts would get, even those that have PNFP hospitals.

Madam Speaker, currently, mental health hospitals are in all regional referrals but the challenge is human resource and yes, it is true some are being used as COVID-19 hospitals.

We have tried so much to support Bombo Hospital for the UPDF. In my report, I have indicated that Bombo Hospital is getting a CT scan, an oxygen plant and we have been installing equipment to support the UPDF but we take note that much more is still needed. The staff that you provide are very valuable to us; I will speak to you out of here in regard to them.

Madam Speaker, about the Nodding disease, I want to say that I provided a report on all the samples and the research that was done to the people there when I travelled to Acholi sub-region with my sister hon. Sarah Opendi who was a minister at that time. We told the people the cause. Spraying was done and is ongoing. What is needed now is rehabilitation which is not a medical issue because they already have the medicines. I request that you go back and clarify that issue.

Madam Speaker, we cannot build isolation facilities in all hospitals. It is not required because we cannot know where an outbreak will take place next. 

Madam Speaker, the National Health Insurance Bill was returned to us, it is being considered and we shall bring it back.

On page 11, I did not say that we are upgrading regional referrals. These are per region and I mentioned the regions that are stressed that will need to be considered.

Madam Speaker, what is needed for all this work to be done is money. I was very clear on the resources that are needed at all levels and I expect that this august House will look for those resources so that we can put up hospitals with facilities and equipment that are required. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need this report to be shared with the sectoral committee to identify the priorities. It will be upon identifying of those priorities; the equipment, the management information systems, staffing levels, blood bank, ambulances and so on, that they will ask for a supplementary.

Therefore, we need this to be scrutinised further. It will be after doing that, that a financial report will be brought to this House on those priorities. Can we have the shadow minister say something?

6.00
DR TIMOTHY BATUWA (FDC, Jinja South Division West, Jinja City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the shadow Minister of Health, let me start from where the minister ended when she said that all they need is money. True, we shall support you in getting money but let me first draw the attention of the House to the figures on page 15 of the report where the minister reveals that to renovate general or district hospitals and re-equip them, the ministry needs Shs 30 billion and to construct, it needs Shs 70 billion. See page 17.

I would like to draw your attention to Naguru Hospital, which was constructed out of friendship with China. That hospital was constructed using Shs 20 billion. The hospital has seven very good buildings - (Interjection)- I pray you go there and see for yourself. It has four operating rooms, a maternity ward, a paediatric unit, a teenage centre, a blood bank, a radiology department, including a CT scan and many others. I want to give you an impression that with Shs 20 billion, we can construct a very good hospital like we have never had before.

Therefore, when the minister asks for Shs 30 billion to renovate and Shs 70 billion to construct, I do not wonder why UPDF has decided to take on the construction of all health facilities. I do not wonder why that directive is now coming in. 

We should critically look at these things. If the wish is to improve health care and give us state of art hospitals, we welcome it. However, in her report, we should have an impression of what we are going to get.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would like to make some corrections. The Shs 20 billion was counter funding; the Government of Uganda made a contribution to that.

DR BATUWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I did not want to read the contribution of the Government of Uganda but it was US$ 2 million and tax relief. KCCA donated the land, which is about four acres but the whole hospital –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Those are all cost implications, honourable member. I do not want you to misguide the House that it was only Shs20 billion. There was the aspect of land, Government contribution and the taxes that were waived.

DR BATUWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My effort is not to downplay the money but to give an impression of how much we can get out of Shs30 or 70 billion. Most importantly, the Ministry of Health is a good ministry. It is the only ministry that is headed by women and if there is any ministry that I expect to perform well, it is that ministry. 

One commitment that I ask of you in the Ministry of Health is to assure Ugandans that from now on, they will never be ferried outside the country for treatment. When you stay in Uganda for treatment, much as you are telling us that we do not have experts, you will hire experts from Cuba to come and treat you from here. I heard a very sad story when I went to Butebo Health Centre IV about how Dr Stephen Mallinga’s life was lost – May his soul rest in peace. It looked careless but the people were helpless. They had no ambulance or facilities yet medics had rightly diagnosed what was going to kill the Minister of Health at that time. I do not wish this to happen to anybody. 

If you commit that we will be getting all the treatment from here, I believe you will be able to rehabilitate most of these facilities and to hire expertise.

Last but not least is the cost per capita for the medicines. The minister has given us a figure that is around Shs 9,000. However, she went ahead to say that donors are contributing 64 per cent of that figure. This means that in our budgeting, we are allocating about Shs 2,000 for treatment. 

Sincerely, this cannot buy even a single dose of malaria –(Interjection)– HIV inclusive. Fine, let us look at the Shs 9,000. Sincerely when you treat one person who is taking on very expensive treatment, they will use the money that should have been used by other people. These are the reasons why we go to these health facilities and find no medicine then we conclude that health workers are stealing it. 

Therefore, I implore Parliament to go by the Abuja Declaration, which is that we should facilitate the Ministry of Health to the extent of 15 per cent of our Budget. The money we have been giving them is about 7 per cent. Let us push it to 10 per cent in the coming year, let us push it to 10 per cent – it is possible. Let us push it to 10 per cent and then from thereon, we shall keep pushing it until we get to the 15 per cent because all we desire is a better health system.

Last but not least, Ministry of Health, I was told that we have the National Insurance Scheme Bill, which was sent to the President and up to now, he has not assented to it. So, we need to know why you are delaying with it, yet it is an urgent matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Read rule 235; you reintroduce it.

DR BATUWA: We will reintroduce it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, as you heard Members talking, an aspect of mental health is a really serious issue. We have many people who are suffering from stigma, stress and depression but we do not have hospitals designated for that. We have a chairman in charge of mental health here, hon. Macho. (Laughter)

Members, the report is referred to the Committee on Health to look at the priorities and submit what can be funded faster for a supplementary budget. Thank you very much, honourable minister. (Applause)

Yesterday, we promised, with the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition, that we were going to check on one of our colleagues who is sick. We are going to the next Bill, but I wanted just two minutes for a report to be given to the Minister of Health. 

You are the one responsible for our health in this country and we want to give you a report from the hospital. We need action from you, then you advise this House tomorrow on what can be done. 

As Parliament, we need to take action but we can only do so from an informed point of view from medical personnel like you. We are lucky that the Minister of Health is also a doctor. 

Chairperson of the Committee on Human Rights, you have two minutes.

6.08
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (NRM, West Budama County North East, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Permit me to transmit a report of the Committee on Human Rights on the visit to Mulago National Referral Hospital in the matter of hon. Muhammad Ssegirinya, MP to the Minister of Health. I beg to be granted permission to transmit the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, we are not reading this report verbatim because of the confidentiality of the Member. (Applause) We cannot disclose everything that is there but at least as a doctor, she knows that privacy and confidentiality of one’s health must be maintained.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you can briefly tell us how the Member is. (Laughter)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This morning, you directed the Committee on Human Rights to visit hon. Muhammad Ssegirinya and assess his condition. We did so at 11.30 in the morning. 

A sub-committee of the Committee on Human Rights, comprised of hon. Janepher Mbabazi, hon. Col. Charity Bainababo and hon. Francis Zaake, and headed by myself went to Mulago Hospital, where we were received by a team of doctors, headed by the Executive Director of Mulago Hospital.

The team of doctors comprised the following:

    i) Dr Byarugaba Baterana – ED Mulago Hospital;
    ii) Dr Mukisa Robert – Lead Physician;
    iii) Dr Tayemba Enock;
    iv) Dr Banyisiki Mollino and 
    v) Dr Byabasha Desire.

The sub-committee also interacted with hon. Ssegirinya Muhammad. As you have already indicated, the report contains matters that pertain to his medical condition and matters that are confidential and are not for public discussion now.

However, the committee had extensive discussions with the Director-General of Medical Services and I beg to report on the following:

The Director-General of Medical Services has constituted a team of high-powered specialists, comprising the following; the Executive Director of Mulago Hospital, a heart specialist, an infectious disease specialist, a neuro-physician and an endocrinologist with the following terms of reference:

    1. To carry out a conclusive medical review and diagnosis of hon. Muhammad Ssegirinya.

    2. To treat the matter of hon. Muhammad Ssegirinya as top priority and deliver a report to the Ministry of Health and to the Speaker of Parliament tomorrow, 4 November 2021.

    3. To recommend a comprehensive management strategy and regime.

Madam Speaker, this report will be delivered tomorrow. The Director-General promised that you will get a copy and the minister will also get a copy. We can then discuss the management of the honourable member. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Leader of the Opposition?

6.13
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Madam Speaker, I do not want to mine information from the honourable member and chairperson of the Committee on Human Rights, given that it contains matters of personal health and confidentiality.

The only little thing he did not say to the Members here is that he did not find the honourable member sipping away on a coffee or juice – that the honourable member is indeed ill.

All I can implore the Rt Hon. Speaker and the Minister of Health, now in the Chamber, is to expedite the process of evaluation of the state of affairs of this honourable member because as far as I am concerned, we have done justice to him by reporting his situation. 

I hope that whoever is going to report to Parliament does so as early as possible because I am sure they have not had occasion to speak to God to know what is going on. We want to be sure that what is humanly feasible and possible. What is humanly possible and feasible has a time component to it. So, anything that might go beyond the human capacity is forgivable.

In the circumstances, I still submit, Madam Speaker, that human capacity has not yet been fully exploited to take care of the health of the honourable member. I so pray that whatever is being done to secure his health has a time component and an emergency component to it. I so submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, LOP. Honourable minister, can we request you to leave the House? Go and make a follow-up and give us feedback before end of day on what we can do.

MR NSAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you said the Chairperson of the Committee on Human Rights, I expected him to come here to assess the rights of an honourable member who is treated in the way that he is being treated. I do not think that the Chairperson of the Committee on Human Rights and the team you went with have the capacity to know the health conditions of the Member despite the fact that they had a team of doctors.

The chairperson would have at least mentioned something to do with the rights of the Member. Are we proceeding well if a whole chairperson overseeing the human rights in this country can just run away from the microphone without saying anything relating to the rights of the Member under custody and his treatment?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, you are putting too much energy in saying what is – Hon. Nsamba, I looked for you in the morning because I wanted to send you to the hospital. We did not send him as a chairperson. How he constituted his team to go there - we had actually sent one lady and they just constituted themselves and said they wanted to go and see the Member. 

For us, what we wanted to know was his health status. That is why I have asked Hon. Aceng to go and make a follow up. He has given us very credible information. I was with the Leader of the Opposition and we said, “Let us look for hon. Nsamba and send him”. Anyway, the Member is sick. That must be taken seriously. If we are to prosecute, let us prosecute a live person. 

I do not want to interfere with the court process but I am saying whether guilty or not guilty, he must be treated and he must be prosecuted when he is okay. Today, it is me and tomorrow it will be somebody else. Next item. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021

6.19
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move under Rule 130 that the Bill entitled, “The National Social Security (Amendment) Bill, 2021” be read the second time. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you were supposed to move a Motion to the Bill to be read for the second time. Is the Motion seconded? It is seconded by hon. Komakech, Dr Batuwa, hon. Martine Ojara, hon. Betty Aol, hon. Kiyaga, the Government Chief Whip, the Chairperson of UWOPA and hon. Odoi. 

MS AMONGI: Thank you. I thank Members for the support and seconding the Motion. This Bill seeks to amend the National Social Security Fund Act, Cap. 222. It seeks to establish the stakeholders’ board to provide for mandatory contribution by all workers. 

As you are aware, at the moment, it is only companies that employ at least five members who are supposed to contribute to the social security fund. This Bill is now opening up for anybody who seeks to make a contribution. Even if you have one worker, you can be able to contribute. Also, if you are a private person and you want to contribute or even join the saving, you will be free to go to NSSF and join the scheme. You will get your good interest in the Bill.

It is now expanding the contribution by workers; both workers that are being employed and any other person who wants to join the saving regardless of the size of the enterprises and the number of employees. 

It is also providing for the voluntary contribution and empowering the fund to recover from third parties any sum owed. There are people, honourable members, who deduct contributions for workers and fail to remit them. We had a very lenient punishment for them. The Bill is now bringing in stringent punishments for those who will deduct the workers money and not remit it. The Members of Parliament are the most affected because the workers run to you saying “my employer has failed to remit my money”. 

We are going to have stringent measures and penalty and even interest. If you fail to deduct or you deduct the money and keep it for a year without putting the money for the member, then you will also pay the interest as part of the penalty. 

It is also to provide mid-term access. As you are aware that COVID-19 has dissipated many workers. Most of them have not worked for two years and others for months. They have been requesting that we should allow them mid-term access of their fund. The current law does not permit except in circumstances of medical and other approved conditions by the Board. 

However, in this circumstance, we are bringing the Bill to permit 20 per cent mid-term access where a person who has saved with the fund for at least ten years and has reached 45 years will be permitted to access their money – the 20 per cent - for recovery purpose or any other. However, the medical aspect will still stand alone as other consideration outside. 

This mid-term access majorly is for this period of COVID-19 pandemic but looking at how the workers have suffered and require recover. Other conditions related to medical will still remain, whether you are 20 years or whether you have saved for five years. If it is a medical condition, you will still be able to justify it and get your money for such circumstances.

It is also providing for in-house experts. At the moment, there are circumstances where we use other people to help the fund to invest. However, this Bill is now saying we have experts that are being employed by the National Social Security Fund. So, instead of looking for provident funds elsewhere to invest, we will now use the in-house officers that will be able to look for the entire investment portfolio and ensure that the fund for the members is properly managed. Therefore, we now want experts within the fund, who will be employed by the fund, instead of using members’ money to manage the investment.

That will reduce costs and empower the board to introduce benefits. There are other benefits that members can get, outside the interests. Therefore, this Bill also seeks that we give power to the board to look at other benefits. There can be a bonus for members who have saved and have not withdrawn their money. In financial management and investment, you need to attract people to invest. With this, there will be a lot of innovations within the fund.  

I request Members to support the second reading of this Bill and debate it so that we enact the law to support the workers out there who are looking up to us to ensure that the Bill is passed so that most of them who are waiting to access, especially mid-term, will be able to get their money and recover from the very adverse impacts of COVID-19.

I beg to submit and move the motion. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I can now invite the Chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to give us their position. 

6.27
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Flavia Kabahenda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2021.

Madam Speaker, in the introduction, the National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2021 -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report is uploaded on your iPads.

MS KABAHENDA: It is on the Members’ iPads, Madam Speaker. It was read for the first time on 29 September, 2O2l in accordance with rule 128 and referred to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for consideration in line with rule 129 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The committee considered the Bill and hereby reports.

In the background, on 17 February, 2021, Parliament passed the National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 20l9 and it was then called the 2019 Bill and sent to His Excellency the President for assent in line with Article 9l(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995. 

His Excellency the President did not assent to the Bill and both his term and that of Parliament lapsed. On 16 September, 2021, the Speaker guided that all business of the 10th Parliament that had lapsed, including Bills, had to be reintroduced and processed afresh. 

On 26 August, 2O2l, His Excellency returned the 2019 Bill to Parliament for reconsideration and wrote to the Speaker, highlighting a number of areas for reconsideration. The President’s letter returning the Bill, dated 26 August, 2021, is attached to this report. The Bill that was laid on 29 September, 2021 therefore contains the areas highlighted by the President.

The policy and principles of the Bill 

The policy behind the Bill is to expand social security coverage by making contributions to the National Social Security Fund mandatory for all workers in the formal sector and also allowing workers in the formal and informal sectors to make voluntary contributions to the fund. In addition, the Bill seeks to enhance the spectrum of benefits available to workers and to improve management of the National Social Security Fund.

The methodology in considering the Bill

    a) We held meetings and received written submissions from several stakeholders. 

    b) We reviewed various literature.

    c) We made a desk review of the pension schemes and provident funds of various countries including Kenya, Tanzania and Ghana.

The meetings and written submissions

We met:
    1. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development;
    2. The National Social Security Fund technical team;
    3. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development;
    4. The Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority;
    5. The National Organisation of Trade Unions;
    6. The Central Organisation of Free Trade Unions (COFTU);
    7. Platform for Labour Action; 
    8. The National Council for Persons with Disabilities; 
    9. National Union of Disabled Persons of Uganda;
    10. Members of Parliament representing Workers; 
    11. Members of Parliament representing persons with disabilities; 
    12. Hon. Alex Ndeezi, the former Chairperson, Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development.

The committee also received written memoranda from:

    1. The Federation of Uganda Employers;
    2. The Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda;
    3. The Expanding Social Protection Unit in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

Madam Speaker, we reviewed some documents, including: 

    1. The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995;
    2. The National Social Security Fund Act, Cap. 222;
    3. The Uganda Retirements Benefits Regulatory Authority Act, 2011;
    4. The Companies Act, 2012;
    5. The Contracts Act, 2010; 
    6. The Public Finance Management Act, 20l5;
    7. The Persons with Disabilities Act, 2020;
    8. The National Social Protection Policy, 20l5;
    9. The Constitution of the International Labour Organisation;
    10. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development Goals;
    11. The Third National Development Plan (NDP III). 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the minutes and all the notes from the documents reviewed and the annex to the report. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, lay.

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Speaker, these are the general observations.

5.1 Compliance of the Bill with the provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, l995

The committee observes that the Bill, through its principles where it seeks to expand social security through mandatory contributions for all workers in the formal sector and allowing for workers in the informal sectors to make voluntary contributions, reflects Objective XIV of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy under the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

5.2 Compliance with UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development

The UN 2030 Agenda containing the Sustainable Development Goals is a plan of action for people, planet and prosperity which seeks to strengthen universal peace and freedom. The UN 2030 Agenda, under SDG 1.3, urges all countries to implement nationally-appropriate social protection systems and measures for all and by 2030 achieve substantial coverage of the poor and the vulnerable. 

The committee observes that social protection is a key pillar in attaining development for all, as all development starts with the wellbeing of individuals. The Bill speaks to the UN Agenda 2030 and the Sustainable Development Goals, especially by providing for mandatory contribution by all workers regardless of the size of the enterprise or number of employees, including workers in the informal sector and making provision for an expanded scope of social security coverage and benefits.

5.3 Compliance with the third National Development Plan and the National Protection Policy, 2015

The Bill, through the policy of expanding social protection, falls within the ambit of the NDP III under Development Strategy XVI of increasing access to social protection.

The Bill also falls within the objectives of the National Social Protection Policy, 2015 which are to increase access to social security, enhance care, protection and support for the vulnerable people and strengthen the institutional framework for social protection service delivery.

Compliance with gender equity

The committee appreciates the call by the UN Agenda 2030 that no one is left behind. In this regard, it is critical to espouse values of fairness and create platforms that ensure that those that have been negatively affected by circumstances from history and those that face risks and vulnerabilities are catered for. The Bill takes cognisance of this and ensures gender and equity. 

The minister is obliged, for example, to ensure that there is a balance in gender, skills and experience among the members of the board. The provisions of the Bill provide for the expansion of social security protection and ensure equity by providing that those in the informal sector are eligible to make contributions to the fund. 

That said, however, the committee observes that while the Bill takes care of gender, it does not take care of disability in some respects. The committee takes note of the various disadvantages that persons with disabilities face, especially regarding employment. It recommends that Clause 3 of the Bill be amended in clause 6(b) by inserting, immediately after the word, “experience” the words, “and consideration of persons with disability.”

The low number of members of National Social Security Fund (NSSF)

The committee notes with concern that while the Fund and its finances have increased over the years, the number of members is still low, compared to the population of the country. Uganda's population is in excess of 40 million but the membership of the Fund stands at only about 2.12 million, according to figures from NSSF. 

Out of the total members’ contributions of Shs 15.3 trillion, contributions of members aged 35 years and below, account for only 32.9 per cent. This is worrying, given that the bulk of Uganda’s population is predominantly young. 

Out of an estimated 15 million workers in Uganda, the figure of 2.12 is really low. By NSSF’s own admission, when they met the committee, there is need for re-organisation to address this challenge. There is, therefore, need to mobilise and increase the membership to the Fund. 

It is also important to note that the informal sector plays a vital role in the economy but is difficult to map and as the law currently stands, not represented in terms of membership of the Fund. 

Increasing the uptake of the Fund among the informal sector should go a long way in increasing its size and by extension, positively impacting the economy, given the role that the Fund plays in the economy. 

In this regard, the committee is pleased with the introduction of voluntary contributions and the removal of the restriction on the number of employees in an enterprise for membership. The committee hopes that this will lead to increased membership of the Fund, expand social security coverage, which is vital for all and lead to the attainment of the UN 2030 Agenda where no one is left behind.

Specific observations and recommendations 

On commencement, clause 1 of the Bill provides that:

“The Act shall come into force upon publication in the Gazette, except Section 24A, which shall come into force on a date to be appointed by the Minister by statutory instrument on the advice of the Board.”

The committee is alive to the fact that NSSF operates on the basis that members make contributions and get their money when they are eligible, which is predictable and can be planned for and that mid-term access requires the Fund to make preparations to be able to provide for mid-term access. 

At the same time, however, the committee is concerned that without a specified timeline provided within which the statutory instrument is to be made, Section 24A may not meet the need for which it is meant, which is to enable members have interim access to their savings before attaining the age prescribed by law. 
 
During engagements with various stakeholders, in considering the Bill, the committee noted that the majority were in agreement that a timeline was necessary. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Section 24A comes into force within 60 days after the publication of the Act in the Gazette. 

Supervision of the National Social Security Fund: Clause 2(e)

Under clause 2(2)(e) of the Bill, “Minister” means the minister responsible for finance. The committee observes that the object of NSSF is social security and finance is just a subject.

The committee also observes that finance is an integral part of the management and operation of social security and that the finances and investment of NSSF should be prudently managed for the benefit of the contributors. 

Ensuring that the aspect of social security and/or protection is taken care of, also involves ensuring that there is compliance by both employers and employees. This is best handled by the ministry responsible for social security. Moreover, the
National Social Protection Policy, 2015 hands the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development vital responsibilities, including: 

    i) Spearheading the implementation of the policy;
    ii)  Providing technical guidance and leadership on social protection;
    iii) Initiating and/or reviewing policies and laws on social protection; and
    iv) Establishing mechanisms for delivery of social protection services and monitoring and co-ordinating the implementation of interventions among others. 

The committee has also had the benefit of comparing situations elsewhere both in the region and beyond and established that in all jurisdictions, the ministry responsible for labour or social security is the one responsible for the supervision of social security or provident funds. This is the case in Kenya and Tanzania, who are member States of the East African Community Region.

In other countries such as Ghana, they practice dual responsibility for this role where investments are handled by the ministry responsible for finance, but matters regarding social security are handled by the ministry responsible for labour and/or social security. 

The committee is also mindful of the fact that the Constitution of the International Labour Organisation (ILO), which Uganda ratified in 1963, requires every Member State, under Article 22, to periodically report on the measures taken to give effect to the provisions of the Conventions to which it is party. Uganda reports through the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development whom the Government of Uganda in 2011, submitted as the country’s contact at the ILO. 

Madam Speaker, the same Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development is the one who represents all the African Union States that are Member States of the ILO.

The committee notes that the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is a member of the board of NSSF with full voting rights and that, under Section 8 of the Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority Act(URBRA), the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development appoints the board of directors of the URBRA, which gives both supervisory and regulatory directives to the Authority and regulates the entire retirement benefits sector and all the players thereunder, including NSSF on behalf of the ministry.

It is the observation of the committee that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is ably represented on the Board of Directors of NSSF and the entire retirement benefits sector and has a say on how the finances and investments of NSSF are handled. Placing social security under the supervision of the Ministry Of Finance, Planning and Economic Development would compromise the effective running of the scheme. 

The committee is confident that the Fund will continue to grow even when placed under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

The committee further observes that the mandate of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is limited to matters of finances, while that of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development incudes, among others, mobilising and empowering communities to harness their potential while protecting the rights of vulnerable population groups and promoting issues of labour productivity and employment, unionising workers and arbitration; social protection, gender equality and equity, human rights, culture and empowerment. 

Further, Madam Speaker, there is need to implement the obligations of the National Tripartite Charter on Labour Relations signed between the Government of Uganda and the Federation of Uganda Employers (NOTU & COFTU), which obligates the State to, among others, create a vibrant social sector that provides for the welfare of workers, retired persons, the unemployed, the orphans, the sick, the persons with disabilities, youth and other disadvantaged and to promote good governance and compliance with the national laws and ratified regional and international treaties such as ILO. 

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is directly responsible for the creation of the vibrant social sector as well as securing workers’ retirement through their contributions in NSSF. And no doubt, Madam Speaker, it was the Minister of Gender that tabled this Bill. 

The committee recommends that supervision of NSSF be under the ministry responsible for social security and that the word “minister” will refer to the Minister responsible for Labour and or Social Security.  

Clause 3:  Board of Directors

Clause 3(1)(f) of the Bill provides that the managing director shall be an ex-officio member of the board with the right to vote. The board of directors is responsible for the management and operations of the fund under section 4 of the principal Act. 

This superiority of the board of directors over the management of the managing director is recognised by Clause 14 of the Bill, which provides for his or her appointment by the minister on the recommendation of the board. 

The committee is concerned that giving the managing director a right to vote on the board will create a fertile ground for conflict of interest - for he or she would be part of the organ that recommends for his or her appointment, appraises him or her and to which he or she accounts. 

During the interaction of the committee with NSSF, it was submitted that the managing director is a person who heads the day-to-day running of the fund and who has technical expertise in matters relevant to the fund and that at a number of times, he or she could be the only member of the board with the requisite technical expertise. 

The committee observes that as the person in charge of the day-to-day running of the fund, the managing director should be a person vested with the right skill but that this, in itself, should not be the basis for granting him or her voting rights. It will conflict with the global corporate governance principles, Madam Speaker. 

Therefore, the Bill presents a cure for this through clause 3(6)(b) by mandating the minister to ensure a balance of skills and experience among the members of the board. This way, the people appointed to the board should possess the right skills. 

The committee further observes that there is need for consistency with the other laws and the best practices of corporate governance, where ex-officio members do not have voting rights. Madam Speaker, the prime example is in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda Article 78(1)(d) that gives the legal practice of ex-officio members not having voting rights on any matter that requires voting. The committee, therefore, recommends that the managing director should be an ex-officio member of the board, as has been the practice but with no right to vote.

Clause 7: Voluntary Contributions

The committee appreciates the provision for voluntary contributions as an avenue for increasing social security coverage and promoting a savings culture. The committee also welcomes the introduction of penalties for employers who deduct voluntary contributions on behalf of their employees and fail to remit the same to the fund. This is a deterrent, builds trust and should encourage more workers to join the fund. 

The committee is concerned, however, that while the Bill provides for fines and sometimes imprisonment, there is no provision obliging the defaulting employer to remit the deducted contributions of the employee back to the fund. In this way, the employee will still stand to lose. 

The committee notes that while the Bill grants powers to the minister to perform a variety of functions in consultation with the board, in other provisions in Clause 7, under the proposed Section 13(a)(7), the power to remake regulations prescribing the procedure for making voluntary contributions and benefits is granted to the board. This is a departure from the rest of the Bill. 

The committee recommends, therefore, that Clause 7 be amended in the proposed Section 13(a) to:

a)  	Provide under the proposed section 13(a)(6) an obligation to an employer who deducts a voluntary contribution and fails to remit the same to the fund to remit to the fund any outstanding contributions due to the employee on top of the fine and the imprisonment, or both, that are provided for. 

b) 	By granting the minister, under section 13(a)(7) power to prescribe by regulations, and in consultation with the board, the procedure for making voluntary contributions and benefits.  

Recovering from a Third-Party: Clauses 8 and 20

Clauses 8 and 20 of the Bill seek to amend section 14 and 48 of the principal Act, respectively, by providing for recovery of any contribution and any other sum together with interest from a third party who owes money to a defaulting contributing employer. While the committee supports the need to expand avenues to increase social protection, it is concerned that the NSSF engaging with third parties will expose members’ contributions to endless and protracted recovery court battles, which may be costlier on the savers’ contributions than what it is intended to recover. 

The NSSF should internally devise means or improve its internal mechanisms to directly recover from defaulting employers, as going for the third parties may cause delays in the collection of members’ contributions, as well as a conflict of interest on the part of those who may be executing the task of the actual recovery from the third parties. 

The committee recommends that the proposed amendment to sections 14 and 48 of the principal Act be deleted. 

Clause 12: Mid-term Access to Benefits

Madam Speaker mid-term access aims to provide interim benefits for members of the fund in the interim. At the same time, the committee is alive to the fact that there is need for a balance between providing members’ interim access to benefits, while at the same time, ensuring that members have benefits when they retire. 

The committee notes that they proposed section 24(a)(1) refers to contributions as opposed to savings for voluntary savers and imposes terms and conditions. 

The committee is concerned that this is restrictive to voluntary savers and yet, the Bill seeks to expand social security by, among other things, attracting voluntary savers. 

The committee further notes that the proposed section 24(a)(1) gives the minister discretion to provide for mid-term access to eligible members a sum not exceeding 20 per cent of a members’ benefits. This discretion may allow the minister to provide a sum less than 20 per cent. 

The committee notes that there is no consideration of mid-term access for persons with disabilities, which runs counter to the need for equity and Uganda's constitutional obligation for affirmative action. 

The committee is aware of the fact that PWDs are, on average, more likely than their non-disabled counterparts to not get job opportunities easily and more likely to not find jobs when they lose them. Moreover, a number of them have underlying medical conditions, which make them even more vulnerable. All these factors mean that PWDs are unlikely to work for the same number of years as their able-bodied counterparts. 

The committee also notes that the number of PWD workers and contributors to the fund is negligible and is unlikely to strain the fund, when they are granted this affirmative action to meet them access. 

The committee further notes that there is need for this statutory instrument, under the proposed 24(a)(3) prescribing the terms and conditions and procedures for accessing the benefits that it be laid before Parliament to ensure that it is in consonance with the spirit of the Act. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the proposed section 24 of the Bill be amended by: 
 
    a)  Removing the restrictions on mid-term access for voluntary savings to make it a sum of 20 per cent of their benefits and not up to 20 per cent of the benefits.

    b) Providing for mid-term access of a sum of 50 per cent of accrued benefits for persons with disabilities who have attained the age of 40 years and above and have contributed to the fund for at least seven years. 

    c)  Requiring that the statutory instrument under Section 24(iii) be laid before Parliament for approval. 

(7) 	Madam Speaker, we had consequential amendments which we are calling new amendments:
 
7.1. 	Section 20, the age benefit. Section 23 of the Principal Act restricts the number of times a member can be paid and age benefit. 

It is observed by the committee that the restriction of section 23 of the Principal Act is unfair to members. 

The committee recommends that section 23 of the Principal Act be deleted 

7.2. Section 34: Members account 

Section 34(2) and (3) of the Principal Act provide for the closure of a member’s account on the attainment of the age of 60 years and grants the minister powers to dispose of the member’s money into the Reserve Account. 

Section 34(2) and (3) run counter to the principle of expanding social security coverage as espoused in the Bill, which provides for voluntary contribution.

Section 34(2)(b)(i) the Principal Act would therefore prohibit a member who wishes to make voluntary contributions to the fund after attaining the age of 60 years. 

The provision also bars persons aged 60 years or over who may not have been members of the fund but may wish to join and make voluntary contributions.

Under Section 34(3) of the Principal Act, it empowers the minister to permanently dispose of the monies in the members’ account into the Reserve Fund. 

The committee recommends that section 34(2) and (3) of the Principal Act be amended to:

    a)  Allow for continued voluntary saving even after attaining the age of 60 years.

    b)  Provide for the board to publish the names and details of all dormant members’ accounts in the fund every year in a newspaper of wide circulation.

    c)  Provide for more time before a member’s contributions can be deposited into the Reserve account.

8. 	Conclusion: 

The committee welcomes the principle of the Bill to expand social protection coverage through initiatives such as voluntary contributions and making workers in the informal sector eligible to contributing to the fund, thereby providing a remedy to the poor saving culture in the country. 

The Bill brings forth innovative provisions such as mid-term access, which should help workers in need of some relief, especially given the effects of COVID-19 pandemic. 

The Bill provides for gender and equity through the addition of gender and disability among the areas that ought to be balanced by the minister while appointing members of the board. 

The committee wishes to note the measures put in place by NSSF to increase efficiency such as the timely remittance of benefits within days, which is a huge improvement. 

While that is the case, the committee observes that there is no visibility for NSSF in many parts of the country, as the fund has only 17 branches and 23 outreach centres countrywide. 

If the number of members is to increase, the fund has to scale up the number of branches and mobilisation efforts. If this is not done, the initiatives in the Bill may come to nothing. 

There is also need to provide members of the fund with financial literacy given that according to the figures from NSSF, 50 per cent of the members who receive their benefits exhausted them within one year and then they go back to poverty, which negates the very objective of providing social security and/or protection which the fund was set up to achieve in the first place. 

It is the wish of the committee that NSSF will put in place measures to ensure that the innovations of the Bill lead to an increased membership, widen social protection coverage and heed to the call of the UN 2030 Agenda to leave no one behind. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much, chairperson of the committee, for the elaborate report. Members, this is an important Bill that we need to debate with all the soberness. We need to understand it deeply before we debate it. 

You have heard the report from the chairperson and it is uploaded on your iPads. I am going suspend debate on this report so that I accord Members an opportunity to go and look at the report and internalise it so that you come for an informed debate.

We are doing this - Yes, we had this report in the Tenth Parliament. However, the majority of Members in the Eleventh Parliament are new. They were not there when this report was adopted. Therefore, it is just prudent that we give the Members an opportunity to read this report, come back for debate and go for the next reading. 

7.02
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Not all of us have iPads because ours had issues. I want to request if the Clerk's Office can send this report on the Eleventh Parliament WhatsApp group as it would help some of us so that we can internalise the report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I beg your pardon? 

MS OPENDI: Not all Members have iPads. Some of us were given iPads but they have issues. We returned them but they have not yet given them back to us. I was suggesting that since we have an official WhatsApp group for the Eleventh Parliament and all Members are there, we could send this report on that WhatsApp -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we send the report on emails? Yes, send the report on email and then we shall come for a debate on the report. Hon. Sarah can go and read from Jonathan’s WhatsApp. Honourable member, thank you so much. We need to be serious on this Bill. There is a Member seeking leave; hon. Nsamba

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED, “THE NATIONAL LOCAL CONTENT BILL”

7.03
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NUP, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the time accorded to this motion seeking leave of the House to introduce a private Member's Bill entitled, “The National Local Content Bill”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe just for information, the NSSF Bill will be debated on Tuesday and passed. Therefore, you have to come ready. 

MR NSAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am moving under rules 56, 121 and 122 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament: 

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda (1995) empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda; 

AND WHEREAS Article 94(b) of the Constitution and rule 121(i) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament grant a Member of Parliament the right to move a Private Member's Bill;

AWARE THAT whereas the Government of Uganda formulated the “Buy Uganda, Build Uganda (BUBU)” policy with the aim of increasing consumption of local products and increasing participation of the locally-established firms in domestic trade, this policy has not been fully implemented;

CONCERNED THAT whereas Uganda has encouraged and provided various incentives for foreign investors to establish businesses and operate in Uganda, the investors are not under any obligation to prioritise Ugandan citizens in employment, the procurement of goods manufactured in Uganda, the employment of non-citizens and the transfer of skills and technology to Ugandan citizens and entities;

FURTHER CONCERNED THAT the lack of protection for Ugandan manufacturers, the imposition of obligations on foreign investors to use Ugandan labour, goods or services as well as the non-implementation of the “Buy Uganda, Build Uganda” policy has had adverse effects on the economy and has generally exposed Ugandan manufacturers to unfair competition, increased levels of unemployment, widened the trade deficit between Uganda and other countries, increased levels of hemorrhage or profit repatriation and led to slow development of local capacity to undertake projects, especially in the construction sub-sector; 

NOTING THAT unless stringent measures are introduced to ensure the use of Ugandan labour, goods and services in all undertakings or projects where Government is party or where public funds are used, the earlier identified adverse effects on the Ugandan economy will continue reversing Uganda’s development trajectory;

RECOGNISING THAT the petroleum sub-sector has tried to implement local content policies as prescribed in the Petroleum Act, 2013 and have resulted in increased employment of Ugandans and the utilisation and consumption of locally-manufactured goods and locally available services in the petroleum sub-sector;

RECALLING THAT the 10th Parliament recognised the need for this Bill by granting me leave to introduce the Bill and eventually the 10th Parliament passed the Bill on 20 May 2020;

FURTHER RECALLING THAT whereas the Bill was returned by His Excellency the President on 18 August 2020 and referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for reconsideration prior to its lapsing with the dissolution of the 10th Parliament, in accordance with Rule 235 (1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I have studied the President’s concern and I have addressed them;

NOW, THEREFORE, this motion is moved:

THAT this House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill for an Act of Parliament entitled, “The National Local Content Bill”, a draft of which is attached and uploaded on our iPads;

AND do order the publication of the said Bill, in preparation for its first reading.”

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by hon. Jonathan Odur, hon. Moses Ogwal, hon. Solomon Silwany, hon. Paulson Luttamaguzi, Member for Bardege-Layibi Division, hon. Chemutai, Workers MP, hon. Isabirye, hon. Hope Grania Nakazibwe – and everybody.

Would you like to speak to your motion for one minute?

MR NSAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the time. I want to thank the House for seconding this motion in large numbers.

Madam Speaker, as a country, we are at our development stage and since we are there, we are using part of our development budget for investment in this country. Unfortunately, 90 per cent of our development budget is what we commit to infrastructural development and 90 per cent of it is given to external companies, which implies that, that money leaves this economy and goes to where the money came from.

So, with the coming of this local content Bill, we are looking at a situation where for, every contract that goes out, there is a Ugandan company that partakes of it and there are Ugandans who are partaking of it, either providing employment or providing the services.

Madam Speaker, we had young companies here in this country and they are all exiting the stage of development because of the unfair competition that is put up by our policies on procurement. So, we want to introduce a local content requirement in our procurement processes and everything we do to allow Ugandan companies – either through reservation or opportunity – to participate in the current growth trends in the country.

Honourable members, this is an affirmative action law and it is intended to help our companies, manufacturers here and people in this country to take part in the development that is going on. 

I am privileged to have hon. Moses Ogwal to second this motion. He has been there; he has been in the private sector. He has been working with the Private Sector Foundation Uganda and we worked with him on this law in the 10th Parliament. Today, he is a Member of Parliament. I am more confident that he will give more reasons why we should have this law moved in this country. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Nsamba. Hon. Moses, you have two minutes. By the way, this is a straightforward motion. It came in the 10th Parliament and it has come back.

7.12
MR MOSES OGWAL (NRM, Dokolo County North, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I come here to second this motion. I am motivated to do so because of what I see. The change of procurement should not only be for supporting value-for-money operations, but it should support development. 

It will lead to various benefits, which include, among others, increase in employment – as he had mentioned – increase in domestic and foreign investment, industrialisation and all those economic-level issues, which would help us.

We note that there are many legal frameworks, which we had, which could support local content, but they are not good enough and do not talk to each other. I have listed most of them here. 

Madam Speaker, I want to mention that preference schemes in Uganda are also defined in a way and they are many. We mention the one of oil and the ones which are under PPDA. We mention others related to roads and the whole issue of the Standard Gauge Railway. So, there are very many legal arrangements which do not speak to each other, which I think this law would try and change.

Another issue that I want to mention is that around us – externally – many countries have gone through this way. Use of local content support in the US was done through the Buy American Act of 1933. So, the SOP for development actually recognises local content, which America did. Other countries have done so. In the neighbourhood here, we have South Africa. There are some key areas where they mentioned items like – when building buses, they specify the local content at 80 per cent. On pharmaceutical and furniture materials, including the ones that we use in schools, local content must be 100 per cent. 

So, they go into details to show how you can work and support the SMEs to do better. The one of Kenya specifically has interesting areas in respect of which they must support SMEs, physically disadvantaged groups, women and the youth. It also clearly states that in the overall budget expenditure for procured areas, 30 per cent must go to the local persons.

The reasons local content measures have not yielded what we expected include, but are not limited to the following:

As I mentioned earlier there is the legal regime, which is not unified to allow both the elements of providing money and those supporting the business persons or persons who should use this money or take advantage of the budget. They are not unified although the current proposal unifies them.

The changing guidelines in favour of – I must mention that in 2017, the guidelines that were issued favoured most of the producers who would reinvest in the economy. This was intended to favour producers who would send money back to their countries. I hope we would appreciate that to that level.

So, those good guidelines that had been issued in 2017 were quickly changed in 2018. So, we need a law, which will not allow such changes to take place. 

There is also lack of motivation. Because for a big company to support a small company, there must be motivation in such a way that if you support the small company –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you summarise, please?

MR MOSES OGWAL: If you support a small company, you will get more business. That is lacking and we hope that will be well amplified in this document. 

Madam Speaker, we are going to have a challenge particularly when we come to the Parish Development Model. It is an opportunity – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, hon. Moses Ogwal met me when I was in S.1. He even feels – we used to call him Uncle. So, when he says, “Madam Speaker” just do not worry. (Laughter) 

MR MOSES OGWAL: I am sorry. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, summarise. 

MR MOSES OGWAL: My request to you and the august House is that for us to achieve all the advantages that come with local content, let us support this Bill. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Moses Ogwal. The honourable member’s Motion is about him seeking leave of this House to introduce a Private Members’ Bill. This right is enjoyed by every Member because it is provided for under Rule 121 of the Rules of Procedure. Therefore, we shall not have a debate on this.

I now put the question that leave of the House be granted to hon. Nsamba to introduce a Private Members’ Bill entitled, “The National Local Content Bill.”

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nsamba, you can now go and work hard to bring the Bill for first reading. Would you like to say something? 

MR NSAMBA: I thank you, Madam Speaker, for granting me leave of this House to re-introduce this Bill. I thank you, honourable members, for the support. I saw everyone interested in the local content law. 

Since the previous Bill was still at the assent level, we request the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to handle the Bill expeditiously for the good of the people of Uganda and the investors in this country. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock. Thank you.

(The House rose at exactly 7.20 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 4 November 2021 at 2 p.m.) 


