Thursday, 15 November 2012

Parliament met at 2.38 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thank you for the honour you gave to hon. John Odit yesterday and at All Saints’ Cathedral today. We have given him a very good send-off. Thank you very much for according him that respect.

Due to some other urgent issues, the sensitisation workshop on the Public Finance Bill, 2012 which was scheduled to take place on 28th November has been postponed to 4th December. So, take note accordingly and prepare to report and have this meeting, so that we can understand this Bill better and it will take a shorter time for us to discuss it in the House.

Honourable members, last week we had a debate on the issue of Kyambogo and there was a proposed motion. I have asked for a copy of the motion from the office of the Clerk but it has not been received by the Clerk. It cannot therefore come on the Order Paper now. It will come tomorrow. It has not been received, so we do not have copies today.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before that, in the public gallery this afternoon we have members of the Association of Uganda Oil and Gas Service Providers. They are here to observe the proceedings of Parliament. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

I wish to confirm that the Minister of Finance, hon. Maria Kiwanuka, respected my directive and by 10.00 O’clock of the date appointed she brought that report to my office.

2.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a statement by the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the candidature of Uganda for the Organisation of Islamic Conference (OIC) Secretary-General position. I wish to make a statement to this august House on the above matter following a directive I received on this matter.

Colleagues will recall that the financial year 2012/13 budget approved by this House on 28 September 2012 allocated all the available funds to priority areas of Government including late increase in recruitment and staff costs for the health sector, which funding I am still grappling with. Since the approval of the financial year 2012/13 budget, a number of developments have unraveled, which needs us to exercise even greater caution and fiscal discipline in the management of the scarce resources. These events include the following:

a) 	Domestic revenue shortfall for quarter one, as our trade tax revenues shrunk due to the global crisis.

b) 	The recent developments. Funding cuts instituted by some development partners as a result of financial improprieties in the Office of the Prime Minister and the Ministry of Public Service. You will note that development partners had programmed funding up to 24 per cent of the budget for financial year 2012/13 and this totaled to Shs 2.7 trillion.

The effect of the above actions mean that we have to brace for tougher times this financial and to immediately refocus on instilling fiscal discipline in public expenditure and accelerating our economy’s sluggish growth. This means that we have to pay even more attention to financing priority investments that are a prerequisite for the growth stimulus in the economy and for the support to essential services in the local government and the wage bill. Any other expenditure pressures must be discouraged.

Mr Speaker, I fully recognise the fact that Uganda has a candidate for Secretary-General of OIC. I also note that during Cabinet discussions for the financial year 2012/13 budget, before submission to Parliament, this issue featured. However, considering the constraints in the budget and the need to back finance productive investments to stimulate the sluggish economy, Cabinet decided that it was not possible to allocate funds for OIC candidature and payment of arrears. Similarly, Parliament committee discussions came to the same conclusion, therefore they passed financial year 2012/13 budget, which was debated and appropriated by this Parliament, did not allocate funds for the OIC candidature and payment of its arrears.

Mr Speaker, we regard the OIC as one of our important development partners and our relationship remains cordial. We have continued and we will continue to borrow from that source for critical investments in our economy. The OIC is aware of our financial predicament and has continued financial support in spite of our arrears. This is also true of other multilateral partners such as African Development Bank and the Islamic Development Bank.

We are very supportive of our candidature for the OIC where we understand the other candidate is from Saudi Arabia. However, we remain unable to find funds as requested for the reasons aforementioned. I appeal to all of us to brave for even tighter times in the face of the realities our economy is currently facing. We cannot afford any slippage, and any actions that will slide us back to double digit inflation should be resisted such as early supplementaries particularly those under our own control.

I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is what we have been waiting for from the Minister of Finance. We will have limited interaction on this for about eight minutes. This is almost a fait accompli, so we will not spend a lot of time on it until we find other avenues of dealing with the situation.

2.47
MR ONYANGO KAKOBA (NRM, Buikwe County North, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the honourable minister for the statement. However, I find the minister’s statement contradictory. We have a candidate, we have not subscribed, and at the same time we are saying the candidate is going to stand or we are supporting the candidate. I find this a little contradictory. I cannot imagine a situation where you are going to present a candidate when you have not paid your subscription fee. It is like someone sitting for an exam when you have not registered. That does not happen! 

I wish the honourable minister was a little bit straightforward and told us that they are not supporting the candidate; that would be understandable, instead of saying “we are supporting the candidate” but at the same time say, “we are unable to pay”. You cannot sit an exam when you have not registered.

This is just one of the cases we have had a problem with regarding our contributions to international organisations. I have been a member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs for quite some time and year in year out the issue of contributions to these international organisations is a problem. We really need to redefine our commitment to these international organisations. If you are finding it difficult to contribute to them, why don’t you identify some few and make a commitment to those instead of trying to be everywhere and you end up nowhere.

We really need to be committed and get serious on this issue of contributions to international organisations. It is an embarrassment to the country when we go to these meetings and then we find we have arrears. In most cases, we tend to pay when elections are around the corner, which does not add up. The Executive needs to get serious on this matter.

I would also like to seek clarification from the honourable Minister of Foreign Affairs; if he is not here, his colleagues should answer. There were press reports that Government was going to support the candidate from Saudi Arabia and that there was an envoy from the Saudi Arabian Kingdom who came to Uganda to try and drum up support for their candidate. How true is this? We need to know, now that our candidate is almost unable to contest for this post because we have not yet paid our subscriptions. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.50
MR MUHAMED KAWUMA (DP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have carefully listened to the honourable minister’s statement with a lot of dismay. When we talk about the candidature of Uganda in such an organisation, it is not about the narrow issue of the candidature per say but the other affiliated benefits that Uganda enjoys from such international organisations. What is the value of the money? Of course, we are also looking at the arrears here. The OIC is the major sponsor of the Islamic University in Uganda (IUIU). Many of us are graduates from that university. 

In the statement we also see that we are not subscribing to other international organisations like the African Development Bank, from which time and again we seek financial rescue. My concern about the honourable minister’s statement is the lack of Government commitment. The reason given here is because there is financial mismanagement in the OPM. We have many other such cases. In the past years, we have been celebrating economic achievement and progress of seven per cent and we have not been subscribing to this organisation. Now we failing, and there is even no commitment at all to show that we are going to subscribe or pay the arrears in the next financial. The statement just ends at that, and it is like we are giving up our membership in the organisation. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.52
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a very serious statement and I would like to look at it in its entirety - its implication to Government, to Parliament and Uganda as a whole.

The Minister of Finance, although the statement is not signed, is telling us that our trade tax revenue has shrunk. He is telling us that a quarter of our budget is not being financed because the development partners have cut financing because of corruption. He is telling us to brace ourselves for tougher times ahead. As an economist, I look at this statement as being a very serious one. He is actually telling us that we are on an economic downturn, that we have a crisis at hand. 

When he says, “We are now only going to finance priority investments”, I think Parliament must know which those are. It seems there are some areas, which are going to incur budget cuts. I think as a result of this statement, we should request Ministry of Finance to come out with a clear statement on the state of the economy as it stands today. We seem to be in a crisis which is being camouflaged. We shall be surprised. 

I think in about a month or two ahead we will be looking at budget performance. We are almost six months into our budget, so for us to receive this and we only look at the Organisation of Islamic Conference is not enough. The Minister of Finance has been generous in telling us, although indirectly, that we have an economic crisis at our hands. So, I would like to request that you direct that he actually comes out with a full statement on the state of our economy today and on priority areas that he is proposing to allocate the little resources we have. Thank you.

2.55
MR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi West County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Magyezi is looking at the economic performance, but having been here for some time, this is not something new. A few years ago, there was report of a threat of invasion of locusts and the only organisation that we were looking at that could help in case locusts invaded Uganda was a certain organisation in IGAD but we had not subscribed to that organisation. We went into a debate on if the locusts arrived here whether this organisation will ever come to our rescue. Some years ago, we also had a candidate to UNIDO but Uganda had not subscribed. We were even lucky that our candidate eventually made it. 

What is happening is not something of today. There is lack of commitment and seriousness when it comes to subscribing to international organisations and yet we actually benefit from these organisations. We are only lucky that some of these organisations become sympathetic and we attend and maybe vote or participate in the deliberations. I think this is a problem of lack of seriousness and commitment but not about the economy. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.57
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (NRM, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I find the statement of the honourable minister still wanting as a result of pointing out the issue of the donors cutting their aid as a result of the mess in the Office of the Prime Minister. Really, his mathematics does not add up in this way. This is something that came up way back last year, and we all knew about our candidature about two years ago. These are things that highlight on the board of the foreign affairs ministry all the time. The information keeps flowing that in such and such an organisation, you will be taking up the secretariat or other things. This means there is really no goodwill towards our participation in such international organisations where we amass or attract a lot of donor funding. 

Mulago Hospital, for example, is amongst the recipients of the donor funds from the OIC. What a chance we are missing to hold the secretariat where we shall at least have some leverage of control of the activities that go on. I think this is deplorable and we must call our house to order. As a country being viewed from our foreign participation, no one shall respect us as Ugandans on foreign soil. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

2.59
MR PHILLIP WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The minister has given us a very serious statement. It would appear that maybe Government is going towards bankruptcy and it will need all of us to maybe sit and agree on how to move forward because we do not have money, basically caused by, symptomatically, the cuts by the donors. 

I think the major problem is that we have caused this situation ourselves because of our corrupt tendencies. We steal money given to us by poor people in rich countries and it comes here and rich people enjoy in a poor country. In anything rotting, there is something which germinates. In our corrupt ways, we have been given a rude shock that we must address the issue of corruption in our country and address it seriously; if we do not address it, we shall get no money.
 
Failure to pay arrears in foreign organisations where we belong is rampant. Our Government does not seem to care about the image of this country. That is why when we go to our embassies, they are in appalling situations; they are not repaired, we do not pay arrears, and now we cannot even support our own to compete for an office internationally to give us stature. 

You did not support Kiprotich and he went and did something which you have not done for 10 years. Now you want to own him. You cannot even support our own to become secretary-general of OIC. We have no money, but what happens to the budgeting. We budget every year and we are in arrears every year. Where do you take the money, members of the government? 

I think as my colleague from Igara said, we need some serious statement from Government on how to move forward from where we are because a Shs 3.0 trillion shortage is serious money from the Shs 11 trillion budget. At least this case of OIC should have been an emergency so that we look for money so that our own can compete for that slot. He has been putting in a lot of effort for this position and it will be too bad if he is disqualified just because a whole country cannot pay US$1 million for him to participate. Thank you very much.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister whether this report is up-to-date. As far as I am know, our candidate is almost reaching Djibouti. We would like to get clarification from the minister whether this report we are debating is the current report. If not, can he go back and come up with the exact situation on this matter? Otherwise, we are going to waste time discussing this matter which has already been overtaken by events. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.03
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I want to only focus on 2.0(b), the recent development funding cuts instituted by some development partners. I have few observations that I want to make. What were the requirements or the observations of the development partners in line with the corruption cases we are having in OPM, if you talk about OPM as a case study? 

What conclusions did they reach? I also want to ask Government to be honest here. Some of the conditions of the development partners were very simple for Government to address. Do we want to say here that some individuals are bigger than development partners? If we are going to have a shortfall of Shs 2.7 billion, for example, who are these individuals who are bigger than us having a funding gap of Shs 2.7 trillion? Hon. Omach, you have brought this here but how are you acting in addressing the gaps, for instance, on the deficit of Shs 2.7 trillion? If you are going to protect a few individuals at the expense of a poor Ugandan, then there is a crisis. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.05
MR ABDI FADHIL CHEMASWET (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Right from the beginning, Makerere University was the only university in Uganda. In 1971, after Uganda had been given the membership of Organisation of Islamic Conference, it was agreed that there should be a university called the Islamic University in Uganda. It was through the effort of the Organisation of Islamic Conference that that university was established in 1988 and it was placed in Nkoma, Mbale. It is Organisation of Islamic Conference that has been funding the Islamic University in Uganda, and we are not appreciating that fact. In fact, if you want to milk a cow very well, you have to feed it so that you can have a lot of milk. I do believe that the effort that OIC has put in Uganda in terms of funding such an institution is so enormous and we really need to appreciate it. 

When the government comes in and says, “We do not want to give our contribution” then it means they should really tell us that we are withdrawing our membership from OIC. This will be a problem really to students who are studying in the Islamic University in Uganda. This was the second university in Uganda and it is being funded by outsiders who should be appreciated by just giving a small contribution for them to recognise that “we are with Uganda”. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.07
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to agree with hon. Magyezi that the minister should give us a comprehensive statement on the status of the economy because the report here shows we are on oxygen. He needs to tell us what needs to be done. 

Specifically, with respect to the issue, the minister should give us an update. As hon. Mawanda was telling us, the information we have is that a lot of discussions have taken place. Actually, I think it has been agreed that Uganda will not contest for the secretary-general. It will be taken by Saudi Arabia and another position will be created for an assistant secretary-general in charge of African affairs, which the Ugandan will take. That is the information that we have.

I do not know whether the Minister of Finance liaised with the Minister of Foreign Affairs. As we speak, I think the candidate and the Minister for Foreign Affairs have arrived in Djibouti and they are already there working on that. So, are you up-to-date as our minister or you need to cross-check your facts so that when you address Parliament, you know what is going on? I think there have also been discussions on the issue of payment, which you are not telling us - (Interruption)

MR BALYEJJUSA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable colleague for giving way. The information I want to pass on to you, in order for you to beef up your submission, is that the candidature for Uganda is for only now. If it goes beyond today or beyond now, then we are likely not to have any candidate coming from Uganda for the next 52 years because in total, there are about 53 countries that make up OIC and this candidature is rotational. So, once we miss out this time, then we are not likely to produce any candidate for those many years to come. 

In addition to us fielding a candidate, there are many attendant benefits that are associated with our membership to OIC. It is only that time does not permit, but in addition to IUIU which the honourable colleague was elaborating on, there are many sectors that are funded by money from OIC. There is, for instance, money which is channeled through BADEA. There is also the Islamic Development Bank. All these are funds that come to complement and supplement our development efforts economically here in the country.

So, like honourable colleagues have observed before, I think the statement by the Ministry of Finance falls short of the entire explanation about this situation. We demand that he goes back to the drawing board and comes up with a more refined statement that states our positions as a country in as far as membership of OIC is concerned. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You now beg to submit. (Laughter)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much for your detailed information. I hope the minister was listening. I was just updating the minister with respect to the discussions going on in Djibouti this morning. When the minister says on page 3 that “we are very supportive of our candidature for the OIC”, the clarification which he should give us is: what exactly are you trying to tell this Parliament? What is the nature of your support? You are not even telling us how much money we are talking about in arrears and outstanding balances in your statement. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there are two issues - the statement in relation to the OIC and also the request about the statement on the general state of the economy. Would you like to make some response?

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On the issue of giving a statement on the state of the economy, we shall make it within the next two weeks.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next two weeks?

MR OMACH: On the issue of 24 per cent of the budget which is being supported by our development partners, this is to indicate to you that this is the fact that should our development partners decide to cut, the maximum that will be cut is this amount. We operate a cash budget and as of now, any retention of part of this is very tight on our economy. Therefore, for us at this stage to bring any supplementary would be extremely difficult and that is why we brought in this issue of the 24 per cent of our budget. 

We do recognise the importance of OIC, and as I have said in this statement, we undertake to ensure that in the coming financial year, we look into the issue of the payment of the arrears. As far as our candidature is concerned, the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the candidate are on their way for this function. They have been facilitated. I do not have the details but they are on their way to attend this function. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, the minister has asked for two weeks. I think we should give him the two weeks so that we do not have any excuses in the middle. Is that okay? In one week we may not get anything, so let us give him the two weeks he has requested for. 

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, we are in a crisis. We have a problem if the economy is doing so badly to the extent that we cannot afford US$ 500,000 for our candidate. If we are that badly off, to give us two weeks as Parliament, the representatives of the people, is too long! I would request that you cut it short to one week from today. We should have this statement so that we are able to explain to the country what is going on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the request from the person who is supposed to make the statement; can you squeeze water out of a rock? Can we give the minister the time he has requested for so that we can have this report here and deal with it properly. We cannot rush and then he comes and says, “We are not ready”. We shall still be building up on something and spending time for - So, honourable minister, you have two weeks to get back to this House to give a brief on the state of the economy since you have alerted us to brace for even tougher times.

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers from Kyebando UMEA Primary School represented by hon. Seninde Rosemary, Member of Parliament for Wakiso. They have come to join us. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) I earlier directed that all parts of this country are always represented by two Members and I would like the list always to come with both Members’ names. Otherwise, if it is only one, I will stop reading them.

We also have in the distinguished gallery this afternoon the Vice-Chancellor, Prof Isaiah Omollo Ndiege, and lecturers of Kyambogo University. They are here to observe the proceedings of the Parliament. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Honourable members, my attention has been drawn to the fact that both the mover of the motion and the seconders will be going off to the burial of hon. John Odit. This is on the issue of Kyambogo and the motion we agreed upon last week that it should come today. You may remember we debated this quite extensively and all that was left was for us to find a way of moving forward with this, how to move it to the next level. I did say a motion would be able to help us wrap this up properly. I will use my prerogative under the rules to amend the Order Paper to allow this motion to be presented. The condition is that we debate and finalise this in the next 45 minutes so that we can go to the Bill. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO COMPREHENSIVELY ADDRESS THE ISSUES OF MISMANAGEMENT OF KYAMBOGO UNIVERSITY

(Debate Continued)

3.17
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this golden opportunity. I rise to move a motion under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. 

“WHEREAS two petitions were separately presented to this Parliament on behalf of the staff and students of Kyambogo University to investigate the mismanagement of Kyambogo University by the vice-chancellor;

AND WHEREAS the parliamentary sectoral Committee on Education and Sports investigated the petitions and found the vice-chancellor innocent of the allegations leveled against him;

AWARE THAT an ad hoc committee set up by the University Council also investigated the unrest and mismanagement of Kyambogo University and found the vice-chancellor innocent of the allegations leveled against him;

ALSO AWARE that both the parliamentary sectoral Committee on Education and Sports and the ad hoc committee of council found that Kyambogo University is grossly underfunded;

CONSCIOUS THAT both investigations unearthed grave mismanagement by various offices in Kyambogo University, including, but not limited to, the fraudulent employment of unqualified staff, parallel and irregular admission of students who do not meet the minimum requirements, leakage and selling of examination papers to students, students graduating before doing retakes, and altering examination results to give those who have failed better grades;

ALSO CONSCIOUS that the parliamentary committee recommended, among other things, an in-depth investigation to be instituted into the office of the Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Academic Affairs) and the Academic Registrar, Procurement, Estates departments, University Secretary and the Director Human Resources, respectively;

NOTING THAT the sectoral committee also found that the university has suffered financial losses occasioned by fraudulent payment of late fees by students who are then given pre-stamped receipts by a cashier in Stanbic Bank, Kyambogo Branch, in connivance with the staff in the bursar’s office;

FURTHER NOTING THAT the University Council, in total disregard of both reports, in breach of sections 8 and 9 of the Leadership Code Act, 2002, and in a blatant move to undermine the institution of Parliament is illegally furthering the malafide decision of dismissing the vice-chancellor who has in both reports been exonerated;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that: 

1. 	The Inspectorate of Government, within two weeks, commences an in-depth investigation into the corrupt practices and mismanagement in the offices of the Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Academic Affairs), the Academic Registrar, the University Secretary, the Director for Human Resource and Estates Department respectively as recommended by the committee of Parliament;

2. 	The Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Academic Affairs) be asked to take his accumulated and approved leave as the Inspectorate of Government investigates his office;

3. 	The Auditor-General, within two weeks, commences a forensic audit into the procurement, internal audit and the university bursar’s office to ascertain the financial loss suffered by the university and identify culprits, who will be prosecuted in accordance with the law;

4. 	The 11 members of the University Council who breached sections 8 and 9 of the Leadership Code Act by failing to disclose their personal interest when sitting and deciding in the University Council, having testified against the Vice-Chancellor in the ad hoc committee, be asked to vacate office as provided for under section 9(3)(a) of the same Act while the University Council chairperson’s role should also be investigated;

5. 	Government, in the next financial year, appropriates sufficient funds to Kyambogo University to address the urgent and critical needs of the students, academic and welfare issues;

6. 	The Minister of Education and Sports ensures that the vice-chancellor who has been cleared by all the three investigations resumes office immediately without further hindrance and his office be opened forthwith;

7. 	The University and other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 be reviewed and amended to address the issues highlighted in all the three reports;

8. 	The Minister of Education and Sports ensures the immediate implementation of these resolutions and reports back to Parliament the steps taken in this regard within three weeks.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? The motion is seconded by the honourable member for Ajuri, the honourable member for Bukooli Island and the honourable member for Busiro. I am told if you pronounce it the other way, it can be problematic. Honourable members, I think the issues are clearly outlined in the petition.

3.24
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Mr Speaker, we do not have copies of the motion but I have listened attentively, and the mover is talking of investigating certain offices and leaving out other offices. The spirit in the report was that there was more than meets the eye and the report was recommending investigation in the whole university. So, I want to move an amendment that in addition to the offices she has mentioned, all offices in the university, even the office of the Vice-Chancellor, should also be investigated. 

Secondly, in the motion she is mentioning certain people in certain offices to be sent on leave. We should leave that to the investigative arm. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members that is a good contribution. Hon. Anywar, your issues are very clear. 

3.26
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I intend to be very brief because a number of issues have been covered by both sides. My concern is only with one of the proposed issues in the motion - to allocate sufficient funds to Kyambogo University in the next financial year. 

I just wish to make a small amendment that we say, “allocate sufficient funds to all public universities” because all these universities are facing the same challenge. I have had the benefit of teaching in one of them for eight years and these are the same issues that keep arising, which cannot be centred on one office or one individual.

One of the issues that came up in this debate was the surcharge levied against students who do not pay in time. Of course, already they are poor and that is the reason why they have not paid, and then you add a surcharge on a surcharge! Definitely, this is not the decision of an individual or even a specific office; it is usually a decision of senate, which is an organ of the university and it is statutory. So, I think in our investigations, if that is adopted by Parliament, we also need to review the powers of these different organs in our universities. Otherwise, I am in full agreement and support of the motion with those proposed amendments.

3.28
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to second this motion with the amendment brought forward by the Government Chief Whip. I strongly believe that Article 79 of the Constitution empowers Parliament to make laws for the good governance, peace and order of this country. It is incumbent upon the people who implement the laws that we act within the confines of the law and not outside. 

Mr Speaker, two bodies investigated the vice-chancellor. The ad hoc committee set by Kyambogo University Council investigated this office and found the office bearer innocent. Our very own sectoral Committee on Education and Sports also investigated the same office and found the office bearer innocent. One would be tempted to ask a fundamental question: under what basis are those pushing out the Vice-Chancellor of Kyambogo University acting if there is no personal interest? I think this Parliament must promote justice; this Parliament must promote fairness; this Parliament must promote equity. I have been investigated and been found innocent but you are saying, “Obua, get out of Parliament”. What is the basis of my getting out of Parliament? 

I think the entire Kyambogo University should be investigated. You know, in Uganda the corrupt are so powerful that if they gang up against you, you become history – (Applause) – and they want to make this vice-chancellor history. The man came after the first advert and he came out again after the second one. I think in the interest of the university council, they recruited a very good and decent vice-chancellor. But as he started his work and he was spot-on, the laptop warriors – I prefer calling them laptop warriors because they normally use their laptops - of Kyambogo University could not give him an opportunity to proceed with his clean record. That is why he is now here, in this Parliament. We have investigated him and found him innocent. 

We were talking about the state of the economy. We must ask ourselves further, tomorrow the vice-chancellor will go to courts of law and he will be awarded damages because he has been unfairly treated, how will you pay him, if not through the tax payers of Uganda? 

I want to support this motion that the relevant organ created under the laws, the IGG, must now swing into action to investigate all the relevant offices, the entire management. In fact, even the university council itself must be investigated. We are told that there are members of the university council who appointed the ad hoc committee, but they still went ahead and participated in the proceedings of the ad hoc committee. Even after their report had exonerated the VC, they are still pushing him out. So, the council must be investigated and the university management must be investigated so that our brothers and sisters, our sons and daughters who are studying at Kyambogo University are given a conducive atmosphere to study in that university. 

I think even the Committee of Science and Technology is about to present a report on the status of science in public universities. These are critical issues that we must fight. I want to associate myself with this motion and I support all the prayers with the amendments. One important point that I must re-echo is that fairness, justice and equity must be upheld by all Ugandans. Thank you.

3.33
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been following the debate and I am aware that the House extensively debated this matter. There was general consensus supporting the position of the committee, which is reflected in the motion of hon. Beatrice Anywar, and with those good amendments from the Executive I would think that there is general consensus. I would therefore like to move a motion that the question be put to this motion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules are clear; they dictate that I put the question without any further delay. I put the question to the motion that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for a resolution of Parliament to comprehensively address the issues of mismanagement of Kyambogo University and there are eight prayers. We will go prayer by prayer for us to have it comprehensively handled. 

Prayer No 1, “The Inspectorate of Government, within two weeks, commences an in-depth investigation into the corrupt practices and mismanagement in the offices of the Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Academic Affairs), the Academic Registrar, the University Secretary, the Director Human Resource and the estates department respectively as recommended by the report.” 

There was an amendment that was proposed that we stop at “corrupt practices and mismanagement at Kyambogo University”. With all the amendments it should read as follows: “The Inspectorate of Government, within two weeks, commences an in-depth investigation into the corrupt practices and mismanagement in all offices in Kyambogo University.” Hon. Katuntu, do you have something to say?

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am a little bit uncomfortable with the wording of that resolution. The Inspectorate of Government is constitutionally protected from any sort of direction from any person or authority and that includes this House. That wording giving timelines is in some way a direction. So, I think the word to be used should be “urge”; so, we urge the Inspectorate of Government to commence an investigation. To say that you are giving him two weeks would be unconstitutional, in my view.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The proposal would then be: “That Parliament urges the Inspectorate of Government to urgently commence an in-depth investigation into the corrupt practices and mismanagement in all offices in Kyambogo University”. Would that be agreeable?

MR OTADA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think we are not saying for sure that there are corrupt practices going on in Kyambogo. I think we should say, “alleged corrupt practices in Kyambogo”. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is already a finding to that effect by a committee of this House, that there are corrupt practices going on in Kyambogo University. There is a recommendation that was adopted. 

Honourable members, I put the question to prayer No. 1 of the motion, “That Parliament urges the Inspectorate of Government to urgently commence an in-depth investigation into the corrupt practices and mismanagement in all offices in Kyambogo University.” 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Prayer 1 adopted)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prayer No. 2, “The Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Academic Affairs) be asked to take his accumulated and approved leave as the Inspectorate of Government investigates his office.”

There was a proposal that this should be at the initiative of the investigating officer. In which case, there is a proposal for deletion of this No. 2. Okay.

Prayer No. 3, which will now be No. 2, “The Auditor-General, within two weeks, commences a forensic audit in the procurement, internal audit and university bursar’s office to ascertain the financial loss suffered by the university and identify culprits, who shall be prosecuted in accordance with the law.” Is that okay or should we have the same phraseology as we did for the IGG? 

MR BALYEJJUSA: I thank you so much, Mr Speaker. My understanding of a forensic audit is that it presupposes a situation where an ordinary audit has already been conducted. So, are we saying that there is already an audit that has been conducted and therefore the Auditor-General should go in and carry out an in-depth audit? I happen to have a limited understanding of audits although I had some limited exposure in that field. Can we be guided on this by people who are more qualified in audits? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you ask for a forensic audit before doing the ordinary audit first? That is the Member’s question and the answer is, “yes”.

MR KYAMADIDI: I thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to believe that as a public university, ordinarily there are annual audits by even internal auditors. So, to demand for a forensic audit is normal and okay. 

I also wanted to add that we should not specify “procurement, university bursar and internal audit” because there are many more other departments where we shall have to demand for value for money audits or this forensic audit. I want us to be comprehensive in that matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, do you propose to adopt the similar wording with the first prayer, in which case it will be something like, “...urges the Auditor-General to urgently commence a forensic audit in Kyambogo University?” 

MR KYEWALABYE: Mr Speaker, because the Auditor-General is an officer of Parliament, I think that in this case instead of saying “urges” we can actually say “directs”. I stand to be corrected.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. “The Auditor-General within two weeks commences a forensic audit in Kyambogo University.” Is that approved? I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Prayer 3 adopted)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prayer 4, “The 11 members of the University Council who breached sections 8 and 9 of the Leadership Code Act by failing to disclose their personal interest when sitting and deciding in the University Council, having testified against the vice-chancellor in the ad hoc committee, be asked to vacate office as provided for under Section 9 (3) (a) of the same Act while the University Council chairman’s role should be investigated.” I think that this one is taken care of by the general clause. Is that okay? So this one falls by the wayside, as they say.

MS ANYWAR: I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. The members we are trying to mention here are actually supposed to face disciplinary action for the wrongs already done. The VC had already served them with letters to face disciplinary action and that is why we were alluding to them here. Because they are supposed to face disciplinary action, they should proceed to go and face it, unless the House thinks that the undertaking of serving disciplinary action should be waived or carried out concurrently with the general investigation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think it falls within the issue of vacating office, which we agreed to. It should fall within the general framework of the powers of the IGG to deal with it. Is that okay? So we drop 4.

Prayer 5, “Government, in the next financial year, allocates or appropriates sufficient funds to Kyambogo University to address the urgent and critical need for students’ academic and welfare issues.”

MR BYANDALA: Thank you Mr Speaker. I hate it when this House passes resolutions which are not implementable. As we continue, they become accumulative and this House can lose value. In my opinion, it is impossible, with the economic situation, to allocate “sufficient funds” as you say there because getting “sufficient” is a lot of money. I would suggest that we amend it to say that “Government increases funding”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: “Additional”?

MR BYANDALA: Yes, “additional”, and when we come here as a House we can see how far we can go, but we should not get to the level of saying “sufficient”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the proposal is to replace the word “sufficient” with “additional”. Is that acceptable? We already know what we passed this year, so it is to urge them to put more money into Kyambogo or all public universities, because there is a proposal for all.
 
MR MAGYEZI: I thank you, Mr Speaker. Talking of additional funding, even if you added Shs 100, that is additional funding. I think we are talking about funds that are adequate and sufficient to enable the universities run. I think shying away from our responsibilities is not fair to the institutions of Government. I think we should come out with a recommendation and then this will be subject to availability of funds. We cannot sit and say that we shall allocate additional funds. What is “additional”? So, I recommend that we go with the wording of the mover of the motion. 

MR BYANDALA: It is this House that appropriates. When we are here, we shall see what “additional” means. We shall decide here but you cannot just say “sufficient” when you will not get sufficient. All of us have been to these universities. My colleague from Busiro is saying all universities. I am a student from Makerere University and I know that there are buildings, labs and equipment that are needed in the Faculty of Technology worth billions but are not there. How do you expect us to have “sufficient” in all these universities? Let us say “additional” and this House will have the mandate to see what that additional funding is that will be sufficient to take them to a reasonable level. 

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Speaker, I do sympathise with the Cabinet minister. We are all privy to the fact that we are not performing very well and the evidence is there on the roads. Roads maintenance is still failing, and so I sympathise with him. However, I also believe that he does not know where the money is because certain people within Government are able to move things and they have the money to move things.

I also hate, like he did say, for Government to say that it is going to shy away from what people would desire. The level of funding is what we are addressing today and it is about Government’s prioritisation or thinking of what we want Uganda to be. If you shy away from the word “sufficient”, where sufficient means enough - Why wouldn’t you want Government to fund enough for tertiary education? What is causing all this? It is because there isn’t enough and we are saying in order to address it, substitute it with enough and you are now shying away from that? 

Additional funding, as the honourable member from Igara said, takes into consideration even Shs 1 or Shs 10. That is additional funding, and you will run away from this because a parliamentary resolution said “additional funding”. However, if you talked about “sufficient” then we can qualify the sufficient funding to address the perennial problems that are taking place. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We can spend a lot of time on the meaning of the words “sufficient”, “enough”, “adequate”, “additional”. The last member to speak on the Floor, if I asked when he ever had enough resources to meet his demands, the answer would be different from mine because I do not think I have ever had sufficient resources to meet my demands, let alone Government. We appropriate money after allocating it and before long we find we have to look for supplementaries because the monies we are allocated were not enough.

You could even further ask whether your economy really has sufficient resources to meet the demands of this country. When we talk about additional resources, we mean that as the monies are gathered, we can add, we can continue supplementing. My Member of Parliament said that if one had Shs 100 – I do not think this House has the habit of tokenism, that it could just add Shs 1 and boast about it as additional support.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think we need to start from the issue for which the money is required, so that we can ask ourselves, “money sufficient to do what?” Every financial year there is a budget and there are activities, so what are we giving the money for. If you doubt the sufficiency of the money, given the vast needs of the university, we should give priority to some essential limited needs which are quantifiable and therefore measurable in terms of money. So, can we go to the issue of what the money is supposed to do, for example run a university on the bare minimum?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I want to give is that in the financing of public universities, they compute the unit cost depending on the number of students in a particular university. That means that you can know what is sufficient for every university using this formula. So, when we use the term “sufficient”, it is actually  scientifically derived from the computation based on the unit cost per university.

MR FUNGAROO: That is science. Thank you so much. Mr Speaker, with that information given, it implies that we can know the limits and the demands because we know the number of students,  the lecturers, and the unit cost is measurable. So, I do not know why my senior citizens - the Cabinet ministers - find it difficult to accept that there is a limit and therefore sufficiency can be talked about. 

The words “sufficient”, “adequate” are really the same. We should just endeavour to appropriate enough money to run the programmes that have been measured and accepted on the basis of a unit cost in a year.

MR MADADA: Mr Speaker, this particular prayer in the motion may cause a bit of a problem. A  prayer that says we give additional or sufficient money is unattainable. Every financial year there are issues that arise and it is very difficult to determine what will happen next year. There will be many other priorities coming up. So, determining those now is a little of a problem. I also want to be advised on a legal issue based on Article 93 of the Constitution, restriction on financial matters. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It does not apply. Can we use the words, “urges Government to source and allocate adequate funds”, so that it takes care of something comprehensive? Does that capture everything?

MR KYEWALABYE: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I think in this particular case, we had our own committee on education, which carried out the investigations to identify the particular areas which need urgent attention. So, we could say “adequate additional funding to address the identified issues as per the report of the committee.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the proposal now is that “Parliament urges Government, in the next financial year, to source and allocate adequate funds to all public universities.” Would that be it?

MR LOKERIS: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we get compelled to use the words “to source adequate funds”, which resources are not available, and you are only urging Government, if Government does not comply, what is the remedy?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the final draft that, “Parliament urges Government, in the next financial year, to source and allocate adequate funds to all public universities.” 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Prayer 5 adopted)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prayer 6 is that, “The Minister of Education and Sports ensures that the Vice-Chancellor, who has been cleared by all the three investigations, resumes office immediately without any hindrance and his office be opened forthwith.” Why can’t we handle that one together with the first resolution?

MR MUYINGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the House that the power to remove or to appoint lies in the hands of the chancellor and I think that is what the law says. The chancellor appoints and removes; it is not the minister. I just wanted to share that information with you so that we do not make mistakes.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am happy to have received that information from the Minister of State for Higher Education. I think what we urging the ministry to do is not to remove but to ensure that a resolution of Parliament is adhered to. I find some difficulty in removing all the officers from the university because when you do that, who will run the university? That is one.

Two, we have urged the IGG to take up this matter. Now, the laws that guide the IGG are in place; if he or she finds sufficient grounds to remove these people from office during the investigations, he or she removes them. I think let us leave the IGG to do her work. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have dealt with that. This is now the one which says the Vice-Chancellor should resume office immediately without any hindrance or his office be opened forthwith. That is the matter before us now.
  
MR MAJEGERE: Mr Speaker, we need to be very careful when we are handling the issue of the vice-chancellor. It appears there are very many mafias in the university because since morning, I am being harassed with telephone messages and I am sure there are many other Members of Parliament in the same category. The messages are urging us to send away the vice-chancellor. This means there are some mafias behind all this. So, we need to be very careful when dealing with the issue of the vice-chancellor.
 
I am proposing that we leave the vice-chancellor there since we have given the IGG the mandate to investigate. Let the IGG go ahead while the vice-chancellor is still there. Otherwise, if we remove the vice-chancellor - (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that the vice-chancellor had gone on his annual leave, which is ending this week. So, what we are urging is that he resumes work at the end of his leave while the investigations are going on.
 
MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I think the statement I made earlier applies to all officers of this university. The vice-chancellor as we speak now is not on any kind of forced leave. That is one. Two, the investigations against him cleared him. I think it is not even necessary to say that he resumes office. We have said everything will run as normal except and until the IGG orders otherwise. 

About the messages that we are receiving, that is blackmail. You cannot tell me, “Do this unless you want me to go on a strike”. For people who want to go on strike, it is absolutely their right to withdraw their labour and we find alternative labour.
 
MR MAJEGERE: Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to propose that we leave the vice-chancellor in office as the IGG goes ahead with the investigations. 

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I am at pains to believe that this prayer is needed in this motion. We should just delete it. If, as hon. Sseggona is saying, everything is normal, why are we saying he should be reinstated? 

Two, I would also like to agree with the honourable minister; sometimes some of the decisions we make have a lot of legal implications. For avoidance of doubt, as the honourable colleague is saying, I would like to move that that part of the vice-chancellor be deleted from the prayers in this motion.
 
MR HAMSON OBUA: Mr Speaker, the information I have is that the vice-chancellor went on normal leave on the 18 September 2012. When he went on leave, his office was locked and the locks were changed allegedly by the university council. We are saying that he is still the legitimate and bona fide Vice-Chancellor of Kyambogo University until investigations by the office of the IGG are concluded.
 
I do not know how we shall deal with this fundamental fact. How can you move back to an office, for instance your office on First Floor, and you find it locked and yet you are still the bona fide Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda? How do we deal with that?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that will be a matter for the IGG and Police. Do we need a resolution to capture that?
 
MR AWONGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I remember a few days ago, we proposed that Mr Bigirimana should leave office so that he could be investigated. Today, we seem to suggest that the vice-chancellor should remain in office while investigations are going on. Which standards are we applying? Isn’t that double standards?
 
MS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, we made a law that governs universities but tied the hands of the Ministry of Education. According to the information we are receiving, even if we pass the resolution, do we have the powers as Parliament to implement this? 

We have already given more responsibility, though it is their responsibility, to the IGG. I would suggest and support the Member who moved the motion that we delete this prayer because we have already passed a prayer that the IGG does this work. When this happens, whether the vice-chancellor has been pushed out of office legally or illegally, the IGG as an institution will ensure it does its work. So, I pray that we delete this and not be seen to be siding or to be biased so that the IGG does her work very well. Thank you. 
   
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In any case, if the vice-chancellor finds that his office is locked, he has access to the IGG and then they can handle it at that level. So, this is deleted.
 
Prayer 7, “The University and other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 be reviewed and amended to address the issues highlighted in the three reports.”

MS LUMUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to move an amendment by adding “and any other issues”. Remember that the committee had this petition for about three weeks only. So, we should give room to some other issues that may not have come to the attention of the committee. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, it would be: “The University and other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 be reviewed and amended to address the issues highlighted in the three reports and any other issues.” I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Prayer 7 adopted)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Finally, “The Minister of Education and Sports ensures the immediate implementation of these resolutions and reports back to Parliament the steps taken in this regard within three weeks.” I think in most of the things, we are urging the IGG to take action. 

MS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I would like to suggest that we do not put a time limit to it because the minister has to wait for the IGG to do her work and then receive the report. So, there is no way we can put a time limit to it when the IGG is still doing her work. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, this is on steps taken. If she has written a letter or what – It is a preliminary report; that is all. It is just about a preliminary report and not about the final decisions.
 
MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me even at this moment. I find some difficulty in what we are placing on the minister. The resolutions of this Parliament are not communicated by the minister; they are communicated by the Clerk. So, I find difficulty in instructing the minister even to bring a report because we seem to be the complainants, which is perfect, and we are the ones urging the IGG to carry out investigations and of course to make a report as her usual course of business. What is it exactly that we are telling the minister to do and to report on? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that is clear. 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to insist that the minister reports back to the House. Parliament has made a resolution to the Executive and this is a matter where the House has been on fire with the risk of the university staff and students going on strike. There must be an interim preliminary update as to how they are progressing. It is not only for the IGG. The IGG will take his or her time but we need a report on administrative interim arrangements that will be taken to make sure the situation is taken care of. In any case, assuming the VC has been cleared, that kind of reporting is proper because ours is an oversight function.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But if it is about clearing the VC, can that take place in three weeks? Do you think so?
 
MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, my understanding of what the Chief Whip is saying is that for the other details, the IGG could take her time but for these other reports, it is situational, as and when it happened. We would want to know what the progress is in this area. We can get that communication at the time the ministry thinks it has the information at hand. So, we cannot limit everything to two weeks.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, this is about immediate implementation of these resolutions. We are not talking about any other report. We are talking about these resolutions. These are the ones which we are asking the minister to talk about. Is it still relevant? The resolutions we have adopted relate only to the IGG; it is only the one of the Act that actually relates to the minister. 

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I will possibly make a slight amendment. We give two months for the other recommendations, which require a bit of time, but that does not stop the minister to report about any other findings, more so the interim preliminary administrative interventions which could be done. This would keep the House from sliding back into the situation it had reached. 

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, when we talk about three weeks, it is not up to maybe the 14th of December. I would think that we should extend the period to sometime before we break off for recess; so, we can give it four weeks, so that we can get an update from the minister. There is nobody else who can give us this update except the minister.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You could propose an amendment then. Maybe I state it for you; “The Minister of Education and Sports ensures the immediate implementation of these resolutions and reports back to Parliament the steps taken in this regard within three weeks.”

MS AOL: Yes, I think the amendment should be to replace “three weeks” to “within one month”. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, is that okay? I put the question to that.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, the text of the resolution is complete and the Clerk will extract it and supply it to the officers mentioned in the resolution accordingly. Thank you very much.

In the public gallery this afternoon we have pupils and teachers of Exodus Primary School represented by the hon. Patrick Nsanja and hon. Aida Nantaba, Members of Parliament, Kayunga District. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. I hope they are still there. We also have pupils and teachers of Kayini Kamwokya Islamic Primary School represented by hon. Kafeero Ssekitoleko and hon. Peace Kusasira, Members of Parliament, Mukono District. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them.  (Applause)  

We also have pupils and teachers of Kiwandangabo Primary School, Bugiri, represented by hon. Wafula Oguttu and hon. Justine Lumumba, Members of Parliament, Bugiri District. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House.  Please, join me in welcoming them.  (Applause)  You are all welcome! Thank you.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

4.15
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you remember how far we had gone; some clauses were stood over but we went as far as clause 120. We are now starting with clause 121.

Clause 121 

 MR WERIKHE:  Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to substitute sub clause (2) with the following: “When announcing areas for granting of petroleum exploration licences according to this Act, the Minister shall, with the approval of Cabinet, specify the maximum Government share which may be held by the Government under subsection (1).” Withdraw the proposal of sub clause (3) by the committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is the amendment - delete sub-clause (2) and replace it with the text read by the committee chairperson. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 121, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 122

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, we harmonised with the proposed amendment to a certain extent. In sub-clause (1), the proposal was to amend by deleting all the words after “unless” up to the end of the paragraph. That means that the proposal would read as follows: “The licensee and its contractors and sub-contractors shall give preference to goods which are produced or available in Uganda and services which are rendered by Ugandan citizens and companies.” This is okay.

We also had a proposal about a joint venture but I think hon. Alaso has a new amended version which – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we deal with this one first?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, we can deal with it first.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Alaso, is your amendment part of this?

MS ALASO: Yes, Mr Chairman. May be I propose it first. Fortunately, the committee chairperson has already said he has harmonised and is agreeable with this. The proposal, under clause 122 (1), is to delete all those words beginning from the word “unless”. The justification is that this makes it a lot clearer and minimises the possibility of ambiguity. We would like the licensee to procure services and goods produced by Ugandan entrepreneurs.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, honourable members? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Any other amendment on clause 122?

MS ALASO: Yes, Mr Chairman. Can I propose it?  

MR WERIKHE: I think before you come in, there is a proposal to have companies coming from outside this country to partner with indigenous companies. I talked to hon. Alaso this afternoon before we came to the House, but the harmonisation has not actually fruitfully matured. Maybe when she elucidates this on the Floor, we can then take a decision.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, we will harmonise from here.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to move that we create a new sub clause (2) to read as follows: “Where the goods and services required by the contractor or licensee are not available in Uganda, they shall be provided by companies which have entered into a joint venture with a Ugandan company provided that the said Ugandan company has a share capital of at least 48 per cent in the joint venture.” 

Mr Chairman, the reason behind this amendment is that at this particular stage in the oil industry, we need to provide affirmatively for local companies so that we increase their participation in trade, decision-making and job creation. This would be an opportunity for the oil revenues to be ploughed back into our country rather than having all of them taken outside the country by foreign companies.

Secondly, the proposal I am making is not new. In Africa, some countries have already embraced this arrangement in the context of local content. If you look at what happened in Angola, for instance, and you know Angola is a great oil-producing country, we know that it is not a matter of leaving it to concession or to production sharing agreements or to anything; it is a matter of law. 

The particular case I would like to refer to is the case of Nigeria. In 2010, Nigeria passed a separate law to deal with the participation of local companies. It is called “The Nigeria Oil and Gas Industry Content Development, 2010”. They provide for joint ventures; they also provide that in that joint venture, you have local companies providing a share capital which is not less than 51 per cent. 

If this proposal is adopted, it will help our companies to participate. Otherwise, we will end up in a situation where the contractors and licensees will bring gardeners and truck drivers from outside this country and then our own people will not have the opportunity to participate. If they argue that we do not have the capacity entirely to provide those sophisticated technologies, I propose that with our 48 per cent shareholding in this joint venture, they can bring what we cannot bring and we bring what we can locally bring with our local companies. Therefore, I pray that the House will support this amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is clear except that I will be proposing a technical adjustment to what she has proposed, if it is adopted. These days we are trying to run away from the word “provided”. You just create a new sub-clause to set that which you want to say in the provision to create the exception. That is now the way we do it.

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, while I agree, in principle, to protect our local companies, the proposal by hon. Alaso brings in conditions, including limits, and I thought it could be abused. Rather, I would propose – because she is just bringing this amendment on the Floor, Mr Chairman – (Interjections) – No, the chairman indicated that she is bringing this and it was not harmonised – (Interjections)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please, proceed.

MRS MULONI: What I am proposing is that, while in principle we are in agreement with protecting our local companies,  we need to re-draft this clause to read as follows: “Whereas the goods and services referred to in subsection (1) are offered on terms which are not equal to or better than imported goods and services with regard to quality and availability at the time and in quantities required, the licensee may, with the approval of the Authority, procure them from outside Uganda.” 

This does not prohibit our companies from getting into joint venture with companies from outside. From the proposal hon. Alaso is making, which puts a limit of 48 per cent in the joint venture, it is not clear what happens if there are no Ugandans capable to raise that percentage. 

You also realise that the oil and gas industry is very capital intensive. This will only protect a few companies. So, we would rather leave it open and encourage our local companies to get into joint ventures with foreign companies.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I entirely support the local content amendment aware that - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which one?

MR MUKITALE: The one moved by hon. Alaso. I support it aware that the production sharing agreement model we took is only best for a country if that country can control the recoverable costs to a minimum and make sure as much local content as possible is maximised deliberately to make sure that the country benefits.

Also, I want to attempt to define local content. If we do not define local content, we shall have a problem. Actually, in disagreement with what the honourable minister is suggesting, it becomes very difficult for our local companies, which we must deliberately nurture and develop, to compete internationally with those companies which are already in the business. They will be excluded. That is why the joint venture should be conditioned.

Mr Chairman, if I can inform the Minister; when a Ugandan company of 48 per cent is partnering with whatever big company globally, there is nothing that stops them from coming under a joint venture. Why do you want to go directly to multinationals? Some of us have worked for multinationals and we know what they are. You cannot compete with them. So, we must enable and protect our companies, and it does not need a week or two. The legal gurus will tell us what it takes to form a joint venture. The moment the companies here are given an expression of interest, they will immediately know who to partner with. 

Therefore, we should make this an edge. That is what is happening in Nigeria under the reforms because before it was not. Angola has taken a step in that direction. Even if you look at the post-apartheid Black Economic Empowerment (BEE) in South Africa, it is in that direction. It is on that ground that I would like to request that the Minister concedes to the amendment that these multinationals have to come through existing joint ventures. 

We are building capacity because they will bring the technology and the capital and after four or five years, we will build our own national capacity to have that technology. In the event that the company goes away after the contract, you will have a local company which has the best practice. I would like to insist that we support the amendment.

MR NAKABALE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would also wish to support hon. Alaso. I disagree with the Minister; if we say we want to promote and see local participation and yet here we are we shying away from making the variables measurable, I think it will be unrealistic. 

I wish also to add that not only should we be looking at the percentage of shareholding but we even want to promote local participation, and here we are looking at employment opportunities. We are better off stating that the employment level should be at least 85 per cent. In stating this clearly, we shall be able to measure and make these companies account so that local participation can be realised. Therefore, I call upon honourable members, and more so the Minister, to accept that we support the amendment.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. It is surprising that the Minister is opposing the good amendment by hon. Alaso, which takes care of national interest. I had the opportunity to visit the oil wells sometime last year and while there, we discovered that our friends are eating chicken and tomatoes imported from South Africa. So, we are trying to say that they should come in and partner with Wafula and company so that we can buy tomatoes from Bugiri. What is wrong with that? Why is the Minister opposing that, Mr Chairman?

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I stand to support the amendment by hon. Alaso. In support, I just want to give one vivid example that Members know very well. This is to do with Umeme. Umeme decided to import electricity poles from South Africa, even the conductors. We have ours made by the Cable Corporation here but they decided to import the very expensive ones, copper conductors. Therefore, to avoid all these coming into the oil industry, I think that amendment is pertinent and the House should adopt it. (Interjections)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Motion? 

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, let me just explain - (Interjections) – Honourable members, please, understand. In principle, I am in agreement with what you are proposing. However, I am saying that putting restrictive conditions, given the fact that in this sector the investments are really heavy - (Interjections) – No, not tomatoes. You are talking about the services that are required in the oil industry. So, putting the restriction is what I am saying we would rather leave open.    

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, under our Rules of Procedure, when a motion is on the Floor we normally do not go into debate. Are we proceeding well with the Minister explaining what she has already explained when there is a motion on the Floor?

THE DEPUTY CHAIPRSON: Where is the motion? There was a motion?

MR CHEMASWET: Mr Chairman, the motion is that the amendment by the honourable minister to amend hon. Alaso’s amendment be deleted. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is for the Speaker. (Laughter) That particular kind of question is for the Speaker. 

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move a motion that the debate on the proposed amendment by hon. Alaso be closed and the question be put. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the rules dictate that when such a motion is moved, the Speaker has no other role but to put the question to that motion. I put the question to the motion that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the amendment by hon. Alaso be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 122, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 123

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, under clause 123(2), the committee proposes to insert at the end the words, “and shall take into account gender equity, persons with disabilities and host communities”. So, the sub clause should read as follows: “The programme shall provide for the training and recruitment of Ugandans in all phases of petroleum activities and shall take into account gender equity, persons with disabilities and host communities.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the amendment proposed by the committee. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WERIKHE: We went ahead to insert a new sub clause (3) to read as follows: “In this section, ‘host communities’ means the inhabitants of the district in which petroleum activities take place.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The chairperson proposes to insert a new sub clause after (2), which we have just amended, to define host communities.

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, generally, I agree with him but I am wondering whether it could not be put in the earlier sections where all the other definitions are made.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Well, but do you agree to it?

MR KABAJO: Yes, I agree to it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This is like a section explaining a section before it, which would be proper. This one is explaining what is in the preceding section, for the purposes of that subsection. So, it is restricted to that section.

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, just in case we might need to use that phrase “host communities” again in another clause, wouldn’t it be better to put it in the definition part of the Bill?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: When it arises, then we will deal with it. Honourable member for Agago, what issue are you rising on?

MR AMOS OKOT: Mr Chairman, I rise to move an amendment to the definition of host communities that has been brought up by the chairperson of the committee. 

In this section, it says, “‘host communities’ means inhabitants of the district in which petroleum activities take place.”  I would like to propose that we do not leave it blank like that because in these districts, there are other people who went there to purchase land. Therefore, I propose that we say, “‘host communities’ means the indigenous inhabitants of the communities” – (Interjections) - I have a justification. (Interjections) Mr Chairman, I think I have a right to my opinion because - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal of the honourable member is to clarify and to enlarge what amounts to “host communities”. Let him explain properly and then we can take a decision.

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The host communities we are talking about should be the local communities that have been in existence for some time. We know that oil and gas have been discovered recently. We know some people are very hostile and they normally want to occupy things that do not in any way belong to them as a result of the corruption which exists in this country. So, I insist that we mention that the definition of host communities covers the indigenous inhabitants of that place. If we do not do that, we are not going to give any favour to the people who have been living in that area. Thank you.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, of course I would have loved it if the definition was talking about a region in a federal structure, but we are talking about a district. Now, the introduction of the word “ingenious” is dangerous because it has inter and intra discrimination connotations. That is number one. 

Secondly, if we adopt “indigenous”, it is going to push us into another definition because we may have to define “indigenous”. If you talk about Bunyoro, for example, I could be indigenous in Bunyoro because I can trace my roots there. Unfortunately, I am not resident in Bunyoro, so this pushes me out. 

May I invite my brother to accept that we adopt the definition so far provided and we leave it at that and that we do not go into further debate on that because it may be dangerous. 

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am also uncomfortable with the word, “host communities”. If we go by that, we shall be discriminating against other nationals of Uganda. We have power originating from Busoga, for example, but we are not very strict on putting terms that it should be the Basoga to benefit from the power. (Interjections) - I am also being reminded that even the water we use originates from Busoga and Busoga as a region is not benefiting even from the levy from Government. So, if we insist on host communities, then we are doing this country a disservice. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let me first take the minister. All of you are host communities, so you first wait.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am detecting a very dangerous idea in the definition of “indigenous”. Today, it is possible for me to buy a piece of land anywhere in Uganda. It is a constitutional right. If land does not change hands and become a market good, development cannot take place. 

Secondly, we now have discovered oil in Bunyoro. But I could buy a piece of land in Kabale and unknown to anybody underneath there is gold – (Ms Adong Lilly rose_) – Please, could you allow me to articulate my point. I may buy a plot of land in Kabale and I never imagined there would be gold, or in this case that there would be oil. I have just bought it and in the aerial and ground surveys, they discover there is oil and I have only been there for three years and now you do not want to count me among the people who are hosting the oil. 

I think the mistake that we are making, honourable members, is to imagine that when you are on top of this piece of land, what lies underneath is grown by you, that it is you who planted it there. None of us living today planted oil wherever it is because oil formed many years ago before any of us existed. So, to claim it - Yes, there is a good reason to claim it, but not to claim it in such a way as if to say that if you are here even for 100 years the oil there belongs to you and if you are not there, it would not have been there. I think let us be careful, otherwise we are going to divide this country into pieces and we are going to undermine the very progress that we are trying to establish.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. With all due respect to the honourable member, the proposed amendment is outrightly unconstitutional. It offends both the spirit and the letter of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. You are well aware that the Constitution guarantees the rights of the citizens of Uganda to migrate, settle and to do business in any part of the country. That does not qualify them to be called “indigenous” but it only gives them the constitutional right and we cannot sit and take away that right.

The second issue would probably be a rhetorical question. Who would we consider to be the indigenous community in the national park in Nwoya, where there is oil? I thank you, Mr Chairman. 

MRS ADONG: I thank you, Mr Chairman, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to start by saying that there are people who are buying land with ill intentions of benefitting from the oil. That is a fact in the country. If you all know the history of Buliisa, there is a community called the Balaalo, whom we do not know – they swing from one place to another. If they had not been chased from there, they would have been the ones being referred to as the “host community”.

Secondly, for us, the host communities, we are already experiencing this, like in Nwoya. Talk about recruitment; over 90 per cent of the people who are doing the work that the local community is supposed to do come from elsewhere. As we talk now, we do not even know the people being sent on scholarship for training by these companies. We do not know these people! So, it is very good to make a law that gives opportunity to the host communities to be given an opportunity. (Interjections) We need to protect them, although I do not agree with the word “indigenous” because it may alienate certain people who went to settle in those areas with good intentions. 

Those who are privy to information about where the oil is are going ahead to buy the land, and of course they have the money and connections. They will be the ones benefitting and the actual poor people will be left out. Mind you, it is the poor people who will start the insecurity that this country will face. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Remember this is about training.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I support the committee’s affirmative enabling amendment. In this information age, the Ogoni experience is live for anybody who cares to find out. There are the Aborigines in Australia; for those who take time to read, you should know the pain that Australia is going through in form of reparation and restitution to try and look for people who were almost being decimated by an industry that was not sensitive to host communities. 

Therefore, I would like to urge colleagues that the host community definition is proper, and it does not mean that the transhumance and influx that comes because of the evolving industry are not taken care of by other areas of Government. What we are saying is that there are these disadvantaged and very local people. There are these people in Buliisa and Nwoya who do not hold a title. Yesterday, some people in Kampala were claiming to own square miles of land where these small people are. These are the people we are talking about.

There are these people who have been earning a livelihood through agriculture and grazing and they may not transit to the oil industry. They do not have technical capacity, they are not qualified but these are citizens. Therefore, we should not make a law that renders them secondary citizens. It is in that spirit that “host communities” is defined so that we avoid the Ogoni experience, the oil curse and what happened to the Aborigines in Australia.

MR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have no problem with the definition of host communities and I would urge my colleagues to support this amendment. 

I would like to request the chairman that instead of using the word “district” we should bring in the word “region”. The reasons are that with the craze of districts, we may end up having a sub-county becoming a district and alienating other areas that were previously part of that area which would have benefitted. So, I propose that instead of “district” we use “region” – (Interjections) – Mr Chairman, we are already in the process of enacting the Regional Governments Bill, which defines “region”, and I would have no problem. Therefore, I beg to move that we delete this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have had too many amendments. Can we process them first and then we see what is left? The last amendment is on changing from “district” to “region”. There was an amendment that was introducing the concept of indigenous communities as host communities. We may need to process those first.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would urge colleagues to look at the headnotes of both the Bill and the proposed amendment. They both provide for training and employment of Ugandans. The Constitution allows for what we call “affirmative action” in respect of those categories that have been disadvantaged in history, and the Constitution gives examples and we must read within the generic string of those examples. 

The amendment provides for gender equity and that is allowed in the Constitution; it provides for people with disabilities, also allowed in the Constitution. My worry is when you bring in host communities, by whatever definition, this is going to amount to discrimination within the meaning of Article 21 of our Constitution, even when you talk about regions, which hon. Kasirivu is talking about. 

We must also not lose sight of the fact that there are certain dangers that may be associated, environmentally or otherwise, with the hosting of this kind of business. To bridge the gap without offending our Constitution, I would simply implore colleagues that if we could only find a clause that gives some form of compensation to the communities. When we legislate this way and we are saying that Ugandans could access employment and have advantage over others by reason of being part of the host communities, we may be legislating dangerously.

Finally, on this, we may even be incurring the reproach of defining “host”. When we talk about the host communities, we are not talking about villages in abstract; we are talking about individuals. Does that mean that if I cross today, like Prof. Kabwegyere said, and I buy land in an area, I become part of the host? Doesn’t that make access to employment expensive, that I must go and become part of the host community? 

I would like to invite my colleagues to think about the constitutional implications of this. Politically, I would have no problem supporting this position because I know the background to it, but my fear is the Constitution and also dividing our country. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MS BINTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I find a problem with the term “indigenous communities”. This is because in the Third Schedule of our Constitution, the indigenous communities have been outlined. Also, we need to understand that there are certain areas where we might find petroleum activities being carried out but it is very difficult to trace the indigenous communities of that area. I would be comfortable with “host communities” especially where it brings on board the inhabitants. This is because I believe the inhabitants are all those people who have settled in that place. 

I would like to take a leaf from the quota system, especially in regard to the students who join universities, as we are talking about training. How do we handle this? Do we look at the indigenous communities? We do not consider the indigenous communities but we consider all the inhabitants living in those areas. So, I would like to request my colleague to accept the amendment as read out by the committee chairperson so that we can move on. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I wholly appreciate the arguments being raised by both the committee chairperson and other colleagues. However, I am still stuck with the constitutional provisions and I thought it is at this point that the Attorney-General would be of help. 

The Constitution allows affirmative action but it does not allow discrimination. If we legislate the way we are doing, will that be affirmative action or discriminatory? (Interjections) This is the Constitution and that is why I think the Attorney-General should come out. I do have a different view.

The spirit of the Constitution is to allow all Ugandans, irrespective of where they come from, a chance to share the national resource. All Ugandans must have equal opportunity. That is the spirit of the Constitution. If there is what we think is a disadvantaged group that can be lifted to some national level, that is different. However, from the way we are legislating now, that spirit seems to be lost because I think we are now thinking about jobs for our people. For those who come from those areas, they want jobs but also those who do not come from there want those jobs too and training in this sector. That is where the problem is. My own interpretation – (Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much, hon. Katuntu. I come in when we are discussing issues to do with ancestral land where I know you have a stake. 

This committee amendment comes on the background of the findings that to-date, if you audit  - and I remember you presenting on the Floor here - who is getting training, I have nobody from Buliisa who has trained and yet I am supposed to be from a host community. Therefore, without this provision, you can be very sure that you will miss out on training and you will miss the jobs. That is why it is very important that these disadvantaged people get an enabling law so that they can also partake of an industry in their backyard.

MR KATUNTU: I do really appreciate that position. Eventually, it could even become a security problem because – (Interruption) - If you could allow me make my point, unless you think it is that urgent and then I can give way –(Interruption)- Okay, I will take both.  

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Katuntu. I am a member of the committee and I thought I should give a background to the position of the committee. 

We, of course, looked at the fears that have been expressed. However, we made this proposal on the basis of affirmative action in favour of marginalised groups as provided for in Article 32 of the Constitution. Mostly, we were educated by the experiences of areas where oil exploration and production are going on, especially in Africa. The specific one was of the Niger Delta. We looked at the plight of the youth who have been displaced from their land and are now in urban centres and have had no education, the youth who are struggling. 

Therefore, we thought that if there is an opportunity to make an intervention in the law that will help in giving them something so that they do not - you know, they have reached a point where they literally have to strike at a pipeline to try to drive their point home. What if we put it in the law - that was our argument - so that if the oil companies have any middle level training, they would do something for them, so that we do not end up in that scenario. So, it was not done from the discriminatory perspective; it was about helping the host communities - whatever you want to call them - will bear the direct burden of this oil industry. Thank you.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I support and sympathise with the arguments raised by my colleagues. But whether this is the right position or the right way to put it, is my worry. We could find a way of accommodating those concerns by having a distinct clause to cater for that sort of interest, and we can really think about it first.
 
Let me inform hon. Alice Alaso, who is talking about affirmative action and Article 32 – I just have to read it again for the benefit of those colleagues who do not have the Constitution with them; “Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the State shall take affirmative action in favour of groups marginalised.” So, the first is marginalisation; we must prove that this group is already marginalised on the basis of: (1) Gender; (2) Age; (3) Disability or any other reason created by history, tradition or custom. If we are saying that people from Buliisa - and we know they have a problem – were they marginalised on the basis of history? The affirmative action in this law, therefore, should not be based on the argument you are raising because even now, Karamoja for example, will raise the same issue, because if it is about marginalisation and history; so, you will have two competing marginalised groups on the basis of history. 

However, to cater for the interests of the host communities - Mr Chairman, I am sorry I have taken long - but the interest would be, for example, in training they need to be empowered because sometimes if, for example, there is an accident in that place, they would be the first to be affected. So, you need to empower and train them. And that is very legitimate, and we could also cover for it somewhere.
 
Therefore, my view is - and maybe the Attorney-General will come in and give his second opinion about it - we can cater for the interests of the host community, and not indigenous; host community, differently and not in this particular clause. 
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, two issues have been raised; is it affirmative action or is it discrimination? If you look at Article 21(3) it defines what it means to discriminate; “For the purposes of this article, to discriminate means to give different treatment to different persons attributable only or mainly to their respective descriptions by sex, race, colour, ethnic origin, tribe, birth, creed or religion, social or economic standing, political opinion or disability.” That is to discriminate. 

Affirmative action is exactly what has been said by hon. Katuntu. Those are the two issues. Therefore, which one is the law proposing to provide for the amendment? 

MR LOKERIS: Mr Chairman and honourable members, I have been visiting those areas and at times, there are groups who organise the communities there to say, “We are being forgotten because of historical backgrounds which are there.” And one time, they asked me, when I went to a school called Kigumba, “Of all these people, how many come from this area?” I told them that that was not the criteria of intake to that school. It is based on competition by all Ugandans. You go and do the interviews and then join the school.  Then they said, “With us, our schools here cannot compete and, therefore, we shall never attain this education.” Everybody was complaining. Then we said, “in future, we shall look at these historical perspectives.”
 
But recently, there was an advertisement by Tullow Oil looking for applicants to take abroad for further studies. One of the criteria was that the applicant should have got an upper second class degree in the prescribed subjects. The same community said, “We may not be having these ones, what do we do?” And then they said they wanted a slot because they just could not bear seeing people from other areas. So, we realised the agitation they had and decided to constitutionally help them through affirmative action and due to the historical issues that they had, we would give them a quota; out of 20 applicants to be selected for the scholarship, about six would be from their area. (Interjections)– I am just telling you what happened. So, these people were  –(Interruption)

MS ATIM ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The issue we are discussing is touchy and as a country, we are aware that some parts of this country are not privileged at all times to be treated the same way. The honourable members representing the very people who are advancing their grievances or they prayer, and letting this House be aware that as much as there is an already set minimum requirement, we cannot treat the whole country as such. 

Is the honourable minister in order to continue disregarding this prayer and towing the line which is not applicable to the whole country? Some of us, like in Northern Uganda, who have been under war cannot match with the other parts of the country.  Is he in order to continue along that line instead of taking the prayers of the honourable members in good faith?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I thought I heard the minister say that when they advertised, they did not qualify and then they came back to them. So, the minister said it is then that they thought of creating some area of affirmative action and they said, maybe for everything you do, a certain percentage should go to the local community. He was giving a live example of what they tried to do to handle the particular communities that are affected by this. I think the spirit of his argument is still within our discussions. 

MR LOKERIS: Thank you, Mr Chairman, for your wise counsel. I was just stating facts in order to ameliorate tempers that emerge when you visit an area. So, what Government directed was that we should help some of these people using certain criteria, which have been already stated. 

Six slots were, therefore, reserved for people who come from the oil areas, including Nwoya and Amuru, to compete; and then 14 for the rest of the Ugandans. I think that was a very good balance. I think they have done their interviews and they have already reported there. 

Mr Chairman, when you go down there, the way the representatives from that area speak, they look at the oil, which is coming out as coming from their fields where they are. They need to participate with the rest of the Ugandans in order to gain from this. And that is why we should be able to look at our Constitution and find where we can place these people either through affirmative action or historical perspectives so that they at least have something and when you go there they are also proud. They should not be like Ogun where only the rich people are happy and the rest are wallowing in poverty, and they are suffering. 

MR NYOMBI: Mr Chairman, I have carefully looked at the provisions of Article 21(3) and the provisions of Article 32 (1). In Article 21(3), the intention is negative. The motives of one’s actions are negative – it is discriminative. On the other hand, Mr Chairman, the motive behind Article 32(1) is positive. One is trying to promote good intentions.

Having read those clauses, Mr Chairman, when I look at clause 123, the proposed amendment, the intention behind the amendment is not negative. It intends to promote what are ordinarily marginalised groups. It is common knowledge that people with disabilities, except in this particular Government, were marginalised. So, I believe the proposal here is not discriminatory, it is affirmative and there is no harm. (Applause)

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I acknowledge my colleague with vast knowledge in the law, but when I read Article 21(4) I find that the Constitution does not per se forbid discrimination, but it allows positive discrimination. And it states that, “Nothing in this article shall prevent Parliament from enacting laws that are necessary for...” but I will read (c): “Providing for any matter acceptable and demonstrably justifiable in a free and democratic society.”  One issue that we have to look at here is whether it is justifiable to have special treatment for these people. If it may be discrimination, yes, but is it positive? If it is, then the Constitution allows us to move in that direction. I thank you, Mr Chairman. 

MR SSEGGONA: I would like to seek your guidance, Mr Chairman. I have listened to the submission of my learned friend, the Attorney-General, but is there a group that is measured in terms of geographical boundary? We are talking about marginalised groups; we are not talking about geographical boundaries. That is No.1.

Two, are we legislating about oil in Bunyoro, in Amuru, in Busoga or we are legislating about oil in Uganda? The important thing we need to note, if you are describing Amuru today as marginalised on the basis of history, and you are convincing me today that Bunyoro - we are not even talking about Bunyoro - but Buliisa and Hoima were marginalised on the basis of history, what is going to happen tomorrow when you find oil in Masaka? Are you going to make a different law? Because if you have introduced a clause on the basis of what you describe as marginalisation, which is historical, then it means that sense will not apply when you find oil in Masaka, Bukedea, and even in Kampala. 

Mr Chairman, there is something called good business sense; and there is something you can leave to the good business sense and judgement of a company. Take for example, traditionally or historically in Uganda, the best schools were known. You would talk of Buddo, Kisubi, Nyakasura etcetera, but did you have all the students coming from those areas? I stay in Buddo where you can say we have one of the best schools, but there are children in those villages who do not even go to school. Therefore, Mr Chairman, guide me if there is something called “a group” on the basis of a geographical ground.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That was a strong submission from the honourable member. He did not seek guidance. So, there is no guidance to give. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, we have listened to the arguments made particularly by the lawyers, which have been excellent, but let me add an economic dimension to the argument. First, there is what you call “natural assets” of a country. Oil and water are some of those. Actually, you could argue, if we go by this trend, that Kampala, which uses its water from Lake Victoria – you could argue that there are host communities around Lake Victoria who should benefit, or, as one colleague has argued, the moment you generate your electricity from water, the community around that water could be defined as a host community and consequently, argue to treat them differently.
 
The issue which is going to be quite tricky to address is that in economic arguments, there are location factors – factors based on proximity. The fact that oil is found in certain communities gives them some advantages by virtue of their proximity. This is an economic issue, which the lawyers should address. There are proximity or location factors that happen or are enjoyed by those who host these assets. 

So, if we want to make a law - this is also in the law because it also provides that there is a percentage sharing of revenue. (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, I have understood all this oil business. Previously, from the Executive, they struggled to convince us that this oil business was very unique; it was unlike any other natural resource. I would like to assume that Prof. Kamuntu is still a member of the Executive that has been pushing the argument that the oil resource to this country is very unique.
 
Secondly, the argument of economic sense - I was hoping that Prof. Kamuntu would also advance the fact that when you talk about the economic factors, you are also dealing with changes in settlement, displacement, environmental challenges, decline in agriculture and all those multi-sectoral issues the hon. Prof. Kamuntu has been saying on this Floor. 

Mr Chairman, is the hon. Prof. Kamuntu, therefore, in order first of all to run away from an argument of uniqueness of the oil industry that the Executive, to which he is a member, has been pushing; two, to deny this House the benefit of knowledge from him, which he knows that the multi-sectoral implications of the oil industry to the host community, particularly, the negative aspects should be borne in mind as we make this legislation? Is he in order to be so mean, Mr Chairman? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Those are very strong submissions from the honourable member for Serere. (Laughter)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. This is definitely a submission. The point I wanted to raise is the difficulty even of boundaries. There are districts – (Interjections)- this host community is not just a Bunyoro issue. This is a –(Interruption) 

PROF. KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, we have listened to arguments and presentations. Can I move that a motion be put and we proceed?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there are three questions and I am required to put the question once such a motion is moved. I put the question to the motion that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There are three levels of votes we need to take, unless Members withdraw some of the amendments. We start with the one farthest from the – 

MR NIWAGABA: I have withdrawn mine in favour of the committee’s amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The region has been withdrawn. So, we are left with two amendments.

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Given the discussions regarding affirmative action, which we are to take care of, I would like to withdraw the words “local” and “indigenous” from the amendment that I had proposed and take the committee’s definition.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, we revert to one amendment, which was proposed by the committee. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are there any more amendments on clause 123?

MR OTADA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. First, I beg your indulgence because last time, you ruled that any Member who has an amendment should present it to you. But this is an off-cuff amendment, which I propose for the sake of consistency. I beg to move that clause 123(4) should read as follows: “The licensee shall submit to the Authority a report on the execution of the programme under this section every 12 months and on each subsequent anniversary after the approval of the programme by the Authority.” 

Justification: The clause 123(4) would be consistent with clause 123(1) in timelines. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You are saying that after every 12 months, the report should be submitted?

MR OTADA: Mr Chairman, some Members are asking me to read the statement again; is that okay with you? I beg to move that clause 123(4) should read as follows: “The licensee shall submit to the Authority a report on the execution of the programme under this section every 12 months and on each subsequent anniversary after the approval of the programme by the Authority.” 

Justification: This sub-clause would be consistent with clause 123(1) even in phrasing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Some Members are suggesting “annually” instead of “12 months” but “annually” could have the connotation of every calendar year. However, the proposal by hon. Otada is saying that from 12 months after the issuance of the licence. Therefore, can we agree on that? Is “annually” enough? So, “The licensee shall submit to the Authority a report on the execution of the programme under this section annually.” Will that take of your concerns? [HON. MEMBERS “Yes.”] I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 123, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 124, agreed to.

Clause 125

MR KATUNTU: Is there any amendment by the committee?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, I had marked it as having an amendment. I do not know who is to move it.

MR KATUNTU: I would just like to seek clarification. What clause 125 is seeking is to have the licensee actually mortgage his licence. My view is that this licence is not proprietary like you would have a land title or log book. Instead, it is like an academic qualification or a driving permit, which has been granted after the licensee fulfilling many obligations. If the law gives him to mortgage this licence as security, what happens on default? Does the financial institution have a right to attach the rights under that licence or the licence itself as a paper? I need a little bit of clarification on that; because it is not like a land title, where a mortgagee gets proprietary rights in case of default over the mortgaged property.

MR NAKABALE: Thank you, hon. Katuntu, for giving way. Mr Chairman and colleagues, I would like to inform hon. Katuntu that in addition to that, this clause might give room to speculators – people might come to acquire the licence and instead of productively doing what is expected of them in a specified period of time, they mortgage it for their own benefit instead of looking at it in the productive sense for the sake of all Ugandans. 

MR KATUNTU: Well, thank you for the information. Sub-clause (2) makes it even worse, because it states, “The minister may in special circumstances, permit the financing to include activities not related to the licence.” So, I am very uncomfortable with this clause. Unless I can get clarification, I will not support it. The committee should have looked at this clause critically.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, the information I want –
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, are you the minister now? (Laughter) –(Interjections)– The question is to the Frontbench; in the event of default.

MR NYOMBI: Mr Chairman, I actually had the same problem that my learned brother has pointed out. However, to go round it, we could amend this clause by stating that should any financier or financial institution accept the licence as security, it is subject to the conditions of the licence; it is restricted; it is limited to the interests; it can be revoked so that the financial institution takes a risk. (Interruption)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Chairman, if we allow the licensee to use our licence to borrow and he defaults, who will pay? Because, you have allowed them in law, to be responsible, and you have allowed them to use their licence to borrow. Then this second part, you cannot give them so much permission; that they can use our licence to borrow and finance anything they want. You cannot do that.

MR SSEGGONA: I beg to differ from the two Attorneys-General, including my shadow Attorney-General. The solution lies in one thing; deleting the whole clause.

Firstly, what happens where somebody defaults? Has he mortgaged the piece of paper he is holding or the property, which is oil? Remember the licence is to do with drilling and definitely, these are rights which are not transferrable. They are not assignable.

Secondly, a licence is based on specific qualifications and goes through a procurement process which cannot be repeated because somebody has already assigned the licence.

Thirdly, we have recognised both under the Constitution and even in this Bill we are debating, that this oil belongs to the people of Uganda, and the government as a holding entity. The principles of agency, therefore, come in; that it is an agency undertaken by the licensee on behalf of the government or the people of Uganda. Therefore, how do you give away such rights?

Finally, where the minister in those special circumstances, whether we have committed or not, allows an ultra vires transaction, that a person licensed to do specific duties is allowed to go beyond the four corners of the licence, what kind of legislation is that?

Let me recommend to my colleagues that whatever the case, this is a clause worth deleting and we proceed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for deletion of clause 125. I put the question –[HON. MEMBERS: “Aye.”]

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, I propose that we stand over this. (Interjections) I propose we -

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I think we can only stand over a clause if there is a reason. We do not stand over a clause for no reason. As it is now, it is even worse. Honourable minister, I do not know if you have re-addressed your mind in detail to this particular clause. A licence is also defined. It actually includes an exploration licence because there was this mistaken view that we are talking about profit oil under production. Can you imagine even the exploration licence being mortgaged? It just promotes speculators picking licences and running all over the place claiming to get money. In fact, it is another farm-down; an indirect farm-down. 

So, really, Mr Chairman, we have no reason to stand over this particular clause. Let us move and vote on it and proceed with other clauses.

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, in reality, this happens internationally. [HON. MEMBERS: “Motion.”] It is a practice in the oil industry and that is why I am requesting that we stand over it. (Interjections) We will bring explanations. Let us stand over it.  (Interruption) 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, are we proceeding well with the minister insisting even when there is a motion on the Floor? (Mr Buchanayandi rose_)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Does the honourable Minister of Agriculture have some information?

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Mr Chairman, I would like to say that this should be left in -(Interjections)- I think the import here has been misunderstood. The essence of this clause is clearly misunderstood and I want to say that it should be retained. (Interjections) - wait a minute. Here, a licence is being taken as a collateral-(Interjections)– yes, let me explain. 

For instance, if you have goods in a warehouse and you get a warehouse receipt system, you can use that receipt as collateral to go to the bank and access money. (Interjections) Yes. No, what I am saying here is that he has a licence to say he has been considered, evaluated and found fit to go and mine this oil and, therefore, (Interjections) Let me continue my thought and, therefore, that way -(Interjections)- he is  bona fide owner -(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, the word used in this clause is “security.” That is No.1 and it is indeed a mortgage. Two, there is a motion on the Floor. Is the honourable minister, therefore, in order, to insist on the microphone, when there is a motion already moved by the hon. Kasirivu Atwooki, and he does not allow the Member to move his motion?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is a point of order I have to rule on. That one cannot be done by anybody else for the purposes of these proceedings. (Laughter)

There is a motion proposed by an honourable member. The Speaker was of the view that the honourable minister was going to enrich some contribution towards that motion, but it did not come out in that line. So, the minister was not supporting the issue of the motion proposed. He was not in order at all. (Applause)

Motion.

PROF.  KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, having listened attentively, I would like to move a motion that clause 125 be deleted in its entirety. 

HON. MEMBERS: We second the motion.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is seconded. The way the motion is moved opens debate.    

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I support the motion, but with an amendment. The motion is to delete the entire clause, but I would like to amend that we retain sub-clause (1) and delete sub-clause (2). Why? Because, not long ago - is it Heritage?  - sold their interest to somebody. That is part of business. But somebody may also use the licence to borrow for work-related to the licence, and the regulations can provide for the details of how you do it. At least, to empower the person to do the work.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, the question is, if the licensee defaults, what happens?

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think the regulations indicated here will allow somebody not to borrow to an amount which can be –(Interjections)– I am foreseeing a scenario, when I have a paper, legally held by myself and I want to do business, I would be allowed to borrow on long-term and concessional terms to do the business, related to the licence. That is my submission. 

MS EGUNYU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to relate this to the contracts people give from districts or sub-counties in those respective local governments. When someone gets a contract, he can use that contract agreement to get a loan from the bank. If he gets a loan from the bank and that person fails to pay back, it is up to the directors of that company to pay and not the individual sub-counties or the district, which awarded that person a contract. 

So, in relation to this, I would propose that a person who gets a licence can also be in position to acquire a loan from any financial institution provided – maybe, we could stand over this and have it changed a little; however,  a person should be given a chance. If he is given a licence and cannot do what he has to do due to maybe financial constraints, then let them get a loan and do what they are supposed to do and the company will be liable. 

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, in view of the motion moved by hon. Kasirivu Atwoki and in view of the fact that this particular House has before it a Chattels Securities Bill, which handles matters to do with chattels being pledged as security, and that particular Bill has specific conditions; Parliament and especially the legal committee is about to bring a report on that particular Bill; wouldn’t it be in order to delete this particular clause and when we are dealing with the Chattels Securities Bill, we see whether a licensee under this Act can actually pledge a licence under that particular Bill. (Applause)

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, whereas I associate myself with hon. Niwagaba’s submission, when you have not provided for that, how will you relate this to the Chattels Securities Bill? I think the question here is, can this licence be used to secure finances for matters related to the licence? 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I think all that hon. Niwagaba is saying is that this falls squarely within the four corners of the Chattels Securities Bill. Secondly, the information I would like to give to the chairperson of the committee is that financial capacity is a key qualification for a person applying for a licence. So, when we allow you under this clause to come in with insufficient funds, then we are effectively waiving that requirement of financial capacity. 

MR NYOMBI: Mr Chairman, I have looked at this clause again. International companies that get involved in international business may not have all the money that is needed to transact business. The purpose behind this clause is to enable a company - be it Tullow or any other, once they have got a licence - they may have some money, but not the whole amount that is needed to execute the transaction. 

The purpose of this clause is to enable such companies to mobilise finances in order to transact business. A licence is not a title deed. A licence is some kind of permission allowing a person to do certain activities. It is some authority that allows a person to do certain things. When a licence is granted, it is granted with conditions. Should a financial institution take this licence as security, it is subject to the conditions within that licence. 

In any case, it is not that the company that has been granted a licence will, on its own, go and raise finances. There is a rider in the clause; the company must get the clearance of the minister. Therefore, it is not like somebody just sits in a chair and decides on his own. So, Mr chairman -(Interruption) 

MR KATUNTU: I would like to thank the learned Attorney-General for yielding the Floor. The question that I have been raising right from the beginning is, what happens in case of default? What right would the financial institution have? I will give you an example. What this clause is providing is that you can even mortgage – let me use this term “mortgage” literary – you can even mortgage an exploration licence; you can use the exploration licence as security. So, I am asking, what happens if there is a default?

MR NYOMBI: Mr Chairman, it is exactly for that reason; that a legal entity that has been given a licence cannot just walk into a financial institution without the clearance of the minister. The minister will lay down conditions for clearing the legal entity –(Interjections)–  I thought you understood what I was saying.  It is exactly for that reason that a legal entity that has been issued with a licence must go to the minister before going to the financial institution to raise a loan –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Where is that provided for?

MR NYOMBI: “The minister may, in consultation with the Authority consent to the use of a licence by a licensee under this Act as security of his or her share”. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, really, I do not think - we need to be honest to each other, and if both ministers are not ready, we could be able to concede and stand over it. But we really need to be honest with each other and if both ministers are not ready, we should be able to concede and stand over it. But you really, need to be honest to us. If I have mortgaged my title to you, I have mortgaged the land and in case of default, I have rights over that land including selling it. If you are talking about import documentation - I heard a colleague talking of documentation of goods being imported, you have created a lien or a right over the good in the warehouse. So, I have a right to impound those goods. 

I have been asking very simple questions like, what happens in case of a default? And what the learned Attorney-General is telling us is that the minister will tell us or the minister will find out. Do you want us to legislate in a speculative way?

As hon. Niwagaba says, the law that deals with chattels is not yet in place. We are still discussing it at the legal and parliamentary affairs level. Let us have the law in place about chattels and then we can pass this law, because it will be in conformity with the other law. As of now, I do see what we are legislating about.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we stand over this clause and then move forward when there is a better time to deal with it. In the meantime, have a better discussion on this issue so that it can be promptly resolved. 

Clause 125 is stood over. The motion has been overtaken by events. The motion is still subsisting because it was for us to delete and we have not deleted, but stood over; and so, the motion is still subsisting or in the alternative, it has been overtaken by events.

(Clause 125, stood over.)

Clause 126 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman and the honourable member for Serere have amendments. 

MR WERIKHE: Under clause 126, the committee proposes to insert in sub-clause 1, the definition of “pollution”, the words, “or emitting noise,” immediately after the words, “depositing of wastes” to read as follows - there are a number of amendments and I do not know whether I should go through them and then I read the whole paragraph.  The first proposed amendment is to insert –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it on the definition of “pollution”? 

MR WERIKHE: Yes, the definition of “pollution” to read as follows:  “….pollution means any direct or indirect alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, biological or radioactive properties of any part of the environment by discharging, emitting noise or depositing waste so as to …” those are the words, “emitting noise” - it is one of those factors that are included under pollution damage. I think that maybe we consider that and before I proceed. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What would it read? “Discharging - emitting noise”?

MR WERIKHE: “Noise” is also considered as one of the pollutants to the environment.
 
MR KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA: I thank you, Mr Chairman. I need further explanation from the chairperson of the committee. “Emitting” has to do with emission of gases and if he says, “emitting noise” can be part of, but he has now specifically said “noise.” What about the gases emitting toxic -

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I think that if my colleague listened to the entire paragraph, maybe his concern would be captured, and in any case, I do not know if it is gas, is it flaring and so forth? There is a provision for that, but this is specifically defining all pollutants to the environment and noise is one of them.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If you put it under “emitting” in particular, it will not run with the word, “wastes” after “depositing”. So, why don’t you put it after the word “wastes,” or “emitting noise” so that it is clearer?

MR WERIKHE: After, “wastes”, that is where it has been placed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is where it is? After the word “wastes”.

MR WERIKHE: Yes, after “wastes”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, because it was, “after emitting.”

MR WERIKHE: No, it is after, “wastes”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It should be after, “wastes”.

MR WERIKHE: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In which case, “discharging, emitting or depositing wastes, emitting noise so as to affect…”

MR WERIKHE: I wish honourable members would look at the report. Actually, immediately after the words, “depositing of wastes,” that is where those words, “emission of noise,” comes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If it is there, it will be fine. So, I put the question to that since it is clearer now.

MR SSEGGONA: Mine is really not to change the text because it is prepared in a rather technical manner such that I may not be able to understand everything. 

But usually, in drafting, this kind of definition would only come in the middle here, where it states, “definition for purposes of the section”. However, when I look at the interpretation section, there is no definition of pollution. Would it not be better to shift it back to the definition section because it is a definition that cuts across for purposes of the entire Bill? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Would that be better, Attorney-General, so that the liability for damage due to pollution only runs from (2) onwards? You shift the word “pollution” instead of being in this part; you shift it to the general definition section so that Part 10 now deals specifically with these other clauses. Would that be proper?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, we have consulted and I think it will be proper.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I would like to hear the voice of the Attorney-General on this subject.

MR WERIKHE: He delegated that I should act as the –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is the wish of the Chair.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Mr Chairman, there is only one learned profession and you cannot delegate. (Laughter) I think we have considered the proposal made by the Minister of Justice in the Shadow and we do agree. [HON. MEMBER: “We are the next Government.”] Well, we shall pray for you. 

It can be taken to the interpretation clause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The interpretation clause was already adopted. Was it not?  It was not? Was it stood over?

MR KATUNTU: The interpretation clause always comes at the end.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, so we did not act on it. So, the proposal is to amend clause 126 by deleting sub-clause 1 and transferring it to the definition section that is sub-clause 1.

MS KOMUHANGI: On the definition clause; this is not a principle that runs through the proposed Bill. So, how do we put something that does not run through the Bill in the definition clause?

Secondly, this is part B and it is about liability for damage due to pollution, meaning there are several other things to talk about in this part of the Bill. So, I think it would be appropriate we define the word “pollution” here and not in the definition clause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What harm will it do if it appears in the definition clause?

MS KOMUHANGI: If you take it to the definition clause, it means it will run through the whole Bill. It will be something one will read throughout. But here it only appears in Part X.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is the harm that can be caused if you move it there?

MS KOMUHANGI: Okay, but what will you do to the other preceding issues that you need to handle without the definition specifically? Well, I think if they went on record, it would help me –(Interjections)– I mean those who are answering in chorus. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it is very advisable to be on record.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, we are talking about pollution damage. The only reason why it is under part X is for only liability for damages. But throughout the entire Bill, you could have instances of pollution damage. So, you cannot have pollution damage only in relation to this Part X or even only under this particular clause. 

So, the reason why both the Shadow Minister of Justice and the learned Attorney-General had agreed that it is shifted to the definition clause is that it could be raised in relation to any pollution damages in any part of this law. And really, there is no reason why we should spend time debating it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, we have already voted on the amendment for inserting – you mean we haven’t voted on the “emitting noise”. Okay, have we now agreed to include the word “noise” in this definition?

MR KATUNTU: Yes, I think we had agreed. But at procedural levels –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Before I put the question hon. Sseggona stood up on this issue of “emitting noise” and no question was put for us to vote on the issue of noise.

MR KATUNTU: Okay, you can now put the question to that amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I now put the question to the amendment for the insertion of the words “emitting noise” in the definition of the term “pollution.”

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the next level of amendment is about the deletion.

MR WERIKHE: No, there are more amendments under the same clause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, I am talking about the existence of sub-clause 1. Is there any amendment to it?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, Mr Chairman. There is a proposal to insert, after the words “aquatic life and before” the following: “Land and - “

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Where is that?

MR WERIKHE: When you proceed you find it in the third line from the bottom. It talks about wildlife fish and aquatic life, and we are proposing that immediately after the words “aquatic life” we insert the following: “Land and underground and surface water sources” as being part of the pollution damage mentioned.

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, though I agree with the proposal, I would like to move that instead of using the words “land and water sources” we just use the words “water sources.” This is because that will include both water underground and water on the surface.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, should we take the proposal, “water and water sources” as moved by the minister? 

MR WERIKHE: No, “Land and water sources.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, “Land and water sources” –

MS ALASO: Yes, I thank my chairman. The issue about the underground water, in the initial proposal, was that we were looking at a possibility of water being polluted, but from underground. It is not yet a source or from a borehole, but it would get polluted when still at the underground level. So, when we call it water sources, does it cover those concerns? I request that the engineer educates me about this one, since she is the one who proposed it. But I am concerned about the underground sources where we get water for drinking from our boreholes.

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, I clearly said that when you talk about waters sources, it includes both water on the surface and water underground.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put a question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, it is “Land and water sources.” Okay, any other amendments? Can we now deal with sub-clause (1)?

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, there is something about pollution damage. The committee proposes that we insert in sub-clause (1), in the definition of the term “pollution damage” the words “emission of noise” between the word “petroleum” and the phrase “from a facility” to read as follows: “Pollution damage means damage or loss caused by pollution as a consequence of effluence, discharge of petroleum or emission of noise from a facility including a well.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear?

DR OKUONZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The “pollution damage” that is defined here is very limited compared to the definition of “pollution” that was given previously. The definition of “pollution damage” here, in my view, should include the welfare of human beings; the welfare of plants and animal life; and also the health of everything that is alive. 

In addition, it should include alterations of the environment to an extent that it cannot be used effectively. So, I would like to suggest that we include the following words on “pollution damage”: “alteration of the environment that may adversely affect its use” after the word “loss.” So, it will read as follows: “...means damage or loss,” and I assume this is damage or loss of welfare and health for all living things, but in addition, alteration of the environment that may adversely affect its use. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, wouldn’t it be better if it had come after the word “damage”?

DR OKOUNZO: Mr Chairman, I think this is just the word “management”. I wouldn’t mind where it would come in. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, it means a lot because if you say, “or alteration of environment -[HON. MEMBER: “...that may adversely affect the use of the environment or damage or loss to welfare and health of plant or animal life.”]

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Now that is a new definition; we are still processing the other one.
 
MR KYEWALABYE: Mr Chairman, I think we have a situation where we are confusing the definition of “pollution” and that of “pollution damage”. With regard to “pollution damage” it is enough to say, “...means damage or loss caused by pollution” and then whatever you want to talk about, whether altering the environment and so forth, should be mentioned in the definition of “pollution”. Then in that case you don’t even have to add these other words “as a consequence of” because they are already defined in the “pollution”.  

DR OKUONZO: I think that would be okay if we were only dealing with things which are alive, but we are also dealing with land and other things which are inanimate. So, you can only alter those things and render them useless. But that has not been captured anywhere. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But still that would be pollution. So, if we are to include it, we would put it under the definition of pollution so that pollution damage would only now be, “damage or loss caused by pollution.”

DR OKUONZO: What I wanted to bring out is that the damage also includes the difficulty with which you can use something that has been altered in the environment. But it is not brought out in this definition. What is here is simply “damage or loss.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, pollution means, “any direct or indirect alteration” of the physical, thermal, chemical, biological or radioactive properties of any part of the environment.”  

DR OKUONZO: Well, if the environment includes animal and plant life, which it does, and the words “damage and loss” refer to animal life. 

MRS MULONI: Biological. 

DR OKUONZO: Then what word refers to the things that are not changed, not lost and not damaged? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Like what is not damaged? 

DR OKUONZO: Land is not damaged. It is only altered and rendered unusable. You really cannot say that land has been damaged. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You see, “...so as to affect any beneficial use adversely.”

DR OKUONZO: That is the part that I had wanted to bring into this definition. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is right here in the definition of pollution; “...as to affect any beneficial use adversely,” that is of any of those things mentioned.   

DR OKUONZO: I wanted to bring it in the “pollution damage” so that the environment aspect of it other than life can be captured. That is what I wanted to say. It doesn’t just come out in my view.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the proposal by the honourable Member for Kiboga because if it is accepted, then the proposal by the honourable member for Vurra will fall by the wayside.  
I put the question that the definition of “pollution damage” means “damage or loss caused by pollution.” The honourable member proposed deletion of the rest of the phrases after that. 

Is that okay? I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, the amendment proposed by the honourable member from Vurra falls by the wayside. Are we done with sub-clause (1) now? 

There is now the proposal to delete sub-clause (1) from this clause. The shifting can be captured.  The proposal is that sub-clause (1) of clause 126 be deleted and transferred to the definition section. I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Of course, subsequently, the sub-clause (2), (3) and (4) will be renumbered to take care of that situation. 

MR KATUNTU: I still have a problem with the present sub-clause (3). “The minister may notwithstanding the provisions of this Act by agreement with a foreign state issue rules relating to liability for pollution damage caused by petroleum activities under this Act.” 

My reading of this sub-clause, Mr Chairman is that we are subjecting the entire Act to any agreement that may be made by the minister with a foreign state. In fact, we have watered down the entire agreement. The agreement would certainly take precedence over the provisions of the entire Act. All these safeguards we have been putting in place can be watered down by the signature of the minister, and I have problems with that. 

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, the essence of this sub-clause is to take into consideration the Albertine Graben, where we are sharing the boundary with a neighbouring state. What we are trying to bring out here, therefore, is in regard to issues to do with pollution damage, which should apply to the area which cuts across the neighbouring state because we have to enter into an agreement such that any pollution damage that affects us, in the event that it cuts across the border – because we are sharing the boundary in the Albertine Graben region - is catered for. 

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, honourable minister for yielding the Floor. Do you mean to suggest that under that particular clause you can make rules which will have extra-territorial jurisdiction?  

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, because of the nature of the oil industry, when there is exploration, development of production for areas which cut across the boundary, there is definitely need when the time arises for those activities taking place that you enter into an agreement with the neighbouring State based on what you have agreed. So, we would like to ensure that issues to do with pollution damage are well catered for. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Then why don’t you make it subject to this clause?

MR KATUNTU: In fact, our biggest problem is the words, “notwithstanding the provisions of this Act,” because what we are saying is that yes, you could make rules with a foreign State but it should be in accordance with this Act. When you are going to negotiate this agreement, you need to go with your law such that you negotiate with your colleagues and partners while referring them to the law governing this industry or sector in your country such that whatever you do is in accordance with this law. I am sure whatever your colleagues the other side will agree with will be in accordance to the laws in that country. 

I, therefore, move Mr Chairman that we delete the words “notwithstanding...” up to the word “Act” and then it would read: “The minister may by agreement with a foreign State issue rules relating to liability for pollution damage caused by petroleum activities under this Act.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay? 

MR NIWAGABA:  I thought if we stated it this way, “The minister may subject to the provisions of this Act by agreement with a foreign State issue rules relating to liability for pollution damage caused by petroleum activities under this Act,” so that the agreements and the rules made are subjected to the provisions of this Act. I like your take, hon. Katuntu, but I think that would be better. 

MR KATUNTU: No, I concede. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, what is the final proposal now? 

MR NIWAGABA:  The final amendment would read as follows: “The minister may, subject to the provisions of this Act, by agreement with a foreign State issue rules relating to liability for pollution damage caused by petroleum activities under this Act.”

MR KATUNTU: I thought we would start with “Subject to the provisions of this Act...”

MR NIWAGABA: No problem. You can do better drafting. 

MR KATUNTU: (Laughter) Drafting on the microphone is not that easy, but obviously I guess our technical team are picking it and they should phrase it. The principle should be that the minister’s agreement should be subject to this Act. So, we could start as follows: “Subject to the provisions of this Act, the minister may by agreement with a foreign State issue rules relating to liability for pollution damage caused by petroleum activities.” 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I have been following, though I have developed a headache. The danger with this clause is that it is encroaching on our powers under the Constitution. Let the consultations be at say the administrative level; but for the minister to make regulations under a power given by this Parliament, and we subject that power to consultations with a foreign State, is a surrender of our power. 

MR NIWAGABA: With due respect to my learned friend, hon. Sseggona, we are looking at a situation where possibly we have wells or reservoirs crossing our national boundaries and by virtue of tripartite or bilateral agreements, the minister has to enter an agreement with a foreign State, and subject to that agreement, rules and regulations are made. And even under one of the clauses that we have already passed, the regulations made by the minister will always be laid before this House. I don’t think that will be surrendering our powers. 

MR KATUNTU: I think this clause is about managing a resource which is being shared by two countries and then in the process you have a problem of pollution. So, you need to come together - both countries - and see how to manage the problem and then put it down in writing.  But whatever you do should be subject to this law, and I don’t think we shall be surrendering any power.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to that amendment: “Subject to the provisions of this Act, the minister may by agreement with a foreign State issue rules relating to liability for pollution damage caused by petroleum activities.”

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, why I wouldn’t wish to restrict ourselves to this Act in terms of liability is that pollution as an environmental issue may cut across and we may have some oversights. But if we leave it open from an environmental perspective, then we would keep it wider than narrowing it. 

With your permission, Mr Chairman and colleagues, , in the previous provisions, we have made, if I remember well certain provisions relating to this cross-border oil business. Even if we removed the words “consultation with a foreign State,” the minister still has the power to make regulations throughout this Act. I am just not comfortable with “by agreement.” 

If we have permitted the minister, for example, to make agreements with foreign States, we have also permitted the minister to make regulations throughout this Act to give effect to the provisions of this Act. Why do we have to say, “...by agreement?” Because it means that when it comes to this particular section or clause, the minister’s power to make regulations is pegged onto this agreement with the foreign States.  I would implore you, Mr Chairman and colleagues, to reconsider this element of a “foreign State.”

MR KATUNTU: Well, it is a little bit unusual to have this sort of discourse from the same side. But where two people agree all the time, then one of them might be useless. (Laughter) 
How do you deal with a foreign State? You deal with a foreign state by agreement.  And these particular rules we are talking about are only unique to the relationship between these two states. It is not the general rule being envisaged under this particular law. 

You have an agreement and to implement it, you need rules to define it for purposes of enforceability under this law -(Interjections)- you have conceded?  

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I concede. (Laughter)

MR LUGOLOBI: Where it ends, the expression is “...pollution damage caused by petroleum activities under this Act.” I would like to move an amendment that in between “caused by” and “petroleum” we insert the expression “caused by transboundary petroleum activities” because that is what we are referring to or “cross-border,” whichever expression will be better, and not all sorts of petroleum activities. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But can’t pollution happen on the other side, even where there are no cross-boundary activities? Can’t you cause pollution across the country without having the cross-border activities? 

MS LILLY ADONG: Mr Chairman, the petroleum activities in Uganda are situated in a very unique environment which we share. Supposing pollution happens on River Nile, how many countries are going to be involved? Won’t Uganda be sanctioned? So, I think this clause will give the minister the opportunity to enter into agreement with such issues in mind. We are sharing Lake Albert; you can have pollution on this side of the border, but eventually it goes across.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. (Laughter) I put the question to the amendment in sub-clause (3).

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KATUNTU: For purposes of the record, I do not know the question you have just put; is it about the original amendment or for – I think we had agreed that it ends at “activities”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, that is what we said – that “petroleum activities” stops there, not under this Act.

MR KATUNTU: But we had not adopted the first one.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which one? (Interjection) We have adopted the whole thing now; the final text is what we have adopted.

MR KATUNTU: Maybe for the record purposes, Mr Chairman –(Interjection)- No, it can only be the chair to read it such that – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is exactly what I did before. “Subject to the provisions of this Act, the minister may, by agreement with a foreign state, issue rules relating to liability for pollution damage caused by petroleum activities.”

I put the question to that amendment – the final amendment now.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 126, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 127, agreed to.

Clause 128

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There was no amendment on this one -

MR KATUNTU: May I seek some clarification? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay.

MR KATUNTU: For purposes of clarity – because I do not have a fundamental amendment –we are now trying to envisage that there is a petroleum activity that is not licensed. It states, “Where pollution damage occurs during a petroleum activity and the activity has been conducted without a licence…” Oh, it has expired? Well, the party that – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If the licence expires – 

MR KATUNTU:  I would understand that if there had been a licence then it expired. But this sort of thinking that somebody could easily come there and say if you are conducting it illegally then you are liable, instead of actually putting in place penal consequences.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That one is captured under the other penal provision with 1000 currency points or something like that, if you proceed to carry out activities. 

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, hon. Katuntu. We did consider the criminal aspect of carrying out petroleum activities without a licence under clause 4. And I think this particular clause is now in respect of the civil remedies.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 128 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed.)

(Clause 128 agreed to.)

Clause 129

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 129 had no amendment; you have to seek leave - It has to be something small because we went through this before.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I will try to make it as small as possible. One, the provision reads “claiming of damages” and it is talking about “in accordance with this Act”. As I had earlier implored colleagues, we need not to restrict the application to “this Act” but to “this Act and any other laws in place for the time being”. That is the simple amendment that I propose. This is because there are other environmental laws which are in place.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is “and any other law” acceptable?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, the full phrase should be “in place for the time being”.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think with “this Act and any other applicable laws”. It would then read, “The liability of a licensee for pollution damage may only be claimed in accordance with this Act and any other law applicable.”

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, there is a word which would be inconsistent, “may only be”. So, we may have to remove the word “only”. And the justification is among other laws applicable here we have, for example, Common Law. If a person proceeded under Common Law, would you block him? In this case, the court would say “We cannot receive your complaint because you have not proceeded under this Act.” And that is the element I am seeking to cure under sub-clause (1). 

Now when you go to sub-clause (2), I think we find an even bigger problem because it, in effect, legislates impunity. It is providing: “Liability for pollution damage may not be claimed against: (a) Any person who by agreement with the licensee or his or her contractors has performed tasks or work in connection with petroleum activities.” So, while we said we want the licensee to shoulder the liability, we notice that the contractors or other agents of the licensee may conduct activities that offend the provisions of this Act and other environmental laws. 

But by sub-clause (2) we have actually taken away all the liability against them, and that would give them impunity to conduct business rather carelessly. 

MR WERIKHE: But it cannot be, Mr Chairman. Is it in its entirety as sub-clause (2)? Because if you looked at part (b),Any person who has manufactured or delivered the equipment he used in petroleum activity.” Will that apply? That is why I am asking: Is sub-clause (2) in its entirety or some aspects of it?

MR SSEGGONA: Actually, Mr Chairman and colleagues, you will find that the entire sub-clause (2) would have to go because it is lifting liability from them for whatever activities they engage in. If you look at (a), (b), (c) and (d) are simply explaining categories that are not liable in anyway. But we are saying no, any person who conducts an activity and it results into pollution should be liable.

MR NIWAGABA: Maybe some clarification – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: On this same one? Let me have hon. Adong. 

MS LILLY ADONG: Mr Chairman, I also rise on the same point as hon. Sseggona said. Sub-clause (2) is actually exonerating the operators. Remember, under clause 83, we did not agree on whom the operators are and who should be appointed by the minister –(Interjections)– we stood over it, as far as I know. Clause 2 is actually exonerating anybody who the licensee will contract to conduct business on their behalf. I stand to inform the House that in Nwoya District, we are already facing this kind of thing where the operator or a licensee went and buried waste in the community and the communities are suffering. Each of the oil companies coming after it are denying responsibility and they are not removing it. So, who is going to be held responsible for this? So, I think this sub-clause 2(a) should be deleted.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, if we look at 129(2), it emphasises the strict liability under 127(1). Let us look at 127(1) together with 129(2); it emphasises strict liability –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Let me give you some useful information. When you look at clause 129(2), it embodies two cardinal principles of law. One is the principle of volenti non fit injuria and this one will apply to 129(2) –(Interjections)– that means voluntary assumption of risk. So, it will apply to 129(2)a, 129(2)c and 129(2)d. Then the other principle of remoteness of damage would apply to 129(2)b. 

So, I think these particular clauses are relevant because we cannot widely open the floodgates to the licensees. They rhyme well with those Common Law principles on liability and we should maintain them. 

There was a question raised by hon. Lilly Adong, that particular damage by depositing the waste would not permit anybody suing apart from the one who could have entered an agreement with the licensee in performing the task or work in connection with petroleum activities. 

MS ADONG: Mr Chairman, in that case the waste that was dumped in that place is threatening even the school which is nearby, and the man has built his home on the waste. There is also a borehole nearby and there are very many people who visit the home to tell the man not to use the land for the next 30 years and people fear to use the borehole around that place. 

So, it is affecting the wider community and not only the one person who entered into agreement with the oil company.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The problem is that this one would not capture that person because this law is not going to apply backward, this law will apply forward. But a similar case – 

MS ADONG: Yes, similar cases may occur, because we may not have the capacity to educate everybody living in the area. 

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, what clauses 127 and 129 are trying to address is exactly what the honourable member from Nwoya has talked about, on the liability of the licensee for pollution damage. Tullow took over from Heritage and Tullow is held responsible for clearing the damage in Nwoya District. 

So, as a matter of fact, Tullow has taken up the responsibility because the licence was passed over from Heritage to Tullow. And it is addressing the issue of NEMA – National Environmental Authority took up the issue; they went there and carried out various tests to see the extent of the damage and whether it was hazardous, and it has recommended an appropriate way of handling that waste. So, it is being dealt with and Tullow is responsible; there is no vacuum in that aspect. 

Clause 129 is actually segregating or enforcing that the polluter pays. So that people who may have manufactured equipment used in petroleum would not take responsibility for the damages  -  the polluter or the person contracted to do work by the licensee -you do not charge damages on that person; you charge the licensee instead. So, this is what this clause is actually talking about.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The spirit behind the amendment to have this deleted is well understood. If you read 129(2)a, “Any person by agreement with a licensee or his or her contractors has performed tasks or work in connection with petroleum activities.” .

Mr Chairman, I feel we are now going beyond legislating for the sector and we are trying to apportion blame in the relationship between a licensee and any other person contracted to do the work.

First of all, that causes problems because amongst them, the licensee and the contractors must have agreed on the standards and requirements; they must be in tandem. We agreed here that we hold the licensee responsible. Now that we have reached 129, we are trying to segregate. 

Certainly, even in remote senses, a person who has manufactured, or these truck drivers who have delivered equipment – it is too farfetched to hold such a transporter responsible for the eventual activity that takes place. 

So, I want us to have this in mind. If someone is contracted here to transport a ridge to a certain well, and his job is done, and he drives away. How can you seek him to answer for the damage? I still think that we can reconsider -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, what 129(2) is doing is this. It is saying, “It shall be no defence for the licensee against liabilities -”, the licensee cannot say, “No, we had an agreement with that person, you pursue that person”, or that “The equipment that I bought were defective, so pursue those people -”. That person went there on his own, yet that person had gone to rescue people who were dying as a result of the licensee’s pollution. That is what it is saying; that the licensee cannot raise any of these as his defence.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, these are well defined issues. In that case, I think we put the question, because it caters for the concerns that have been raised by Members who have already suffered from this problem.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In other words, the liability squarely remains with the licensee; no defence is permitted under this law; this is what it is saying. 

MR SSEGONA: Mr Chairman, if you look at clause 129 – okay, read clauses 127, 129 to 130 - you will find that, of necessity, certain provisions are removable. I agree with those who are talking about strict liability. Strict liability comes as against the licensee in clause 127.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But honourable, you did not listen to what I said. What I said was that, clause 129(2) is simply saying the licensee has no defence. The licensee cannot say, I had a contract with that person so I am not liable. The licensee cannot say, “No, the equipment I imported was defective that is why there was pollution”. It cannot say that. It is totally liable in any situation. That is what it is saying.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I agree and I take your guidance with utmost gratitude. That is why I am reading the three together to bring out the meaning of them combined. The “strict liability” which is talked about in clause 129 actually starts from clause 127. Strict liability in a sense that, I do not need to prove negligence. That is clause 127.

When it comes to clause 129 - and I will read it, “Liability for pollution damage may not be claimed...” and the word to mark “...against any person who by agreement with a licensee or his or her contractors has performed tasks or work in connection with petroleum activity.”

This envisages some other person beyond who has an agreement with the licensee, and this person has conducted his activities in a manner that causes pollution. We have agreed that the licensee has no defence whatsoever. 

When it comes to this second person, he has a defence when you read clause 129 together with clause 130. Now, the point I am putting across and which actually comes out in clause 130 is that, we must maintain liability onto this other person, provided we are able to prove negligence. Meaning, licensee aside, these other persons who conduct petroleum activity leading to pollution, will still remain liable if they conduct their business negligently.

Take an example. I am operating under an agreement with a licensee. The licensee finishes his term or the licence is revoked and the licensee leaves, but there is a person working under an agreement with the licensee whose activities injured me as a result of negligence - I have my reservations when it comes to the word “gross” - but as a result of somebody’s negligence. This sub-clause (2) is a shield against that person, and that is my understanding of this clause and it is dangerous.

MR KATUNTU: I think I agree with hon. Sseggona, but to some extent. When you look at clause 127, a licensee is liable for pollution damage without regard to fault. That is what we call strict liability, period. So, the overall responsibility without regard to fault falls with the licensee. 

When you come to 129, that is now claiming damages; and as the Chairperson said, when you look at 129(2), the liability is taken away from this other person as against a third party; against who could be a victim, but this victim’s recourse is on the licensee, and that has been done deliberately such that the licensee does not run away from that responsibility. 

So, when you come to clause 130, it governs the relationship now between the licensee and this person who could have caused him problems under clause 127. Say, “Look here, you acted wilfully or negligently and caused me problems” then the licensee can have action against all these people who had been exempted under clause 129(2), and I thought that flows. 

My only problem, Mr Chairman, is the drafting of clause 130. It has to be looked into. These negatives - really I do not know whether it is the style these days. When I used to do drafting, I would have done it differently. Maybe, we need to redraft this one differently because you are now just giving him a right, but you state: “A licensee may not claim compensation...” yet the clause wants to give the licensee a right to claim in case there is negligence or wilful or gross negligence by this person they are talking about who has been exempted. I would propose -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we deal with clause 129 now? Are we ready to finish 129 because that was -

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, let me finally give this example. We have an Act of Parliament called the Workers’ Compensation Act and it is talking about compensation for a worker being effected by the employer. Now, there are situations where the employers sub-contract service providers. Under the Workers’ Compensation Act, a person who suffers injury while working for the sub-contractor his recourse is against the principle employer; the owner of the factory. There is no corresponding clause that bars the owner of the factory from seeking compensation from the sub-contractor under an agreement. This is the input of clause 130 currently in this Bill. 

My problem; as long as the employer is going to prove breach of contract; that you breached a standard clause of putting in place standards. You did not put these standards in place and as a result, I have been condemned to pay compensation. That is the import of clause 130. I am talking about a specific tortfeasor. While we have provided for strict liability in clause 127 against a licensee, we are actually providing for strict exemption against a tortfeasor even when - actually it is called impunity - even when he has conducted himself negligently, and that is my fear with 129(2).

Clause 130; let me repeat - hon. Katuntu has brought it forward. I do not know whether he is retracting it. Clause 130 is talking about the relationship between the licensee and his contractor. It does not talk about a relationship between the actual tortfeasor and the victim. I am looking at a situation where the victim is seeking compensation from a specific tortfeasor; not to restrict him to the licensee, but to anyone who causes liability, is my issue, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The question is, does the victim under this provision have recourse? And the answer is, “yes”. The victim has a recourse. That is the important thing. It is not like the victim will have nobody to sue or anything like that. The victim will sue the licensee and that is what the provision is saying.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, the relationship between the licensee and his sub-contractor is not only contractual. It is now legal because there are other provisions within this Bill that have defined that relationship. What he can do, what he cannot do, who is to be held for what actions and so forth. The reason why we are giving strict liability under clause 127(1) is for the victim to have a better recourse; a well-known recourse. This small tortfeasor may not be in position to put back the victim to his original position. That is why we are going for the licensee. So, if we now vulgarise it and say, “Okay, start looking for the small ones,” then we will have defeated the very essence of strict liability.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question. Have I taken the vote on this amendment of deletion of “only” and “…any other law applicable”? Have we taken that amendment already? Did we vote on that?  Just to be sure let us take a vote on clause 1, “…the amendment of any other law applicable,” after the deletion of the words “may only.” Delete “only” and then insert, after the end of the sub-clause “…any other law applicable.” I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 129, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 129, agreed to.

Clause 130

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, under clause 130, the committee proposes to insert “c” immediately after 129(2) in brackets at the end of the second line of sub-clause (1) to read as follows: “A licensee may not claim compensation for pollution damage against a person exempted from liability under section 129(2)(c),” not just clause 129(2), “...unless that person in question or a person in his or her service has acted wilfully or by gross negligence.” To limit its application to paragraph (c) of sub-clause (2), clause 129, so as not to suffocate the contractual rights of the licensee to recover from the persons exempted under clause 129 whose arrangement with the licensee is of a contractual nature.   

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the amendment to clause 130 sub-clause (1). Can I put the question to this particular amendment?

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think they are just two and these are minor. The first is, immediately after the words “section 129(2)(c)” which he has put, instead of the word “unless” to state “except where” then we continue; and also to remove the word “gross” and leave it to “negligence” because “gross negligence” calls for proof of two essential ingredients. First, you prove negligence then you have got to prove that the negligence was gross. I think it is better to leave it as “negligence” because it is negligence anyway.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Negligence is negligence, whether minor or whatever.

MR NIWAGABA: On a closer look, why should the liability or the claim by the licensee be restricted to that person only under (c)? What if the person from whom the licensee has purchased the equipment turns out to be obsolete, should we restrict the licensee from claiming from this manufacturer who has supplied him obsolete materials? Or the person whom he has agreed with - he has sub-contracted, he is an operator - and decides that particular person negligently causes pollution damage?

So, I think the remedy of the licensee should be against all those persons named under (2) in my view.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think that was the original intention of the Bill that any of these a, b, c, d would be liable where they commit negligence. 

MR KATUNTU: I do agree with that only that I was suggesting that our technical people look at it this way. Because when you look, it is recourse for pollution damage. You are giving the licensee a right. And then when you start, “A licensee may not claim compensation..” why don’t we state it this way, “Notwithstanding what is provided for under section 129, a licensee may claim compensation…” then we can conclude it that way. I think that is better drafting.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That will now be redrafting, but the substance of the provision would remain. Okay, so we can vote on this and ask the redraft to be done. Can I put the question to the issue of “gross”; we take out “gross” and also in place of “unless” we say “except where the person in question” - now it changes to “where the person in question” not “that person”. Hon. Sseggona, what would be the - take out the word “unless” and say except where - 

MR SSEGGONA: “Except where the person” –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It would now change to “the” – “where the person” -

MR SSEGGONA: It would still be okay if you used - it is basically redrafting, “…against a person exempted from liability under clause 129 except where…” then you continue the way it is. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That person in that question-

MR SSEGGONA: Yes, “Except where the person...” –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: “…where the person in question.” That will be smarter. “... where the person in question or a person in his or her service has acted wilfully or by negligence.” That is the amendment now. I put the question to that?

MRS MULONI: When you look at clause 129(4), “A licensee may claim compensation from the party causing pollution damage to the licensee to the same extent as the licensee may bring action for recourse against the party causing the damage.” Isn’t this in line with what hon. Katuntu was proposing in amending clause 131? It is provided for in 129(4)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What hon. Katuntu is saying is just to re-arrange the wording. It is not the substance. It is not changing anything except drafting in a negative way say, “a licensee may not claim” instead of saying, “may not claim” you want him to claim. 

MR SSEGGONA: I think, Mr Chairman, what the minister is saying in substance is that you do not need both clause 129(4) and clause 130(1) because they are basically talking about the same thing in terms of substance. Sub-clause (4) is saying a licensee may claim compensation from that party then 130(1), that a licensee may claim against the same person. So, in substance, you are doing the same in two provisions.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So?

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, I still believe clause 130 is necessary because of the principles envisaged under it. The first principle under (1) is to limit the claim to wilful or negligence. The second principle is mitigation of damages and then the third is to invalidate any agreement to the contrary. So, I think clause l30 would still be necessary.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members the amendment that I was going to put a question to was “…except where the person in question or a person in his or her service has acted wilfully or by negligence.” That was the amendment proposed and also the issue of making it positive rather than drafting it in the negative sense. May I put the question to this particular amendment? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OTADA: Mr Chairman, I wanted to know whether the chairperson of the committee conceded to amendment of clause 129(2) in its entirety as opposed to clause 129(2)(c), because there was that issue as well.

MR WERIKHE: Yes, Mr Chairman, I did concede to that amendment so as to stop at clause 129(2) –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, the (c) – because it is meant to cover the whole of sub-clause (2) - does not apply in this situation, and it is accordingly removed from the initial position. 

(Clause 130, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 131

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, we propose to add, after “damage is caused” the following: “Or any other Ugandan court of competent jurisdiction” to read as follows: “Legal action for compensation for pollution damage shall be brought before a competent court in the area where the influence or discharge of petroleum takes place or where damage is caused or any other Ugandan court of competent jurisdiction.” 

Justification: The restriction of legal action to only courts in the area where discharge of petroleum happens is detrimental to the process of access to justice. One should be able to approach any competent court on Ugandan soil. 

MR KATUNTU: Ordinarily, if you are defining jurisdiction and the court, you just give the real court. But both the Judicature Act and the Magistrate’s Court Act provide for both geographical and value of the subject matter or your claim. 

I do not even know why we need this provision in the first place because it is provided for under our laws where the subject matter is or where the complaint is arising from – that is if you are going to a lower court. And if the value of your claim is high, then you must go to a High Court; and there is only one High Court. 

My only problem is that if we leave it as it is - the minister may assist me on this. The only reason why you provided for this is where damage is caused. Such that even if there is an effluence here, but the damage is caused in Mityana, for example, you can even make a claim in Mityana. That is the reason why you have this.

The amendment the chairperson is moving does not seem to add real value; because all courts are competent. 

MR WERIKHE: I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 131 stands part of the Bill –

MR SSEGONA: Mr Chairman, my understanding of the Shadow Attorney General’s proposal is that we delete. But if that is not what he intended and actually said, my submission is that we actually delete it, because we usually put jurisdiction in this kind of format when we are restricting jurisdiction. When you are opening up jurisdiction, you do not need it because jurisdiction is already provided for in terms of competent courts.

My experience with provisions of this kind is, one, they provide for geographical limitations. We have already stated under clause 127 that the person to sue is actually the licensee who stays, say in Masaka, and the damage we are talking about is occasioned somewhere in Iganga. There are two Acts I can talk about off the cuff, which make provisions of this kind. The Employment Act for example, section 93, limits jurisdiction in legal matters to district level officers. Now, if you go to a magistrate’s court, you lose out. 

The Workers’ Compensation has similar provisions, it is actually the same; that you can only claim in the area where the accident occurred. That is, apart from the High Court – you cannot sue, for example, if the employer is in Kampala and the accident occurs in Iganga, you cannot come to the Chief Magistrate’s Court in Kampala. 

What is the cause of action that we are legislating against? The cause of action we are suing against is actually not the happening of this event, but the refusal to compensate as required by law. Now, if you do it this way, it will not bring out the meaning because you are restricting against liability. 

Two, it may even inconvenience litigants because the litigant may actually be in Kampala where the licensee is. But you are forcing him to go and sue in a court in Iganga. 

So, my proposal is, since jurisdiction is already provided for in other laws, the Judicature Act and the Magistrate’s Court Act, why don’t we leave this open; that is the only way we can open up access to justice.

MR NYOMBI: Mr Chairman, I think the objective behind this clause is to ensure that if legal action is brought, it is brought in the area where the nuisance has occurred. The restriction, I think is taken care of by other legislations – even this provision itself because it talks about competent court. 

Let us assume legal action was in respect of compensation beyond the jurisdiction of the local court of the area. This provision does take care of that because it does talk about competent court. It does not impose a restriction that you must go to that court; you can always go to the High Court. 

So, Mr Chairman, I do not think there is a problem with this provision. This provision is intended to ensure that the trial takes place where the nuisance has taken place, but should the subject value be over that, then the affected party can go above that court. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, this particular provision applies to small claims, but anything above 50 million, you only have one court to go to; that is the High Court; because the monitory jurisdiction or anything beyond that can only be the High Court. So, if you are talking about compensation of 10 or 15, then go either to Masindi District Court or Buliisa or Nwoya. But if you are talking of anything above 50 million, there is only one competent court, and that is the High Court.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is also the aspect of “competent court in the area”, because you have a High Court in Masindi; you may also be tempted to file it in the High Court in Kampala. So, this is saying, if the event happened in Masindi or Hoima, and there is a competent court there, you file it there rather than come and file it in the High Court in Jinja because it is near Bugweri –(Laughter)– I think it is also about proximity to the scene and the issues of evidence and witnesses. 


MR KATUNTU: The only essence of having High Court circuits all over the country is to do exactly that. The reason as to why you have a High Court sitting in Fort Portal is to have matters arising out of that jurisdiction and for litigants to have easy access to justice. That is why you can go to Gulu and have a High Court there and so forth. But at the end of the day there are authorities to it; there is only one High Court.

You remember at one time we had a legal problem within our courts of law during the election petition because at that time, Members who had lost elections and were petitioning were filing in Kampala and their petitions were thrown out because they said that they were filing in a wrong court until there was a competent - a Supreme Court - decision so that there is only one High Court decision and one High Court Registry although it could be in Ndorwa or Nakasongola where the learned Attorney-General comes from. So, at the end of the day, what is important are two issues; where the act has taken place and where the damage has been caused. This has been captured by this particular clause.
   
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I will put the question that clause 131 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 131, agreed to.

Clause 132

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it is 7.30 p.m. and it may be an appropriate time to take a break now. I was wondering whether we would not come back tomorrow for one or two hours – tomorrow for about two or three hours and then we can go for the weekend.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.30
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Irene Muloni): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.31
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Irene Muloni): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled: “The Petroleum Exploration, Development and Production Bill, 2012,” and has considered clauses 121 to 131. It passed some clauses with amendments in particular clauses 121, 122, 123, 126, 129 and 130, and stood over clause 125.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.32
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Irene Muloni): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the Whole House. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, today has been a very great day for all of us. We have been able to accomplish lots of business. We dealt with the report from the Government and a motion and now we have made some big progress in the Bill. This spirit is what will keep us moving quickly forward and at the end of the session our records will be showing very good. I thank you very much.

For those of you who have persisted up to now, I keep saying that if I had distinguished awards to give, you would be the beneficiaries today, but I thank you very much. That is all I can say for now. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 10 O’clock.

(The House rose at 7.34 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 16 November 2012 at 10.00 a.m.)
