PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - SECOND MEETINGWEDNESDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2022PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6264THE NATIONAL LEGAL AID BILL, 2022Wednesday, 16 November  2022I, therefore, urge this House, as we go into the budgeting process, to consider clearing this bill. It is not good to go for a conference and you are told you have an outstanding debt. However, I was very happy that Parliament of Uganda is up to-date. (Applause)In addition, as the Executive – Honourable Minister in charge of Fisheries and Hon. Bahati, who is a permanent member here – you need to inform your colleagues that we should clear this debt.This morning, I met with the Ambassador of the Royal Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and discussed a number of issues that are of mutual interest between Uganda and Saudi Arabia. They had an agreement, originally with our late Speaker, to have a working Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the Parliament of Uganda and the Parliament of Saudi Arabia. We are going to continue with that MoU. They have done many things in Uganda, including supporting IUIU, mosques and some hospitals. I also raised the issue of respect for the workers that are working in Saudi Arabia. He said he had had a discussion with the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, who is yet to report to this House on what transpired and the outcome of their meeting.I also commend the Muslim Parliamentary Caucus for deepening the relationship between Uganda and Saudi Arabia. (Applause) I am very happy that you have been able to connect IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 8TH SITTING - SECOND MEETINGParliament met at 1.58  p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know it has been a rainy afternoon, but you have endeavoured to come. I thank you for coming for this sitting.I would like to inform you, Honourable Members, that on 11 November 2022, I attended a meeting of the Bureau of Speakers of the East African Community and East African Legislative Assembly. It was about the games that are supposed to start next week.It emerged that whereas the Parliament of Uganda is up to-date with its remittances to the East African Community, it is only Parliaments of Uganda and Kenya that are up to-date . (Applause)Uganda, however, has outstanding bills, arising from other ministries and agencies – the Ministry of East African Community Affairs, the Inter-University Council of East Africa, Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation - I am happy the Minister in charge of Fisheries is here, Civil Aviation Safety and Security Organisation - The money that we are yet to pay is $6.6 million. PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6265THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2022us to those countries that are supporting our country and communities - if they are not supporting yours, I have many mosques and hospitals from those countries. We thank you, the Muslim fraternity.  The world has become a global village and we owe it to our own generation. Whatever we do today, we do it for our generations of tomorrow.When you look at the Youth MP for the western region here, tomorrow, he is not going to be a youth; he is growing up. We really need to leave a legacy as the 11th Parliament; what did you do for the community? What did you do for the people of Uganda? That is what we really expect of you as Members of Parliament. Honourable members, I know I am a friend to all of you and you are all my friends. However, when it comes to the business in the House, let us have respect for each other. That business of heckling – you responding when you are on the microphone – must stop. Let us have respect for each other and have decorum. (Applause) I know the person who did it – I am not going to name the person – but let it be the last time. I thank you, again, for coming this afternoon. I got a call from the Government Chief Whip, telling me that all Cabinet ministers had been called for a meeting. I am happy there was courtesy today. 2.06THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Matthias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is no vacuum, with the presence of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. So, we shall deal with the challenges that arise in the course of the Business of the House.Madam Speaker, it is not my nature to raise matters of national importance because I find my way variously, but I have been compelled to raise one as a matter of urgency.My constituency is -THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, we are still reacting to the communication.  I will allow you to raise it later. MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you.2.07MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your communication. I also thank our brothers, the Muslim community in Parliament, for strengthening relationships. However, Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence on the issue of Islamic banking. When I heard that, I remembered the high appetite we had for this banking. These were promises that were made in Parliament. I seek your indulgence to ask the Prime Minister on how far it has gone because these are loans that they give Ugandans without interests. How far are we with Islamic banking in Uganda? (Interjections)  I will take information from the Swahaba –(Interruption)-MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, Commissioner, for giving way.  The information I want to give is that the Executive is supposed to come up with regulations and an advisory council, as required by the law.Since the 10th Parliament, the Muslim Parliamentary Caucus has been making this request, but also as a Parliament that believes in Islamic banking, they have been making promises.In the 10th Parliament, Hon. Bahati was in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The problem, or the reluctance or the absence of political will, is on the side of the Executive. We even presented the names of the experts they wanted on the Floor of Parliament because they were saying they are no experts on Sharia Law. They were presented on the Floor, but up now, they have not acted. The information I give is that the problem is on the Executive, especially Hon. Bahati here who was there that time.6266THE NATIONAL LEGAL AID BILL, 2022MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude. I thank you Hon. Asuman for that information. Nevertheless, Islamic banking is beneficial to even us who are non-Muslims. You can get their cheap loans without interest, because the Sharia Law demands that when you lend out money, you do not charge any interest. This would boost and steer the development of our country, especially at this time, when we are just recovering from COVID-19 and the different lockdowns. I think this is something that should be handled urgently.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my imagination is that most Members do not understand Islamic banking. I am going to request the persons who came to my office - talking about Islamic banking - to take the Members through. We can have a day’s workshop on Islamic banking so that we appreciate what you are going to approve. You cannot approve what you do not know. Let us have a workshop and agree on what the benefits vis-à-vis the disadvantages of Islamic banking are.2.10THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, I thank the honourable colleague - the Commissioner - for inquiring as to how far we have moved with Islamic banking. Hon. Asuman is referring to Hon. Bahati, who is in the House now. I know we have handled Islamic banking in Cabinet, but since he was in the ministry, let him give you an update as to where we are, although we want to know more in the workshop. Let Hon. Bahati give us a brief of how far we have moved with Islamic banking. THE SPEAKER: You see why it is good to have institutional memory? That is the reason our voters should not vote us out; we need institutional memory. (Laughter)2.11THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that I moved the amendment of the Financial Institutions Act, to allow Islamic banking operate in this country. What was remaining was the regulations, but in the law, we put a provision that we would have a council under Bank of Uganda. Bank of Uganda found it a bit difficult - as the controlling institution of other commercial banks - to have a council under the Central Bank. To resolve this matter, after Parliament presented a number of positions from different stakeholders, we agreed that we make an amendment to that, so that these councils can be under different commercial banks. At the moment, the ministry of finance has presented the principles to Cabinet and the principles have been adopted. We are waiting for the Bill itself to make the amendments so that we can now allow the commercial banks to regulate Islamic banking, instead of the Central Bank at that point - so that the Central Bank only supervises. That was raised in Cabinet - that the Bill will come to Cabinet - maybe in the next one month and probably, by the end of the year, we should be able to sort this thing out because it is very urgent. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can you give us a timeline as to when the Bill will be here and we sort that issue. It is long overdue because it started from the 10th Parliament.MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, the Bill will be here before we close this session. THE SPEAKER: When are we closing this session?MS NAKADAMA: I mean, in December, before Christmas.THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, in two weeks’ time, we should have the Bill. MS NAKADAMA: Yes, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. On my communication, let us start with Hon. Akol. 2.14MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I thank you for the meeting you had with the Ambassador. When you talk about the export COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6267THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2022of labour to those countries - when we visited our embassy in Dubai, we realised there is a great problem. The problem is always seen by many of us, including what we always see on social media - how our people are abused in those countries. Above all, when we talked to the embassy officials, they told us that the law does not permit us to export casual labourers, especially domestic workers. Therefore, when the minister comes to communicate on the condition of our people who are taken to those countries, we should be told how those who are not supposed to be exported to provide labour in those countries end up being exported. These are people who are suffering in those countries. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, we need a report from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. We also need to know how you accredit and give the people taking labourers licences. Most of them do not even have capacity in case anybody dies there, to bring back the body. Hon. Nantaba raised this issue last week. We need to first of all know what criteria you use to give licenses. Or are the licences among us?2.16MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank you for giving us a brief on the report that you had with your counterparts in Nairobi. On this matter, there was a petition by the migrant workers. I think this petition is before the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. I have received some people reaching out to me, as the chairperson of UWOPA over this matter, asking that the petition, which contains their grievances be handled. One of the issues that is being raised is that some of the officials within the ministry of gender, who are supposed to handle this matter actually own or are related to the people who own some of these companies. That is why it becomes difficult for them to handle. I request that you direct the ministry of gender to conclude with that petition and bring that report here so that we discuss it. It is not the first time we have discussed this. THE SPEAKER: Is it the Ministry or the committee?MS OPENDI: It is the committee. The people told me that they petitioned last year. My phone has blacked out, but I was trying to get the actual date. It was in July last year, when this petition was sent to your office, and you referred it to the committee on gender. Secondly, Madam Speaker - just allow me raise this, so that I do not stand up again. You have told us about the East African Community and the countries that are paying up their dues. We are widening and deepening the integration of our people. Also, we have just brought on board the Democratic Republic of Congo. We also hope to bring on board Somalia and maybe, even Ethiopia to the East African Community. I remember even at some point, our EALA Members were complaining that EALA - due to lack of funding - wanted to reduce the number of plenary sittings. I think this will not augur well for us as the East African Community. The purpose of establishing the East African Community was to deepen and widen the cooperation among the Partner States. When Partner States are not meeting their obligations, then there is no way the Secretariat can function. There is no way we will move together as one block. It would be of interest for the summit, which comprises the Heads of State to find a lasting solution to funding of the East African Community Secretariat and EALA.Otherwise, this community will collapse again and we should not allow it because it has many benefits. THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Opendi. The Summit came up with a solution to this effect and that is why Uganda is up to-date to that effect; its enforceability on the part of the other countries. Is the chairperson of gender here? Vice-chairperson, do you have the report?6268THE NATIONAL LEGAL AID BILL, 20222.19MS DORCUS ACEN (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The chairperson of gender is not around; however, I am a Member. Yes, we have that report, but from the committee, we are also constrained, as she has been explaining. We have the resources and members of the committee were supposed to travel to Saudi Arabia and some of those other countries to get those details. However, members were denied visas. We had a discussion about this today morning and we still push it to you as a committee. If there is a way, kindly, help the committee so that the committee can have proper information to enable us make informed decisions. I thank you. THE SPEAKER: One of the issues that we discussed with the ambassador this morning was on the issue of the visas, which should not be a problem. Tomorrow, we can process that and the committee will be able to travel and get further information. 2.21MR ENOSI ASIIMWE (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Following your communication, specifically regarding heckling in this House, because we come into this House as representatives of the people, the views we express here are not necessarily our views, but of those who we represent. So, when I am expressing the views of my constituents and then, somebody shuts me down, you are actually shutting down the views of the people we represent. Going forward, Madam Speaker, I want you to be strong on people who try to shut us down because of the opinions that we hold -(Interjections)- like what they are doing right now. (Laughter)I pray that this un-civilised habit gets -(Interjections)-  yes, exactly what I am trying to say is what they are doing. Heckling is uncivilized. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, respect the person speaking.MR ENOSI ASIIMWE: Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: And, indeed, you are being un-civilised. How can you heckle a Speaker? Not Anita. Hon. Dorcas, there was an issue - of course, you know very well that you are supposed to report back within 45 days.When you got the challenge of the visas, you ought to have come back to the House formally and reported that you have this challenge and seek for an extension. Why didn’t you do that? MS DORCAS ACEN: Thank you. It is something that we are working on. However, I have seen my Vice- Chairperson walking in. I request her to give that update. Thank you.2.32THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COM-MITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Sarah Najjuma): Madam Speaker, it is true we were denied visas to go and benchmark in Saudi Arabia as my Member has said, but we were going to report back to the House.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sarah Najjuma, I would like to refer you to rule 30(10). MS NAJJUMA: Madam Speaker, we apologise as a committee - THE SPEAKER:  Rule 30(10) defines how many days you are supposed to take before reporting back.MS NAJJUMA: Thank you, for your guidance. We apologise as a committee for not reporting back on time. On the issue of benchmarking, we are looking around to see which country we can benchmark for best practises.THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, we are talking about Saudi Arabia and the presumption of mistreatment, but maybe because she was not here, she had not got the information well. COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6269THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2022Put it formally in writing to the House, seeking for an extension of time.2.25MR DAN ATWIJUKIRE (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Madam Speaker, I wanted to give my little contribution to the externalisation of labour and the committee’s failure to travel. The biggest challenge with externalisation and the challenges that our children face, start with us here.If we can lift the veil on who these exporters are - I have seen scenarios where someone dies in Saudi Arabia or in any other country, and later on, we discover that the company that exported that worker was illegal and it becomes very difficult to follow up on that particular person. You wonder where the licensing group is, and where the regulators are and every time, we cry about this, it worsens. That only goes to explain that the person doing it is not an ordinary Ugandan. We should examine thoroughly before we go to Saudi Arabia because the infection starts with us. Thank you very much. THE SPEAKER: Madam Chairperson, as you go for your investigation - you have heard; we must lift the veil. They do it in the name of a company. Go ahead and find out who the directors of those companies are. (Applause) Find out if they are related to you or I, so that we know whether the problem is among us or somewhere else. 2.27MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think from this interaction on this matter of the externalisation of labour, there are challenges, which the committee has failed to bring to the leadership of this institution, which they should have brought to you. I request that you summon the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson in your office. They give you a brief before they come here to ask for an extension. I see some challenges, which are administrative in nature. Otherwise, we might open the debate afresh. Yet, that is what we should be doing when they bring the report. THE SPEAKER: If it is on the issue of externalisation, we will debate it when the report comes. Let us have matters of national importance, followed by the Leader of the Opposition and later, Hon. Abdallah.2.28THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been curiously aroused by a challenge in Masaka City, which is an emerging city, but unable to expand water provision. I have been keen to follow up to National Water and Sewerage Corporation (NWSC) headquarters as to why they are not able to expand water provision in the city. When I inquired, even other cities have the same problem and the claim by NWSC is that they cannot do any expansion because Government agencies like hospitals, the UPDF, police and prisons do not pay their water bills. In the budget, these are well funded institutions and MDAs with enough money to pay these bills, but they have not paid. When I checked up close, they owe NWSC up to Shs 50 billion in unpaid bills and therefore, they are unable to service their suppliers to expand water to our communities. Certainly, we are incubating diseases in these communities without clean water.Will the ministry of finance explain to this country whether the money we supplied to these MDAs to pay for services developed “legs” and walked away from where it was designated or actually, there are mischarges that we need to probe as Parliament so that we can arrest the situation ahead of time? I am in possession of documents - because I work with evidence – on how these MDAs are reneging on their payments. Madam Speaker, we need, in the presence of the Prime Minister and ministry of finance, a quick explanation where this money is, so that we can –6270THE NATIONAL LEGAL AID BILL, 2022THE SPEAKER: Which documents do you have?MR MPUUGA: Of course, Madam Speaker, I run a privileged office, which it can access all manner of documents. THE SPEAKER: Can we have a copy of the documents - because it may be good for all of us?MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, they are not nuclear weapon documents. I have a presidential communication ordering Finance to pay their bills, dated 17 September 2022. He was probably privy. He is quoting bills in the range of Shs 44 billion. My other private document quotes over Shs 60 billion and so, we have a divergence, but he is accepting the problem. I have evidence that the UPDF is not paying, just as Uganda Police, Nebbi Hospital, Arua Hospital, Masaka Regional Referral Hospital, Hoima Hospital -Madam Speaker, I visited Hoima Regional Referral Hospital a month ago and I will lay a report tomorrow. The hospital did not have water that day. They do not have money and the hospital is very sick itself. I would like to lay this evidence for the record. I have other copies, but the ministry of finance can explain what we are dealing with.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we have an explanation to that effect on Tuesday?2.32THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, we are going to look into this matter. I will summon the Ministry of Water and Environment to come up with a statement here after thorough investigation.THE SPEAKER: We want a statement from Finance. There is already evidence that water bills have not been paid.MS NAKADAMA: Yes, sorry, I meant the ministry of finance. THE SPEAKER: Hajati, between me and you, we know that water is life. All of us need water in our places. If you are not paying for water and now, you are depriving them from providing us with water, why are we here?MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, the minister of finance is going to come here with a statement on Tuesday. THE SPEAKER: We do not want a statement; we want action taken because there is a letter. There is even an executive order from the President. MS NAKADAMA: Much obliged. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in VIP Gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from the Apostolic Nunciature; 1.  His Excellency, the Most Reverend Luigi Bianco - Apostolic Nuncio;2.  Rev. Fr Krzysztof Seroka – Secretary of the Nunciature.You are most welcome. (Applause) They have come to observe the proceedings, as Parliament pays tribute that Hon. Akello talked about yesterday. 3.  We also have our own, the Most Reverend John Baptist Odama, the Archbishop of Gulu Archdiocese. You are most welcome. (Applause) 4.  We have Monsignor Dr John Baptist Kauta. Monsignor, you are most welcome. He is my uncle. (Applause) 5.  We have Hon. Judith Franca Akello, you are most welcome. (Applause) 6.  We also have Hon. Komakech, the former MP – you are welcome. (Applause) COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6271THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2022We have a delegation from the Embassy of Italy in Uganda and that includes:1. His Excellency Massimiliano Mazzanti – Ambassador;2. Mr Mario Savona – Deputy Ambassador;3. Ms Stella Ahaabwa– Chief of StaffThey are all here to witness our proceedings and the motion when we are paying tribute. You are most welcome. This is Parliament of Uganda and your Parliament. We want to sincerely thank you for coming over to witness our proceedings. Join me in welcoming them. (Applause)2.36MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Madam Speaker, thank you very much, for this opportunity and thank you, Hon. Mpuuga, for bringing this matter up. Madam Speaker, you have directed the Prime Minister to come with a statement or the action point. However, I want to also bring this to your attention.You are a dedicated leader and are steering this Parliament very well to accommodate people’s needs. We put those issues in the Appropriation Act.You steered this Parliament to appropriate and different agencies and MDAs got their budgets according to the needs of this country. However, we see, all the time, that when we get money, new issues come up before they fund what this House appropriated.Can the Prime Minister also come out clearly to tell us how far - The other day, the minister of finance presented the budget performance, but we need to know why the districts, for example, have been given 11.5 per cent. We have seen other expenses made by the ministry of finance without consulting Parliament. They have become another appropriation body as the ministry of finance.You leave critical issues where Members of Parliament have put their brains to interrogate the needs of the people and bring your own issues and fund them at will. Are we going to continue moving like this when the Prime Minister is there supervising that ministry?THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we got a report on budget performance for quarters one and two and referred it to the Committee on Budget. The committee should come and present on what the percentage that has been given out. Then, ministry of finance should give us the reason they took over the power of appropriation, which is not theirs. Let us wait for the report from the committee.MR NIRINGIYIMANA:  Much obliged, Madam Speaker. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Abdullah -2.38MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA (NUP, Mukono County North, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Under Section 207 of the Magistrates Courts Act, the jurisdiction and powers of magistrate’s courts to hear and determine cases and matters of civil nature in light of the value on the subject matter in dispute is as follows:1. The Chief Magistrate is authorised to handle a matter not beyond Shs 50 million.2. Magistrate Grade I is authorised to handle a case whose value cannot exceed Shs 20 million; and 3. Magistrate Grade II is authorised to handle a matter whose value cannot exceed Shs 500,000.Today, the High Court is grappling with cases of backlog arising from the fact that several cases are now being filed in the High Court. Even a small plot around Wakiso, Mukono, Buikwe and Mpigi - you just find yourself exceeding Shs 50 million and that has created a backlog in our Judiciary.I have tried my best to reach to the Attorney-General and the Secretary to the Judiciary to ensure that the Magistrates Court Act is 6272THE NATIONAL LEGAL AID BILL, 2022amended, but they are not moving. People are killing each because cases in Court are not moving. Madam Speaker, justice delayed is justice denied. I call upon the minister and the Attorney-General to urgently move a Bill to amend the Magistrates Courts Act before our people kill each other the more. I humbly pray. THE SPEAKER: Government - 2.41THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, justice delayed is justice denied. I am going to call the Attorney-General to come and give us a statement on the delayed cases and backlog.2.41THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): First of all, with humility, I would like to appreciate the response of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Of course, I would not blame her for responding the way she did, in the absence of the learned Attorney-General and the able deputy.The question at hand would rather be that we get a commitment either that the Cabinet has discussed this gap or not. I request that my learned brother moves a Private Member’s Bill so we can cause the first amendment. I do not think the Prime Minister’s response enables this House to take action that far. It is an admission of a void and the inability to follow up.Madam Speaker, it speaks to an issue we addressed yesterday, about the validity of legislation and the failure to act on expired legislation in space and time. I am putting the House on notice that I am going to instruct my Attorney-General in the alternative cabinet to move a private Member’s Bill to amend the Magistrates Court Act. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Yes, Hon. Dan.MR ATWIJUKIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek procedural guidance relating to the responses we get from our beloved ministers - THE SPEAKER: First repeat that word - “beloved”. (Laughter)MR ATWIJUKIRE: Madam Speaker, when we bring out issues, at times we get instant answers or we are told they will report back to the House. However, it stops at reporting. Even when they promise to take action, nothing or little is done. What mechanism can be put in place to follow up commitments made by our ministers to ensure Ugandans benefit on the issues that their representatives raise here? Otherwise, it has become a routine that when Hon. Kimosho or any other Member raises an issue, a minister stands up and gives an answer, but at the end of the day, an ordinary Ugandan does not get anything. Thank you very much. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what Hon. Abdullah raised is very pertinent. When you talk about backlog, it is rising out of all of that. I am aware there is recruitment taking place for grade I magistrates and chief magistrates. We need a statement from the Attorney-General and this must be given to us on Tuesday. A statement from the Attorney-General should be reflected on the Order Paper and please, Clerk, quote all the items that have been recorded the entire week. As we agreed last week, tomorrow, Thursday, we will have a-one-item Order Paper under rule 220, that is, the actions taken on all the reports that have been laid on the Floor of this House. (Applause) We only have one agenda after prayers. We want the actions taken on all the reports that have been laid. Let us handle report by report. If it means sitting here up to night time, we shall sit. (Applause)2.47MR MARTIN MUGABI (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I raised a matter of national importance here [Mr Kiwanuka] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6273THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2022in regard to the sugarcane manufacturers who were cheating farmers using faulty weighing scales and you directed the minister of trade, Hon. Bahati -THE SPEAKER: Is it sugarcane manufacturers or the sugar-MR MARTIN MUGABI: It is sugarcane manufacturers who cheat the sugarcane farmers.THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are protected; please, speak.MR MARTIN MUGABI: Thank you. Madam Speaker, you directed the minister to handle the matter. The minister promised to convene a meeting between the sugarcane manufacturers and sugarcane farmers. To-date, the minister has not proceeded with the directive. Is it, therefore, right -THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, there was a related matter from Hon. Ssimbwa and a committee was given to handle that issue. Just wait for a report from the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry on that matter. MR MARTIN MUGABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: That shows that I remember your issue, which was related to what Hon. Ssimbwa raised, and it is being handled appropriately. Hon. Atkins.2.48MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. On Wednesday, 11 May 2022, a Government nurse from Bwera General Hospital got an appointment into a Government ambulance belonging to the hospital, on reference of a patient to Kiruddu Hospital. In the ambulance, was the attendant, driver, nurse and the patient. When they reached Kibiito Subcounty in Bunyangabu District, the ambulance burst into flames and the nurse got burnt to death. The reason I am raising this is that this citizen died on duty, offering service to his country. I am here because the government nurse, now the late, left behind five biological children. The children are out of school. He left a young widow, with a house under construction. Madam Speaker, duty falls upon us, as the Government, that we offer opportunity to our sons and daughters to serve their country. When a calamity or tragedy of that nature befalls them, it is up to the Government to look after their families. This should not only be restricted to the Kasese person. They should actually bring on board other people, especially the nurses who are dying while trying to save lives during this Ebola tragedy. They should also bring on board the policemen and policewomen that are dying on duty when merciless human beings attack them and kill them. Their families end up suffering. This cannot be allowed to continue.My prayer is that Government finds it urgent and needful to go and rescue the widow of the deceased Government nurse, identify the five biological children and make a commitment to educate them to, at least, first degree level and also ensure that their house is completed. The Government should look into the area of compensating the families of those sons and daughters that are dying while on duty serving their country, especially under the health and security sectors. I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Hon. Atkins. Our condolences to the family that lost the nurse and sympathies to the children. Prime Minister -2.52THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, I send condolences to the family of the nurse and the other people who were in that ambulance – and the children who are at home trying to see how they can push on with their studies. 6274THE NATIONAL LEGAL AID BILL, 2022I commit myself here that we are going to get in touch with the family and see how we can be of help, mainly to the children, to see how they can push on with their studies and also see how we can help in other things like the construction of the house. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Atkins, you need to get in touch with the Prime Minister and give her all the details so that we are able to find out what can be done. 2.53MS MARGRET RWABUSHAIJA  (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national concern on the plight of the retired ambassadors and diplomats. These were civil servants who, while still working in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs –THE SPEAKER: Hon. Leader of the Opposition and Hon. Alioni, we are in the House. Can you resume your seats.MS RWABUSHAIJA:  When the group that I am talking about was still working in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, they used to be referred to as “Excellencies”. These senior citizens, who are also diplomats - 79 in number - have not been getting their retirement benefits, particularly pension and gratuity for close to three months. They are always told to go and check on their accounts with claims that their money has been deposited – but when they reach there, they do not find any money. These are senior citizens who have terminal illnesses - quite a number of them - and cannot even treat themselves, which is really absurd. When I thought about it, I also recalled that last year, in the Daily Monitor of 18 February, they wrote about a former police officer who chased after his gratuity for 37 years and died without getting it. Therefore, I wonder where we are going because these people work, but eventually, struggle to get their benefits. My prayer is that the minister of finance comes to this august House and gives a statement on why people are tortured even after they have worked diligently for this nation. I submit.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Does this go to foreign affairs or Public Service? (Member rose_) There is a procedural matter here.MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, there are items in the budget, which are statutory and call for a direct charge. One of them is pension and gratuity. While a civil servant is working, part of his or her salary is religiously, deducted monthly. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to establish whether Government is complying with the Appropriation Act and the Public Finance Management Act or they are taking Parliament and the laws that have been put in place as ceremonial legal acts, but do different things. I am seeking your guidance, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Minister of Public Service -2.57THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Ms Grace Mary Mugasa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I thank the honourable member who raised the matter of ambassadors. As the Ministry of Public Service, we decentralised pensions and gratuity management across Government – in MDAs, including local governments. Therefore, I will expect a report from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs so that we can compile the list for compensation. Thank you very much. THE SPEAKER: So, you are saying you want the Minister to compile a list for compensation?MS MARY MUGASA: Yes, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okello Oryem - Honourable members, this is a son of a former President. (Laughter)[Ms Nakadama] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6275THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 20222.59THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Okello Oryem): Madam Speaker and colleague Members of Parliament, my sincere apologies, first of all, I extend sympathies to the former Ambassadors, who have served this country diligently abroad, who have made representation on behalf of this Government and previous Governments while serving this Government. I am saddened to hear that there are 77 of them, who have not got their entitlement after retirement from Service. This is not only common within the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; it is across the board, including in other sectors. In this particular case, I want to assure you that I will discuss this matter with my Permanent Secretary tomorrow morning. I will then ensure that we give you a report on this particular aspect. I ask the colleague to give me the 77 individuals concerned and I will see how to follow it up with my Permanent Secretary and ensure that we see how, if the money is there-THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, listen to the minister. MR ORYEM: Madam Speaker, I will definitely ensure that I get the list of the 77, deal with my Permanent Secretary and I will report to this House the status of how these former Ambassadors can be paid as soon as possible. I thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I think the minister wants to get the list from the Workers’ Representative in order for him to reconcile with what is in the ministry - basically reconciliation - and that is why we have Workers’ Representatives here. The MP for Workers is also doing her work. That is why they were electedHonourable members, we have a motion that is awaited by the team in the Gallery and we really need to have -3.01THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will be very brief. The matter raised by the Workers’ MP is not restricted to the former Ambassadors. There is actually a very big problem.On the Floor of this Parliament, you have a committee of Parliament handling gratuity of former employees of East African Community Affairs as we instructed. Former employees of UP&TC are demanding for their pension, including former employees of Coffee Marketing Board; it is like a cancer. Madam Speaker, unless you instruct committees of Parliament that are handling ministries to ask all ministries to submit unpaid pension as a matter of urgency, we shall be judged as having abdicated responsibility as leaders in this country to senior citizens who served this country diligently.I would like to inform colleagues on the front bench that very soon, you will be former MPs and former ministers. Therefore, where you are leaving a trail of incompetence in handling pension, very soon, you will be former. Let us leave a clean slate and a sense of justice in your wake.Madam Speaker, you need to find a way of instructing ministers to submit to relevant committees all pending pension payments for an audit by Parliament. There are MDAs where pension is fixed for people to earn an interest - and not paid on time deliberately. Until Parliament makes an inquest and establishes the extent of abuse, we could be just treating a boil, Madam Speaker. The Workers’ MP is bringing to light this critical issue. We need to interrogate it further. The issues that happened in Public Service have not gone away. Part of the base on which they laid is still in existence and the pension is still abused. I thank you. 6276THE NATIONAL LEGAL AID BILL, 2022THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister of Public Service, you need to give us a list of pensioners - ministry by ministry, entity by entity, department by department and what is in arrears. We will then scrutinise all those in the different sectoral committees.  When can we have that?MS MARY MUGASA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. We will bring a report in one week. THE SPEAKER: Very good. We are starting the budget process and we need to capture it. Hon. Benard.  - Honourable members, do not laugh at Hon. Benard; this is his maiden speech.3.04MR BENARD SEKYANZI (NRM, Budyebo County, Nakasongola): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the protection. I rise on a matter of national importance. Madam Speaker, in my constituency, there is an urgent matter, which needs to be handled. I know you are steering this Parliament and you said it is pro-people.In 2019, His Excellency, the President of this mighty country, the Pearl of Africa, came to Nakasongola and directed that Kyarubanga land should be degazetted for tenants. However, right now, district leaders are ferrying people from other districts to this land. I am not ashamed to say this here because it is true. They are also arresting the sitting tenants and anybody who rises up to them. (Applause)  So far, 88 people have been detained for days and months without trial. I even have some police bonds here, which I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER: Lay them on the Table.MR SEKYANZI: As I speak now - THE SPEAKER: Hon. Benard, read the names of the persons on bond, then lay.MR SEKYANZI: We have Moses Semanda, Tom Sembatya, Abas Serugo, Martin Sekayiwa, commander Rogers Kabalubindu, Tumuhairwe and others.Madam Speaker, the old man who is between 60 to 70 years known as Sunday Kamuza has been detained for six days in police custody in Nakasongola. Therefore, my humble request is, Madam Speaker -THE SPEAKER: Honourable members -MR SEKYANZI: The Minister for the Presidency should come for a locus and get the real information and what is taking place on the Kyalubanga land. I also request - because these residents petitioned the Office of the Prime Minister, even the Office of the Minister for the Presidency on the 6th of October. However, nothing observable was done in form of a response. I request that the Minister of Internal Affairs engages and investigates the RDC, and the District Police Commander, who are being used to arrest these people, day and night. You should also direct that they stop using the yellow car, which is being used in arresting these people because it is tarnishing the name of the ruling party. People think they are the ones who are carrying out the arrests.THE SPEAKER: Thank you Bernard.MR SEKYANZI: I also request that  the Minister for the Presidency, if possible, should transfer the RDC and his Deputy, plus the DPC, because they are the ones who are causing commotion there. I beg to submit. ( Laughter)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, lay those documents on the Table.MR SEKYANZI: I beg to lay, Madam Speaker. (Laughter) Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a very serious matter. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you cannot have an old man of 62 years in cells for six days. This House is making an order to have that man out on police bond; can we have the old man out on police bond today?COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6277THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 20223.11THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama Isanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate my brother Hon. Sekyanzi Bernard upon his maiden speech. He has done very well. Whatever he has raised here is very important.I am going to direct for the old man to be released today, on police bond. Other issues need to be investigated. I am going to direct the ministries involved to make an investigation and report back to this House.THE SPEAKER: We also need the ministries responsible to visit the locus. MS NAKADAMA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Much obliged.THE SPEAKER: Report back to the House on Tuesday on the fate of the old man and whether you went to the locus. Let us also know what action you have taken.3.11DR SIRAJI EZAMA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. On 2nd of this month, an unfortunate incident happened in one of my subcounties. A police officer, registration number 73117, Crespas Owomugisha, deliberately shot at a tyre of a Fuso Lorry that was carrying 12 people. The vehicle overturned and six people died instantly; six are admitted to the hospital in critical condition. The mandate of the police is to keep law and order and to protect citizens and their properties. The police deliberately did that. Those people who lost their lives had dependant families. Their families are now left with nobody to cater for them. The injured are still in the hospital, with no one to cater for their medical bills. I am, therefore, requesting that the Government comes out to compensate those who have lost their lives and also cater for the families of those who lost their lives. Government should also take action against the police officer who deliberately led to the death of these people. I have the names of those who have lost their lives. I beg to read them.THE SPEAKER: No. We shall confirm the details when they go to the locus. DR EZAMA: I want to lay-THE SPEAKER: Dr Ezama, you will give the information to the Prime Minister. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we need action.DR EZAMA: Thank you. Most obliged.MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, I will get information from the honourable colleague and we take action. Thank you.3.16MS ASINANSI NYAKATO (FDC, Woman Representative, Hoima City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a question to the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, under rule 42(1). The National Development Plan III, commits the Government to establish an oil and gas incubation Fund specifically to help out Ugandans, give loans to local entrepreneurs, both medium and small entrepreneurs, as a means of empowering them to compete in the oil and gas sector.My question to the minister is; When is the Government going to establish the oil and gas incubation fund so that Ugandans can easily compete for business opportunities in the oil and gas sector? I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER: She comes from the oil city.MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, I will cross-check and get back to the House Tuesday next week.THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as you visit the locus, if you find the RDC and maybe the DPC - whoever you find culpable regarding what is happening in Hon. Bernard’s constituency, you should not just transfer them because you will be transferring a problem to another district. 6278THE NATIONAL LEGAL AID BILL, 2022We must take serious action on these civil servants. This business of transferring people from one district to another - you are actually infecting the whole country. Members who have not presented, let us use tomorrow; please, I want to release the team in the Gallery.LAYING OF PAPERSTHE LOCAL GOVERNMENT CITIES REGULATIONS, 2022THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, since the creation of cities in 2020, the House has been on record demanding for regulations for operationalisation of various functions in the new cities. I notified the minister and she is ready to lay on the Table.3.19THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Victoria Businge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 28 April 2020, Parliament approved the creation of cities in Uganda in accordance with Article 179 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and section 7(2)(a) of the Local Government Act Cap. 243.In order to effect the provisions of the Local Governments Act, the Ministry of Local Government has prepared regulations under Statutory Instrument No. 115 of 2022 in accordance with section 175 of the Act.In accordance with section 175(3) of the Local Government Act, a publication of the Local Government Cities Regulations, 2022, Statutory Instrument No. 115 of 2022 was made on 28 October 2022 in the Uganda Gazette. I now take this honour to lay the Local Government Cities Regulations, 2022 Statutory Instrument No. 115 of 2022 before this Parliament for further action.The Local Government Cities Regulations have been uploaded on the intranet for the Members to internalise at their own time. I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, I am optimistic that these regulations will enable the cities to satisfactorily deliver their mandate in line with the national development aspirations. I thank you and I am going to accordingly refer these regulations to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government.MOTION SEEKING LEA VE OF THE HOUSE TO INTRODUCE PRIV ATE MEMBERS’ BILLSTHE CAPITAL MARKETS AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Article 94(4)(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, as I have always said, is a bedrock that gives private Members the mandate to raise Private Member’s Bills and it is your constitutional right, which should not be abused. The abuse now comes in when you bring a Bill and you are seeking for leave. We send the Bill to ministry of finance, but when it reaches committee level, you make alterations. We are not going to entertain that abuse of privileges. Hon. Nathan, can you proceed?3.22MR NATHAN IGEME (NRM, Jinja South Division East, Jinja City): Thank you for this opportunity, Madam Speaker. I rise to move a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill to amend the Capital Markets Authority Act Cap. 84 moved under rules 121 and 122 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. “WHEREAS Article 79 of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws for peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda and; WHEREAS Article 94(4)b of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rule 121 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament provide that a Member has the right to move a Private Member’s Bill;[The Speaker]MOTION SEEKING LEA VE TO INTRODUCE A PRIV ATE MEMB ER’S BILL6279THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2022AWARE THAT Parliament enacted the Capital Markets Act, Cap. 84, which established the Capital Markets Authority for the purpose of regulating the security sector and that Parliament subsequently amended the Capital Markets Authority Act in 2011 to provide for preparation of prospectuses and information memoranda to enable issuance of securities on exchanges and in 2016 providing, inter alia, that for the Capital Markets Authority to approve prospectuses and information memoranda, and to introduce financial and prudential regulations;FURTHER AWARE that Uganda, through the Capital Markets Authority, is a member of the International Organisation of Securities Commission (IOSCO), an international body that brings together the world security regulators and;RECOGNISING that as the global standard setter for the security sector;CONCERNED that the Capital Markets Authority Act, in its current state, poses challenges in its implementation so far as it separates the power of approval after documents, including prospectuses and information memoranda, which is granted to the Capital Markets Authority as a regulator from the power of exchanges to conduct scrutiny, to certify compliance or prospectuses to issue and lease securities, yet, all powers relate to prospectuses hence has had the effect of entrenching division in the listing approval powers and consequently, created bureaucratic challenges amongst players in the market;FURTHER CONCERNED that the 2016 amendment expanded CMA powers into prudential regulations, which powers are akin to those of the Central Bank in the banking sector without regard to the IOSCO requirement to restrict such regulations by a capital markets regulator with a justification of the specific risk to be mitigated;MOREOVER the conduct of regulated entities has never been given a central focus in the regulation of the securities markets;NOTING that the Capital Markets Authority Act creates confusion in the mandate of the Capital Markets Authority by granting the authority the power to make regulations providing for the fees to be charged for the regulatory activities in the capital markets, yet, the Act does not make provision for regulated activities, but provides for approved and regulated persons;RECOGNISING that Uganda, as a member of IOSCO has an obligation to incorporate the IOSCO objectives and principles of security regulation into its legal framework that governs the capital markets industry;CONVINCED that there is urgent need to amend the Capital Markets Authority Act to clearly provide for the functions of the Capital Markets Authority to regulate the conduct of approved persons as opposed to regulating products, activities, which is the current practice, incorporate IOSCO objectives and principles of securities regulation into the Capital Markets Authority, designate unapproved stock exchange as a listing authority, make provisions for a single entity to scrutinise, certify and approve prospectuses;NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that Parliament grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill to amend the Capital Markets Authority Act, a draft of which is attached here and I am laying on the Table.” THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Nathan Igeme. Is the motion seconded?  - It is seconded by Hon. Gilbert Olanya, Hon. Aogon, Hon. Rose Ibanda, Hon. Atim Apea, Hon. Aber, Hon. Akamba and by the whole House. Would you still love to speak about your motion? Can I give the seconder? One minute, please -3.28MR DAN ATWIJUKIRE (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion. The mover clearly articulated the major issues that we hope will be brought out in the amendments. The spirit is majorly to reduce on the restrictions and open capital markets so as to attract many players, since it is a growing sector in our economy.6280THE NATIONAL LEGAL AID BILL, 2022Aware that many other businesses are going down, this is one of the safest areas of investment. It would be in the interest of many Ugandans to get the opportunity to be players in this part of the economy, but also to participate without restrictions or limiting it to a few players. We hope at the end of the amendment, those restrictions will be cured. I beg to second. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Olanya -3.28MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate my colleague for this very important private Member’s Bill. Our country depends majorly on business and capital markets is very paramount for Ugandans.Looking at this and the mood of the House, I would like to move, Madam Speaker, that you put the question so that leave is granted to my colleague to process his Bill, into an Act of Parliament for the betterment of this country. I beg to move.THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I put the question that this House grants leave to Hon. Nathan Igeme Nabeta to introduce the Capital Markets Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2022. (Question put and agreed to.)THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I direct the Clerk to ensure that all the necessary assistance is granted to Hon. Nabeta so that he can bring his Bill for first reading. BILLS SECOND READING THE NATIONAL LEGAL AID BILL, 2022 THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, the National Legal Aid Bill dates back to the 10th Parliament, with granting leave to Hon. Lyandro Komakech on 24 September 2020, to introduce the National Legal Aid Bill. Hon. Lyandro Komakech is seated in the Gallery. The Bill, however, lapsed with the 10th Parliament and was reintroduced in the 11th Parliament by Hon. Silas Aogon on 28 September 2022.It has come to our knowledge and notice that the Certificate of Financial Implications was issued for the Bill. A copy of the Bill that was used to elicit the certificate varies from the copy that was actually laid for the first reading.The point of variation has a financial implication, especially section 25(g) on the appropriation by Parliament as a source of funding for legal aid services. In effect of the grounds for issuance of the Certificate of Financial Implication, in this view, I guide as follows:In introducing a private Member’s Bill, the copy of the Bill used for seeking a Certificate of Financial Implications should be the same as that that was tabled for first reading;Proposals for amendment to the Bill can only be done at committee level and during the second reading;It is irregular for us to alter the content of the Bill, which of course, you know, amounts to abuse of our rights, as provided under Article 94(4)(b). That, of course, can lead the Executive from giving you a certificate.In light of that, I will stand over this Bill and we will have a harmonisation meeting. We had a meeting today with the acting chairperson of the committee.  - Do you want to report on what we agreed? MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to confirm that we had a consultative meeting this afternoon. We agreed to stand over this Bill until we have had consultations and reconciliation with the Office of the Attorney-General. I so report.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Next item - we are going to bring back the Bill once it is harmonised. We are not abandoning it. [Mr Atwijukire]6281THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2022In the public gallery, this afternoon, I have a delegation from Legal Aid Service Providers Network. These are:Hon. Lyandro Komakech, who moved the Bill in the 10th Parliament;1. Dr Sylvia Namubiru;2. Mr Moses Okwalinga;3. Ms Sandra Oryem;4. Ms Maria Kaddu;You are welcome. They have come to observe the debate on this Bill, but do not lose hope. We are going to harmonise and come back to the House on this Bill.3.35MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I need to first appreciate you because for the first time, this Bill has reached this level. I had a lot of hope that it was going to be passed this afternoon. The journey can be rough, but I know how to toe the journey carefully. I know how you have supported us and I am sure this Bill will see the light of day.It is very common for the Office of the Attorney-General to find ways of maneuvering discomfort to the journey of such Bills. However, I want to believe that this Bill is for the people of Uganda and it is meant to be their Christmas gift. Therefore, colleagues, pray with me. It will see the light of day.THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, the Bill will be in this House once we harmonise and I do not want - Attorney-General did not advise me on anything; I read the Bill. I saw what was in there and those are my observations. The fact that I have supported you; I will still support Ugandans on this Bill. (Applause)I want to tell you the Christmas gift that Ugandans are going to get is the National Health Insurance Bill, which is going to come in two weeks’ time. (Applause) It will be in this House. MS AOGON: I am just praying that, Madam Speaker, you –THE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter. MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Silas is my great friend and I know this has been bothering him. However, for purposes of harmonisation and team spirit, as a friend, I request that we give the Speaker time to harmonise everything and report back.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this is not for debate. You are even lucky that it has reached this level. Now you know you are about to cross the river and indeed, you will cross it. Thank you. Next item. MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE VENERABLE GIUSEPPE AMBROSOLI, A PROFESSED MEMBER OF THE COMBONI MISSIONARIES OF THE HEART OF JESUS, MEDICAL DOCTOR, PHILANTHROPIST AND EDUCATOR ON THE AUSPICIOUS OCCASION OF HIS BEATIFICATIONTHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you may be aware, the beatification of Fr Giuseppe Ambrosoli is slated for 20 November 2022 at Kalongo Catholic Mission in Agago. Agago is represented by Hon. Amos Okot, Hon. David Lagen and the Minister for Economic Monitoring. Dr Ambrosoli, a Catholic missionary who came to Uganda in 1956, was the founder of Kalongo Hospital.I grew up hearing about Kalongo Hospital and, today, I am happy to see the real founder. It is a health facility that has 350 and serves over 60,000 people every year from all over the country. (Applause)He died in 1987 and is set to be made a saint in line with the Catholic tradition. That is the team that is here, representing the Pope at that function.6282THE NATIONAL LEGAL AID BILL, 2022This bipartisan motion seeks to pay tribute to the legendary missionary who contributed towards humanity in the health sector and in everything that you can talk of in that area. Amidst all that was happening in northern Uganda, especially the rebellion, this missionary was there and he became part of the community. I, therefore, invite the Prime Minister to move the motion.3.39THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, this is a motion for resolution of Parliament to pay tribute on the occasion of the beautification of the Venerable Giuseppe Ambrosoli, a professed member of the Comboni Missionaries of the Heart of Jesus, medical doctor, philanthropist and educator.This motion is being moved under Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.“WHEREAS Parliament of Uganda received with pleasure the decision of the Holy Father, Pope Francis, to bestow the Rite of Beatification onto the Venerable Giuseppe Ambrosoli on 20 November 2022 in Kalongo, Gulu Archdiocese; AWARE THAT the process of canonising Fr Giuseppe Ambrosoli as a saint commenced in 1999 and on l7 December 2015, the Holy Father, Pope Francis, bestowed onto Fr Giuseppe Ambrosoli the Rite of Venerable, following the confirmation of his life of heroic virtue; RECALLING THAT on 28 November 2019, a miracle was attributed to Venerable Giuseppe Ambrosoli, commencing the process for the beatification of the Venerable Giuseppe Ambrosoli, which process will result in his canonisation; APPRECIATING THAT the Venerable Giuseppe Ambrosoli lived a life of distinction and immeasurably served the people of Uganda, especially those in northern Uganda, through -Serving as a Parish Priest for Kalongo Parish in the Archdiocese of Gulu, where he paid special attention to the suffering of the people, guided by his motto, “God is love and I am his servant to the suffering people”;Revolutionising the care for leprosy patients through admitting leprosy patients to the same hospital as other patients instead of confining them to the often neglected and poorly managed leprosarium, thereby combating the stigma that existed in Ugandan society against lepers; Establishing St Mary’ s Midwifery Training School in Kalongo, Agago District, to provide trained medical practitioners in order to enhance the care of patients in Uganda; and Establishing a clinic for lepers at Kalongo, in present day Agago District, which he transformed into a hospital, recently renamed DrAmbrosoli Memorial Hospital, a 350-bed facility that treats nearly 60,000 patients every year;FIRMLY CONVINCED THAT the Venerable Giuseppe Ambrosoli exhibited unique compassion and kindness in caring for the sick, charity, selflessness, humility, wisdom and love for God and championed the growth of the Catholic Church in Uganda;COGNISANT THAT the Venerable Giuseppe Ambrosoli died on 27 March 1987 at the Comboni Mission in Lira; NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that: Parliament collectively congratulates the people of Uganda, the Comboni Missionaries of the Heart of Jesus and the entire Catholic Church in Uganda on the auspicious occasion of the beatification of the Venerable Giuseppe Ambrosoli, slated for the 20 November, 2022 in Kalongo, Gulu Archdiocese; Parliament takes cognisance of the immense contribution of the Venerable Giuseppe Ambrosoli for his devotion to duty and immense contribution to the development of Uganda.”  [The Speaker]TRIBUTE TO THE VENERABLE GIUSEPPE AMBROSOLI6283THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2022I beg to moveTHE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_) It is seconded by Hon. Lagen, Hon. Okot, Hon. Akello, Hon. Okello Oryem, the minister of energy and by the whole House, including the Leader of the Opposition and the Chairman of the Muslim Caucus. (Applause) Thank you. The whole House has supported the motion. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, would you like to speak a little bit to your motion?MS NAKADAMA:  Madam Speaker, my justification for the resolution of this Parliament to pay tribute to this powerful Father is that Pope Francis issued a concession to the Archdiocese of Gulu to conduct the beatification of Fr Giuseppe Ambrosoli on 20 November 2022 at Kalongo Catholic Mission in Agago District. This will be the third Blessed after Jildo Irwa and Daudi Okello who are the Blessed Martyrs in Gulu Archdiocese. Beatification under the Catholic Church is a procedure of determining and proclaiming that a deceased person is one of the Blessed or has gained the second degree of holiness and it is a stage in the process of canonisation into Sainthood.Venerable Fr Giuseppe Ambrosoli was a Roman Catholic priest and a member of the Comboni Missionaries. He was born on the 25 July 1923 at Ronago - that is in Como in Northern Italy. After a serene childhood and adolescence, he enrolled in the Faculty of Medicine in the University of Milan. After having been awarded this degree, he presented himself at the Comboni Missionaries to become a missionary priest proclaiming simple, yet profound words: “God is love, they are suffering neighbours and I am their servant.”Later on, he went to London for a course in Tropical Medicine and returned to Italy, where he joined the Comboni’s Novitiate of Gozzano (Novara).Madam Speaker, on 09 September 1953, Giuseppe became a Comboni missionary by undertaking his first vows. He studied Theology and was ordained a priest on 17 December 1955 by Archbishop Giovanni Battista Montini - later, Pope Paul VI.At 33 years of age, on 01 February 1856, Fr Giuseppe left for Gulu in Northern Uganda. Thereafter, he went to Kalongo and founded a hospital that gained a reputation of excellence for almost 31 years. At Kalongo Hospital, he also founded St Mary’s Midwifery School, where local women received training as midwives. In 1972, he also incorporated the leprosy centres in the Mission of Alito and Morulem for victims of Hansen’s disease in the hospital’s outreach programme. The hospital, designed for the neediest people in a rural area, became famous for its leading medical practitioner and for the volunteer doctor and religious sisters, who assisted him. Therefore, not only from all over Uganda, but also from neighbouring countries, such as Kenya, Tanzania, Sudan and even as far away as India, people asked to be treated there. In 1963, he was awarded the “Doctors’ Mission Prize” by the Carlo Erba Foundation and in 1985, the Samuel Pozzi Prize – “A Life for Medicine” from the “Order of Doctors” in Milan. Due to his skill as a surgeon, he was asked to serve in the country’s main teaching hospital – Mulago, that is in Kampala, but he preferred to remain in Kalongo.On 13 February 1987 in the midst of the insurgency campaign being waged by the Lord’s Resistance Army, Fr Giuseppe was obliged by the authorities to evacuate the hospital of Kalongo, placing his already precarious health under enormous strain. On 27 March 1987, he died in Lira at 3.30 p.m. 44 days after having been forced to leave Kalongo and brought all the personnel of the hospital to safety. On 17 December 2015, Pope Francis named Fr Giuseppe Ambrosoli as Venerable of the Catholic Church due to his heroic virtue. 6284THE NATIONAL LEGAL AID BILL, 2022As I conclude, Venerable Fr Giuseppe Ambrosoli’s professionalism, kindness, infinite patience, extraordinary availability and his spiritual transparency attracted crowds of patients to him. These attributes made him a true man of God. Indeed, his legacy will continue to be a guiding light to other servants of God.Fr Giuseppe Ambrosoli will always be remembered in Uganda as the “Doctor of Charity.” May Venerable Fr Giuseppe Ambrosoli intervene for Uganda. I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. In remembrance of Fr Giuseppe Ambrosoli, may we rise and observe a moment of silence.(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Indeed, in the Catholic Church, this is the first of its kind and we are proud about it. We thank the Holy Father for that. Indeed, God is love. As we debate, I want you to ask yourself: Are you a servant of your neighbours? Is there anything that you have learnt from the life of the late Father? Honourable members, I now open the debate. We shall start with the Leader of the Opposition; he is seconding the motion. After him, a Muslim will also second, and then, an Anglican. 3.56THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my honourable sister and Rt Hon. Prime Minister in paying tribute to Fr Giuseppe Ambrosoli, a priest in the Order of the Comboni Missionaries of the Sacred Heart of Christ.We are an honoured House. It happens once in your lifetime as a leader in this country, that God has given you an opportunity to speak about his servant.Therefore, I am exceedingly humbled to be invited to second this motion and I know that at the end of the day, the voice of the people is the voice of God; vox dei vox populi, so we say.Madam Speaker, Fr Giuseppe was God’s gift to Uganda. And in his veneration, our nation once again is privileged to be highlighted as a true home of faith.On this occasion of his veneration, Madam Speaker, this humble man of God gives us an opportunity to celebrate not just the opportunity to his journey to Sainthood, but most importantly, his humble service as a priest.We join the rest of humanity to celebrate the gift of priesthood in the Church and thank God, for his priests as messengers, including Fr Ambrosoli for helping us the faithful to share in the priesthood of Christ, a job he did, by administering sacraments and in particular, baptism.Madam Speaker, we celebrate Fr Guissipe who sowed this seed of faith. He multitasked as we have been advised, as a surgeon, midwife, radiologist and paediatrician. He also worked as a manual labourer. He attracted a lot of funding to the community to enable health services get delivered to the people of northern Uganda.Madam Speaker, unfortunately, the state of health services in the region he loved has not really reached the level I am sure he much aspired and desired to see.Aware that veneration is not an end in itself, but a journey to Sainthood, we too celebrate this new prince of the church, who is joining a growing list of Ugandan faithful, whom we celebrate as saints and blessed like the holy Uganda Martyrs. With such humility, Madam Speaker and dedicated service towards God and His people, I am aware from the media that over 300 people are trekking from Gulu to attend to his veneration, which is very humbling; an [Ms Nakadama]TRIBUTE TO THE VENERABLE GIUSEPPE AMBROSOLI6285THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2022admission that we bow to this true servant of God.Madam Speaker, like I observed, Fr Ambrosoli is a gift not only to the people of the Archdiocese of Gulu, but also to the nation and the whole world, because he served with dedication, professionalism and love. We urge the people of Uganda to emulate the life of this great missionary priest in serving God and neighbour and grant that we get the grace to grow in faith. In the memory of this great gift of God to humanity, the only physical epitaph we can erect in his memory is to pay attention to the issues that he held dear, such as justice and care for the wretched of the earth.Madam Speaker, in that tribute and epitaph, he would take care of the poor that are being chased off their land, the poor being denied medical services, persecution of citizens because of political differences, sowing seeds of divisionism through ethnicity, and other social vices. Spoken about as a man with immense spiritual transparency, as political leaders, we are invited to shed off political opaqueness and be as transparent and avoid making decisions that distance us from being men and women that the world will remember with faith that we served for God and country.We pray, Madam Speaker, that the heavenly Father will allow us through remembrance of his venerable servant, to continue receiving his blessings and exhibit the same while praying that the final canonisation of His humble servant happens in our lifetime, as an eternal lesson to the criticality of service to God and humanity.I thank you once again, Madam Speaker for enabling this motion, which is historical in our time and we pray that we all get humbled in our duty to serve without expecting return to self. I thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable Leader of the Opposition for that enriching message. Sabakristo, you are going to speak, but can I have a Muslim speak first? 4.04MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition in supporting the motion regarding the beautification of Venerable Fr Ambrosoli. Madam Speaker, going through the motion and the justification, three things became very clear about the work of Fr Ambrosoli. One, he chose simplicity at the expense of opulence. The fact that he was given an opportunity to serve in Mulago and he declined it, choosing to serve the countryside; he left the trappings of pomp and ostentation in Europe, to come and serve in our country. That simplicity is something that we should emulate. Secondly, Madam Speaker, Fr Ambrosoli chose to offer a service that is very critical and essential in our country - health. In justifying the motion, the health services he was providing attracted patients outside the country. We have been informed that people would come from as far as India, Nairobi and Sudan to get treatment here. Ironically, as we speak now, we are going to India and Nairobi for treatment. What an irony; do we learn anything from that experience? He excelled as an individual and the services he offered were excellent, they were attracting people to come to our country. As the Rt Hon. Prime Minister was justifying the motion, did she pick any lesson from that? Can we learn from the services of Fr Ambrosoli? Finally, Madam Speaker, as we support this motion, as a country, we need to apologise to the Catholic community. We need to apologise to the family of Father Ambrossoli because whether we like it or not, his last days were not the best. It is on record that he was arrested 6286THE NATIONAL LEGAL AID BILL, 2022and humiliated and by the time he died, he was definitely under a lot of stress. The country needs to say “sorry.” Why was he put under house arrest? The drugs he had bought for his hospital were destroyed. He and his team were made to lie on the ground. Exactly two months after that experience, he passed on. We need to say “sorry.” I think this motion would be incomplete if we did not add a component of apologising to the community for the humiliation we subjected Father to. I thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Hajji. Some of us are unlucky that we were not there at that time and we could not see the humiliation, but on behalf of the country and on behalf of everybody, we are sorry for whatever could have happened.4.08MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to speak to this very important motion that is very dear to my heart. I will request that the ICT people display an important picture. If possible, we should leave this picture there for the Members to see. We are talking about Venerable Giuseppe Ambrossoli and many of us do not know what he looked like. That is the great man. Every time I see that picture, it summarises everything that I would have wanted in a medical doctor. It summarises everything that I would have wanted for our health facilities; the care and the love that this great man of God gave. If you cannot interpret this picture well, then perhaps, we can talk more about this. I will kindly ask that we leave this picture on for some time as we reflect as a country. Madam Speaker, allow me to also add my voice in thanking His Holiness Pope Francis for thinking about this and making this the first of its kind in Uganda. Who am I to be in this august House to speak about a great man, first of its kind in the country? I know many others will come.Madam Speaker, I congratulate you because you are presiding over a House that is paying tribute to a great man. Congratulations.Allow me to highlight a few things about this great servant;Humility has already been talked about. 1 Peter 5:5-7 talks about humility, “In all, clothe yourselves with humility in all your dealings with one another for God opposes the proud, but bestows favour on the humble.” In his own words, “Without humility, a person cannot make a step forward. With pride, one goes only backward and such a person is only able to do evil. A person by herself is only an echo of God’s gifts.” These were his words. It was not only his professionalism that attracted people that you have heard from India, South Sudan and Ethiopia. It was not just professionalism that attracted the crowds that we are talking about, but his kind of character, his goodness, his infinite patience, his extraordinary ability and his spiritual transparency that made him the man that we are celebrating today. Madam Speaker, I know many people think that spirituality and science can never match and do not come together. Venerable Giuseppe - By the way Giuseppe, I am told, means Joseph. So, if it is hard to pronounce that, just say Joseph Ambrossoli.He just made this very clear to me that actually, science is made whole in spirituality. There is no conflict and that is why this man of God used science to defend life. He used science to make sure that life is preserved. There is no conflict for those who are saying that there is actually a conflict. Madam Speaker, allow me to end by thanking the Government for the support they have so far rendered to the central organising committee. (Applause) It has not been easy, but like I have always told my Archbishop and former boss, John Baptist Odama, God’s project is God’s project. [Mr Basalirwa]TRIBUTE TO THE VENERABLE GIUSEPPE AMBROSOLI6287THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2022As of yesterday, we were crying, but as of now, the God that we serve, the God of the breakthroughs, has made the queue become shorter and we are going to have a great celebration in Kalongo. Yesterday, I was telling some people that there is no excuse for you not to be in Kalongo. You do not need a visa to go to the “Vatican”, you do not need an air ticket to go to the “Vatican.” It is at our doorstep. Let us come and celebrate as Ugandans. This is our time as Ugandans. Let us come and celebrate the life that was well lived and above all, to all the doctors who are out there, let this man guard you. Even as you strike, let this man speak to your heart to go back and treat those poor innocent people who are suffering. May his legacy live on. I say this for God and my country.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, “Sabakristo.” We thank the Government. When we are paying tribute to a great man like this who has left a legacy, let us not put politics into it. Government, thank you for making this happen. Thank you for enabling the function to take place.4.15THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, I come here to support the motion. I want to give a testimony that when I was young in Karamoja, we were hearing of a great person in your place called Kalongo. You know I am from the south and Kalongo is near the north.I decided that one day, I would go to see these people. I was told that the man was carrying out orthopaedic surgeries and people were coming from Kenya through our place to go for treatment in Kalongo. One time, my father fell sick when I was working in Kotido as a junior officer in Nya County. The father of Hon. Nakwang told me, “if you want your father to survive, bring him and we take him to Kalongo.” I decided to pick my father who chest pains. When we reached there, that is when I saw Rev. Fr Dr Ambrosoli. He examined my father and gave prescriptions and we went to collect the medicine.We got white tablets whose names I did not get to know. My father was asked to swallow the medicine for five days. I took him back to Kotido and after five days, he was alright. I waited again for a short time to see if he could relapse, but he did not. When I took him back for review, he was okay. I cannot forget this great Rev. Fr Dr Ambrosoli, of Kalongo. In fact, Kalongo Hospital is synonymous with Rev. Fr Dr Ambrosoli. Because of those pertinent issues, I have respect for this person; I praise that Reverend Father. He was very prayerful all the time. If he had not been taken by force to Lango, he would not have gone. May his canonisation have God’s blessing. (Applause)4.19THE    MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Okello Oryem): Madam Speaker, I rise to pay respect to a great man of humanity, and one who saved my life, my mother’s life and that of my brothers and sisters. I would not have been here today, if it was not for Rev. Fr Dr Joseph Ambrosoli.In 1971, after the overthrow of the Government of the late President Obote, our family fled to our ancestral home in Namokora, but Idi Amin soldiers decided to pursue us, looking for my father and mother, in an effort to kill us. After trying to seek refuge with different relatives who were hunted down and beaten for giving us refuge - my mother eventually took a decision to run and seek assistance from Rev. Fr Dr Ambrosoli. I was then seven years when we fled to Kalongo Hospital. Madam Speaker, my mother went there thinking that since this was a Whiteman, he would help her, and the children, not for anything else. When we reached there in the night, Rev. Fr Dr Ambrosoli was in shock. He said he had never done anything like that. He did not know what to do for my mother and her children because he was warned by others around him not to put the whole hospital at a risk by having us. 6288THE NATIONAL LEGAL AID BILL, 2022However, he came up with a brilliant idea. He decided that my mother be a patient and told her to put on the clothes of a patient. He then gave my mother a room on the side in the hospital. He told us, the children to stay with him in his residence and made us dress as his altar boys. Amin’s soldiers came there on many occasions looking for us. I was young and naïve, but we would continue playing in the grounds not knowing the dangers we faced.We were in that hospital for three months and my mother was dressed as a patient for those three months due to the assistance of this wonderful gentleman. (Applause)Unfortunately, my mother, in the process of being in the hospital, came across someone who knew her. When this person saw my mother in patients’ clothes, this particular person, with a big mouth, left the hospital and went and told others that she had found the wife of Gen. Tito in Kalongo Hospital.Word went around that the family of Gen. Tito was in Kalongo Hospital. Soon the place was raided by Amin’s soldiers. It was very miraculous how we escaped that night when the place was raided. Fortunately, the soldiers went to a wrong place. Someone informed Rev. Fr Dr Ambrosoli and so, he ran to my mother and told her to undress and change into ordinary clothes and walk quietly out of the hospital. My mother came and picked us. We walked in the night and disappeared. This is why I am here today because of what he did. (Applause)As God would have his ways, on Saturday, I was in Gulu and I met Msgr Matthew Odong outside Boma Hotel. He asked if I was going for the beautification and I said, “Yes, that man saved my life and our family.” He asked, how? I told him the story. He then said, “Why do you keep quiet with such a story?” I said “I do not have to tell everybody”. Little did I know, that today, God would give me an opportunity to tell the world what Rev. Fr Dr Ambrosoli did for my family.Rev. Fr Dr Ambrosoli was a great man. Young as we were, we heard of stories of the miracles he performed in saving patients from as far as Rwanda, Malawi, Tanzania, and these stories are being told by individuals of what his hands would do, if he started treating you. As we have heard here, he served very diligently and humbly, in very difficult circumstances. Working in Kalongo in the 1970s, during President Idi Amin’s time was not easy by any stretch of imagination. Working in Kalongo during the LRA times was not easy by any stretch of imagination. I would like to thank God for giving us Rev. Fr Dr Ambrosoli. I also thank God for what he did for all of us in Uganda; not only for Catholics, but even Protestants. Not only for Ugandans, but people across the board. Madam Speaker, I am not a Catholic. I am a Protestant, but I am very grateful to associate myself with Rev. Fr Dr Ambrosoli and maybe, what Rev. Fr Dr Ambrosoli did in my life, by saving me and making me what I am today is why I have a wife who is a Catholic. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, maybe you need to write a book about that. Let us have the Minister of Veterans and Minister Daudi. 4.26THE     MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (VETERAN AFFAIRS) (Ms Huda Oleru):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I also would like to join the Prime Minister and others who have already supported this motion in paying tribute to Fr Ambrosoli.In the Gospel according to Matthew, a man came to Jesus and told him – in fact, he first knelt down and said: “Jesus, can you treat me? Can you clean me? Can I be cleansed from that disease called leprosy?” Jesus stretched his clean hand, touched the man and, immediately, the man was cleansed and became safe from that disease. (Applause)[Mr Oryem]TRIBUTE TO THE VENERABLE GIUSEPPE AMBROSOLI6289THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2022Madam Speaker, in the Old Testament, leprosy was for sinners. It was a curse. Even in our tradition, it is a disease for which people are isolated. When you have that disease, people do not want to associate with you. It is Jesus who brought it to light that it is not a disease for sinners; it can be a disease for anybody.Similarly, Madam Speaker, Fr Ambrosoli learned his teachings and actions from Jesus. He continued with Jesus’ mission by treating people, which he did, not only in Rome, but also in Uganda and particularly northern Uganda. (Applause)Madam Speaker, we cannot just take this lightly. Therefore, I would like to say that may the legacy of Fr Ambrosoli be remembered forever and ever. Thank you. (Applause)4.29THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ECONOMIC MONITORING) (Ms Beatrice Akello): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When we are talking about Venerable Fr Dr Giuseppe Ambrosoli, he demonstrated exceptional qualities of combining spirituality and science in to Georgina hospital treating illness and diseases. In doing this, my father is a living testimony. My father fell sick, with chest pain. Other doctors reviewed his condition and told him he would not live. They then reported to Dr Ambrosoli. He told me that Dr Ambrosoli reviewed his condition, psychologically prepared him and told him: “Give me three days. I am going for a prayer retreat at Kalongo Hill to get a solution to your problem”. After three days, Dr Ambrosoli came back and told him: “Denis, you are going to live; you are no longer going to die. God has given your solution to me.” My father told me that he connected him to electric power and the following day, he started improving. Within one week, he left the hospital and up and to now, he has never felt chest pain again. (Applause)It is not only my father. When you interact with people of Kalongo, you get very many testimonies of how Dr Ambrosoli treated –(Member timed out.)4.31THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, it is good to pay tribute to this good man, who did a lot of good for humanity. Fr Ambrosoli served the least in our society, as we have seen in the picture that was given to us by Hon. Lucy Akello.The Bible tells us in Matthew 25, that in the final judgment, good people will be separated from bad ones and the good people will be told: “Come and inherit the Kingdom because I was hungry and you fed me. I was sick and you looked after me. I was thirsty and you gave me a drink. I was in prison and you came and saw me. I was naked and you clothed me.” (Applause)Fr Ambrosoli looked after the least in our society because that is what is required of us, as people who believe in God. I am very grateful that the Holy Pope is considering him into sainthood. Thank you. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Hon. Bahati. 4.32MR DA VID LAGEN (NRM, Agago County,    Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to pay my respects to Dr Ambrosoli. Let me begin by thanking you for allowing Members of Parliament to pay their respects. At the same time, I congratulate and thank the family of Dr Joseph Ambrosoli for supporting and allowing him to come to Africa to support the poor people. Madam Speaker, in Agago District, we have a hospital called Kalongo, which was renamed “Dr Ambrosoli Memorial Hospital.” (Applause) Agago District has 26 administrative units, with only one health centre IV , which is not well equipped. 6290THE NATIONAL LEGAL AID BILL, 2022It is my humble prayer today, as we are celebrating and contributing to the motion, that we respect the support of Dr Ambrosoli. The question I want to ask is: Apart from the celebration, what is it that the Government has in place to support the hospital?Madam Speaker, since the death of Dr Ambrosoli, the hospital in Kalongo has never remained the same. If you visit the hospital now and see its condition, you will be very ashamed. As people contribute money to support the celebration of Dr Ambrosoli’s beatification, it is time for the Government to come out openly. Apart from contributing money to support the celebrations, let the Government also fund the hospital to support the vulnerable people in Agago District. (Applause) This will be a memorial support that will never be forgotten. We cannot only go to celebrate the beatification of Dr Ambrosoli for the service he has given to the people. We must leave a mark that people will remember forever when they visit the hospital. This is my humble request to the Government. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, half of the Government’s contribution is for development and it is going to be used for the women’s ward. So, your question has already been answered; part of the money is for the development of the infrastructure of the hospital. However, that does not stop - I do not want you to say, “Yes, Yes” alone. It does not stop you, as Members of Parliament, from contributing for the hospital. Honourable members, we need to contribute towards it. (Members rose_)Hon. Okot. - let me finish the area MPs then I come to you.4.37MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago North County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We appreciate the presence of the Papal Nuncio; the Archbishop of Gulu Archdiocese; His Excellency, the Ambassador and our two honourable MPs who were here with us, Hon. Lyandro and Hon. Judith.Madam Speaker, it is true I represent Kalongo in Agago North County. I extend an invitation to you, my colleagues in this august House to come and we join hands in the beatification of Dr Ambrosoli. That is a nice place. We border Karamoja from the east, and Kitgum next to South Sudan, but it is still a good place. People are very loving and welcoming. I welcome all of you to come to Kalongo. Madam speaker, Dr Ambrosoli was in the centre of the social, economic and religious development. Dr Ambrosoli did a lot and the legacy that he has left has to be propelled beyond what we have seen. When he died, I was 16 years old. I was already a grown up that time. So, I can confirm that it is true what has been said to have transpired during those days. Our fathers, uncles and aunties who had been there during those days were hosting him as their own, to the extent that even –(Member timed out.) Madam Speaker, excuse me for just a minute to conclude this.THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude and then, we have the chairperson of the Acholi Parliamentary Group.MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In conclusion, Dr Ambrosoli is a hero. He is truly a person whose footsteps we should follow. It is true, what he has left, above all, is for us to know Jesus Christ as our Lord and personal Saviour. He is the Way, the Truth and the Life and that is the best thing that he left to the people of Uganda; not only the people of Uganda, but the whole world. I thank you for allowing us to pay tribute to our dear Reverend Father and doctor who showed us the way. Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Chairman -4.40MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I support the motion. I thank you for giving us this opportunity as a country, because it is a first of its kind in the country. Above all, what we are celebrating is a life well-lived. He is a person [Mr Lagen]TRIBUTE TO THE VENERABLE GIUSEPPE AMBROSOLI6291THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2022who discovered why he was alive and knew the purpose of being alive. Moreover, we are all going to die, but what are we going to be remembered for? This is a question that we should ask ourselves. Are we going to be Saints? Are we going to be celebrated? Or some people will celebrate our death? This is a question we have to reason about today when we are talking about this great man. When I was growing up, whenever we were playing, we would ask someone else, “Should I jump?”  And they would say, “Don’t jump.” We would then ask, “If I break my hand, where will you go?” The would answer, “Kalongo?” Now we are talking about a hospital where people were coming from India, Kenya and other faraway places all the way to Uganda. Today, we are taking our people out of the country. What can we do for the legacy of this great man to make sure that people should come to Uganda to seek treatment? This is something that we need to think about, as Members of Parliament and as Government. If only we could go back to the dream this man had of having specialised treatment done in Uganda, we would have greatly honoured the man we are celebrating today. We pray for him and we hope as a Saint, that he intercedes for our country. Thank you very much.4.42MS LILLIAN ABER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in supporting the motion moved by the Prime Minister. The theme for the beatification is “God’s servant to the suffering people.” It is only fit that that theme is thought through by every leader in this country. We ought to be servants of the people. Madam Speaker, when you talk about beatification, some people might not know, but this is a step before Sainthood. And this means that Dr Ambrosoli can intercede for us in Heaven. When you pray through him, God will hear you and give you blessings.  Therefore, people in the House today, as national leaders, we are privileged to have this take place during our time. And today, as we leave this House, we should go thinking about all the wrong things we have done for this country and repent as we pick Dr Ambrosoli’s example. Madam Speaker, I described Dr Ambrosoli as a philanthropist - someone who loved children and women and that is why he had to establish a school of midwifery. Today, when our mothers give birth in hospitals, some of them are slapped by fellow women. When you take your child to seek medical attention, some of the doctors will shout at them or not even pay attention to them. Today, we need to pick a leaf from Dr Ambrosoli’s book. I thank Government for making this happen. This should be a lesson to other health workers that when you do well, the country will remember you. You may not be remembered today, but at one point, you will be. Let us ensure that we do the right thing. I thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 4.44MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Omoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I join colleagues in support of this motion. Allow me to thank, in a special way, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for moving this motion; it means a lot. Madam Speaker, from face value, when you hear the stories about Dr Giuseppe Ambrosoli, you see commitment right away; you see sacrifice, dedication and quite a lot that we appreciate. However, these are all related to his life of faith and his life as a doctor who was serving people. He was a great man and a servant of God. I thank Government for the contribution they made.  How I wish Government fully takes up that project and works for a more comprehensive section for the women in that hospital. That will do us a great deal, Madam Speaker. 6292THE NATIONAL LEGAL AID BILL, 2022Our systems in the country today reveal a Government that is nursing a lot of rot, of corruption and ethical conduct of the technical people. People are driven by desire for money, but not service of the community. How I pray that we learn from the life of Dr Ambrosoli and also have professionals who behave like this great man. Madam Speaker, we have heard about professionals stealing human organs, like kidneys, about doctors who will operate on you and you realise after a month or a year that some parts of the body are missing. These are evils that the country is dealing with. It is my prayer that today, as we deliberate in this House, we should learn and emulate the good examples of Dr Joseph Ambrosoli. I pray that Government takes this celebration seriously and all of us as leaders of this country should go to Kalongo and join hands with the people coming from other countries to celebrate together. I submit. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We passed a Bill on organ transplant. There is a rumour that there has been theft of organs. We are not yet sure, but we have a Bill to that effect. We shall always use it to ensure that there is no theft. 4.47MS DORCAS ACEN (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to join the rest of my colleagues in thanking the Prime Minister for moving the motion. I support the motion to pay tribute to Fr Dr Ambrossoli for his selfless service to this nation. As we all know, this has left a legacy that very many of us Ugandans can emulate.As a representative of the people of Alebtong, I stand to testify that Dr Ambrossoli Memorial Hospital in Kalongo has been, and continues to be a go-to centre; a main referral centre whenever the people of Alebtong have medical emergencies that need referrals. They continue to provide excellent and quality services. I thank them for taking on the legacy of Fr Dr Ambrossoli.Madam Speaker, I also thank Government for the request that the honourable Member from Agago has presented that because of the current dwindling resources in the health sector, we know it has become increasingly difficult for donors to be able to prioritise. However, Kalongo has remained as a very great area that is providing services to the entire region of northern Uganda and beyond. We would like to call for more support to this health centre so that the hospital continues to stand the legacy that has already been started. It can continue to provide services, especially to the women. (Member timed out.) 4.49MR SAMUEL OKWIR (NRM, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker for this opportunity. I thank the Prime Minister for this motion. I was born in Kalongo and my mother had three C-sections. After she was delivered of me, she was unconscious for three days, but I was under the care of this great man we are talking about today. I thank Government for the contribution they have made, but ask that more should be done. Our people still go to this facility, but the road network is very bad, especially from Alebtong, Kitgum and Pader to Kalongo. The network to this facility should be improved so that we can save more lives. Thank you.4.50MR JOHN MAGOLO  (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion moved by the Prime Minister to pay tribute to this great man. It is a celebration of humility and a life well lived. I just want to confirm all that has been said in the words of Revelations 14.13 that states:“And I heard a voice from Heaven saying unto me, ‘Write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth: Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours, and their works do follow them.”[Ms Lamwaka] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION TRIBUTE TO THE VENERABLE GIUSEPPE AMBROSOLI6293THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2022As his deeds follow them that we are reporting and talking about now. The question is; What next for us? I submit. Thank you. 4.51MR GEOFREY FETA  (NRM, Ayivu Division East, Arua City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join in thanking the Prime Minister for introducing this motion. I have two take-homes. First, is the humility and service above self as Dr Ambrosoli did. As a country, we have a crisis in these two aspects. My second take is the foundation body. Fr Ambrosoli came under the Catholic Church. The Church has done enormous things in this country because the resource envelope could not do all that the public needed. The Catholic Church has helped in health facilities, education and very many other facilities. I thank the Catholic Church for helping Government to do this much. In West Nile today, the schools that feature are all Catholic-founded. The hospitals that help our people are also Catholic-founded. Unless the foundation body is very strong, the institution cannot stand. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you cannot even appreciate the Catholic Church? (Applause)MR FETA: We must speak about the role the Catholic Church has played in this country without fear because it is seen and proven. The man of God seated here comes from my constituency, but he is now serving permanently in Acholi because of the beauty of the Catholic Church. (Applause) I thank the House for accepting to honour –(Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The strength of the Catholic Church in terms of the schools and health sector, even a blind person can see. (Applause)4.53MR DA VID KARUBANGA  (NRM, Kigorobya County, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity and indeed, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for this tribute. I would like to join other Honourable Members who have praised the works of Dr Ambrossoli.I would like to share a testimony. My father was attacked by thugs in 1971 and he got an arrow in the stomach. When he was taken to Hoima Hospital, stitched, but the operation was not very well done. In 1982, he was told that his life was in danger. He was afraid he going to die and he was referred to Kalongo Hospital. That was East Acholi that time. Indeed, the doctor that worked on him was Dr Ambrossoli.Forty years later, my father is now 85 and nothing wrong has happened to him. He has lived praising that man of God for the care he gave him. We should emulate his legacy. His life was a true testimony of a dedicated public servant, who should be emulated by all of us. Thank you.4.55MR BOSCO OKIROR (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I am really humbled to speak on such a day. I have a son who is not yet baptised. I have listened to what has been said about Fr Ambrossoli. I actually thought of having him named Ambrossoli. (Laughter) However, on a lighter note, when I heard Hon. Lagen pronounce it as umbrojoli , I thought twice. That is on a lighter note. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, there is something about Fr Ambrossoli that is very unique. He told us that God is love and he said he was going to be a servant of His suffering people. The most captivating of it all is the fact that he was a philanthropist strategically looking at the happiness of others. I have looked at Members of Parliament here and we really deserve a handclap for ourselves 6294THE NATIONAL LEGAL AID BILL, 2022because we are philanthropists too. (Applause) Led by our Speaker, we have continuously supported the health sector. We are walking in the shoes of Dr Ambrossoli. It is my humble prayer that the Lord blesses the day of beatification. May his legacy live on. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. May the legacy keep shining forever and ever. 4.57MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion that the Prime Minister has moved in honour of Fr Ambrossoli on two accounts. One, he saved our people of Karamoja from leprosy. He removed the reproach of our people at a time when it was not nice to visit a place of that kind. Therefore, a man like that - Only God knows what to do to him. No wonder even after death, he preferred to stay in Karamoja. The miracle that we are celebrating him for, which is a prerequisite for beatification, happened in St Kizito Hospital in Napak District. By extension, I am the Member of Parliament representing Fr Ambrossoli at death because his spirit preferred to live in Napak District. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: And the spirit of the saint is going to bless all of you in this House.MS NAKUT: Amen. Madam Speaker, I have an appeal concerning St Kizito Hospital where the miracle happened. Bishop Guiseppe appealed to the President on 13 June concerning financial support for St Kizito Hospital and the President okayed it. On 20 October, Bishop Guiseppe met the Prime Minister in my presence to follow up the commitment to support St Kizito Hospital that had been overwhelmed and she okayed it. It is my appeal that we fast-track this promise so that in memory of Fr Ambrosoli in the place he calls home - The miracles that are continuing to flow, they did not end with Lucia whose health recovered upon getting a poster of Fr Ambrosoli. Many miracles have happened after that. In memory of that, I appeal that we push that promise. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: And a miracle is going to happen in this House.5.00MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you Madam Speaker. I also join my colleagues in supporting the motion. I thank the Comboni Missionaries for identifying one of their best; Fr Ambrosoli and sending him to serve us here in Uganda and Northern Uganda in particular. All of us knew Kalongo Hospital when we were young. People from Tororo went to Kalongo Hospital and whenever they talked about Kalongo, we all knew that you automatically got healed the moment you got there. Therefore, what Fr Ambrosoli was doing is something that must be commended, on a very serious note. However, the north has also had people who have really served to the best of their ability for the good of humanity. You will also recall Fr Lucia, who served very committedly in the north. There are a number of others. I want to say that the Comboni Missionaries, like other Catholic missionaries, have supported us in education, health facilities, and Madam Speaker, as you said, they have done a commendable job. How I wish we continued to see that partnership thrives further for other support. The ambassador was here, but he has left. Your Excellency, let us continue to partner and get more of these very brilliant people in Italy to come and support us so that we continue to enjoy this good work that the Lord has blessed you with. I say all this – (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as we talk about the Catholic Church, there is a lot of outcry out there because the land belonging to the Catholic Church is being [Mr Okiror]TRIBUTE TO THE VENERABLE GIUSEPPE AMBROSOLI6295THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2022grabbed. Kindly, see how to protect the land that belongs to the Church because that land is for development in terms of schools, hospitals, in terms of everything. That land must be protected. 5.03MS AGNES ATIM (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I would like to thank the Prime Minister for bringing the motion. Fr Ambrosoli’s works and deeds in this world bring in mind three things. One, he used his profession to spread love and serve humanity. The second thing I see is that he put his faith into action. As the Bible says, let us have faith, but put it in action and let us be known by the deeds or the works that we have done in this world. Thirdly, Dr Ambrosoli shows you how proper planning with very meagre resources can transform communities. This is a priest who did not have much resources, but he planned and strengthened the overall health system. He did not only look at treating patients as a doctor, but he planned to establish a hospital, went ahead to think of the human resource and established a nurses’ training school. As we talk, in the whole region and probably, the whole country, very many nurses have gone through Kalongo Nurses Training School. That tells us that as we sit in this House and we have an opportunity to plan and budget with the little resources that we have, we should think about what Dr Ambrosoli did with very little in a very difficult environment. I am sure they did not have much, but he did a lot. (Member timed out.)5.05MS ZUMURA MANENO (NRM, Woman Representative, Obongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Prime Minister for bringing a brilliant motion to the House. Such people deserve to be respected forever and ever. As we mention many words in this House and as you have said before, as Members of Parliament, let us contribute and do something tangible for that hospital so that our people continue benefitting. Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you.5.05REV . FR DR CHARLES ONEN (Independent, Laroo-Pece Division, Gulu City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a priest of the Catholic Church of Gulu Archdiocese. I am happy my Bishop is right here, listening to this great deliberation by Parliament. I am just imagining the day this Parliament will sit and pay tribute when I pass on. – (Laughter) This is what I am trying to imagine. You better learn me, before I pass on, so that next time, you do not just -The golden legacy of Rev. Fr Dr Ambrosoli needs to be protected. You know, I am the Deputy Chairperson of the rules committee. Therefore, I want to move a motion under rule 61, that Kalongo Hospital be raised to a medical university, where research on tropical diseases can be done and treated. This will make the great leadership of Dr Ambrosoli to be remembered forever. In your wisdom, if it is fitting, this amendment should be made to the motion brought by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister.THE SPEAKER: Rule 61 is on amendment of a motion and prayers. Rev. Fr Charles is moving an amendment to the prayers. Is it seconded? [Honourable members: “Yes ”] I put the question to that amendment.(Question put and agreed to.)5.07MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The time Rev. Fr Dr Ambrosoli served in northern Uganda was a very traumatising moment. If you see the children he was holding - people were very much traumatised because they were in a war zone. You will need to appreciate what we are doing right now.6296THE NATIONAL LEGAL AID BILL, 2022I join the faithful in thanking Rev. Fr Dr Ambrosoli. Many who had leprosy in West Nile could not be treated in Kuluva Hospital. They had to be transferred to Kalongo. I am a Roman Catholic and 24 hours, you find me reciting the Rosary. The Archbishop you see here is my son; I am a grandmother to him. I am very grateful to the Catholic Church for mentoring me with this high level of discipline. The Catholic Church has disciplined people and always done its best in education, health and everything that comes the right way. I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving this opportunity.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. That is why you have a disciplined Speaker. (Laughter)5.09MR PETER OKOT (NRM, Tochi County, Omoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues in thanking the Prime Minister for moving this motion to pay tribute to the legacy of Rev. Fr Dr Ambrosoli. When I was in primary five, I had a heated argument with my teacher because we were given a question to name the national referral hospital in Uganda. We were given objectives as follows: One, Mulago National Referral Hospital; two, Lacor Hospital and three, Kalongo Hospital. I proudly gave my answer as Kalongo Hospital. Unfortunately, the teacher marked me wrong. I was furious and was only consoled by my mother that I was right as far as services were concerned. Kalongo gave the best services, but I was wrong in terms of Government ranking of hospitals.Madam Speaker, the works of Dr Ambrosoli tell us that it takes more than structures and equipment in a hospital for a patient to be treated. You must use your profession and must include love in what you do. You must be kind to people. Dr Ambrosoli knew he would not live forever. He imparted his skills to a number of other medical workers. (Member timed out.)5.10MR LINOS NGOMPEK (NRM, Kibanda North County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A man who left the comfort of his home in Europe to come and serve the vulnerable poor communities in Uganda must be celebrated and beatified.I thank Dr Ambrosoli for the spirit he exhibited. We shall always live to glorify him. I know very well that they had challenges with Government, including our Archbishop, Dr Ambrosoli, and Fr John Scalabrini who presided over my wedding. I ask for forgiveness on behalf of Government.Madam Speaker, we want this House to recognise and appreciate the contribution Dr Ambrosoli rendered to this country. I believe with your wise wisdom and guidance, we shall achieve that. Thank you. May the good Lord bless you all.   5.12MR ISAAC OTIMGIW (NRM, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join colleagues and appreciate the Prime Minister for bringing this motion into the House.  Dr Ambrosoli-THE SPEAKER: Let us reduce to one minute because Archbishop wants to go back to Gulu.MR OTIMGIW: Dr Ambrosoli has shown all of us that we are miracle makers. We do not have to wait for powers in order to turn water into wine or to raise the dead to come back to life. All he showed is that we have to be kind to people and be givers to the community, and that is enough to make us miracle doers. That is a lesson we can all pick. We should not forget that Dr Ambrosoli started his good deeds before he came to Uganda. He started before World War II and he saved very many Jewish people and took them to Switzerland. I would like to thank him very much for the good deeds to our country. Thank you very much.[Ms Obigah] TRIBUTE TO THE VENERABLE GIUSEPPE AMBROSOLI6297THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 20225.13MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I would like to spend my one minute carefully and properly. One, I want to appreciate Parliament and specifically you, Madam, Speaker, for giving a very famous person this time. Not everybody gets this opportunity.Madam Speaker, those who do good, indeed, will reap good things and I know this Parliament has the power to appropriate. The budgeting process is just starting. What is it that we are going to do for Kalongo Hospital? That is the question. Let us not be people who supply air; let us supply something. I beg to move. 5.15MS JUDITH ACHAN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to speak for and on behalf of the people I represent and that of the women of this country.As we celebrate the life of Rev. Fr Dr Joseph Ambrosoli - he supported the women of this country. Rev. Fr Dr Ambrosoli was born in Italy. He moved to Kalongo in 1956 to serve in the health department. At that time, Dr Ambrosoli found Kalongo at dispensary stage, but by the time he passed on, it was at the level of a referral hospital in the making.Dr Ambrosoli moved from Italy to Kalongo, but died in Lira. Very many of us from different parts of this country – western, eastern, north and central Uganda – received medical support in Kalongo Hospital. I would like to thank our bishop – I sat in the committee in Kampala for the preparations of celebration. I also thank the President for his contribution to the construction of a maternity ward in Kalongo Hospital. (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: We are thanking the Archbishop, not the Bishop.5.16MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the Prime Minister for moving this motion and the Leader of the Opposition for seconding this very important motion. Dr Ambrosoli dreamt of better medical services in northern Uganda and Uganda as a whole. Surprisingly, northern Uganda does not have a CT scan. I remember last year, Archbishop Dr John Baptist Odama, who is here, was asking Christians to contribute Shs 1,000, Shs 2,000 or Shs 5,000 to buy a CT scan in northern Uganda. The gift that the Government can give, in memory of Dr Ambrosoli, is to buy a CT scan in one of the hospitals in northern Uganda. Even if it is not put in Kalongo, we have no problem. Let, at least, one of the hospitals in northern Uganda have a CT scan –(Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, the information I have from the former Minister of State for Health is that the Government is working, together with – please, give us the information. MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, we would not be debating this motion if it was not for the concession by Pope Francis. I would like to thank Pope Francis for his concession and allowing Gulu Archdiocese –THE SPEAKER: At least, clap for “Papa.” (Applause)MS OPENDI: We need to appreciate him for that. Secondly, we have neighbours suffering everywhere. If each one of us cared for our neighbours, we would be at peace and there would be no war in any part of this world. That is what is lacking. We are told that “whatsoever you do to the least of your brothers, that you do unto me”. So, let 6298THE NATIONAL LEGAL AID BILL, 2022us take that message seriously. If it is alcohol destroying our people, let us speak up. Let us not shy away from talking about it. Lastly, Madam Speaker, you asked me to give an update. I am aware that the Ministry of Health, working with partners, the Netherlands Government, is planning to equip all regional referral hospitals with all the necessary equipment. The process has started. Moroto has received and other regional referral hospitals will also get. Not every hospital can have a CT scan because you will lack the personnel to operate it. Thank you.5.20MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the opportunity and for giving space for this very important motion. Madam Prime Minister, thank you. My boss, the Leader of Opposition, thank you very much for seconding this very important motion. To the family of the doctor – for a family to give out their son to go and serve God globally is a sacrifice in itself. I would like to thank the family for giving us their wonderful son.I would also like to thank my brothers and sisters from the northern part of Uganda for allowing our priest to have the best that he could because you supported him. Without your support, certainly, this motion would not have come to fruition. Madam Speaker, I ask that everything that has been mentioned in the motion – Madam Prime Minister, you are here -THE SPEAKER: Hon. Gilbert, we are putting the question; come back.MR KATUSABE: For the request in your motion, Madam Prime Minister and Leader of the Opposition, I know that the Speaker will follow this to the dot. (Member timed out.)[Ms Opendi]5.22MS RITA ATUKWASA (Independent, Woman Representative, Mbarara City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to add my voice in appreciating the achievement that Uganda has attained. We continue to be many firsts. Many good things happen to Uganda even when, many times, we may not celebrate them. So, I am very happy that this has happened to us and we are here to celebrate. I would also like to say that faith without actions is dead, according to James 2:14. This gives us time to reflect that whereas all these good things have happened, what are the small things that we have done in our small ways? It also tells us in the good hymn that: “When I was hungry, you gave me what to eat. When I was thirsty, you gave me what to drink.. .” Today, we are here for the works of Fr Ambrosoli. What is it that we have done that God will reward us for? I would like to end by highlighting that right now, the partnership between the Government and the Catholic Church is good, but my Archdiocese is under attack. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the land at the headquarters of Nyamitanga Diocese - we woke up to find that a certain soldier brought bulldozers in the night, just right behind the Archbishop’s house. So, I would like to use this opportunity to implore you, Madam Speaker, that if there is anything to be done, we need the Archbishop to sleep soundly. That piece of land should be restored. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. As said, we shall know them by their deeds. Now, we are debating because of the deeds of Dr Ambrosoli. 5.24MR CHARLES TEBANDEKE (NUP, Bbale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a born again believer and pastor, I would like to commend the work of the Catholic TRIBUTE TO THE VENERABLE GIUSEPPE AMBROSOLI6299THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2022Church. When the Speaker granted permission to the Ssabakristo and Hajji, I prayed hard that a pastor also be granted permission. (Laughter)According to Proverbs 14: 23, “Those who work hard make profit, but mere talk leads to poverty ”. I beg that amidst talking, we should add on work. In Proverbs 10, “the treasures of wickedness profit nothing, but righteous delivers us from death.” We should always do good. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Komakech - 5.26MR CHRISTOPHER KOMAKECH (Independent, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to support to the motion on the Floor. There was a time when hate was being preached in northern Uganda. There was a time when women were being raped by the LRA rebels. At that time, we had no psychologists or counsellors to help these particular women. There was only one person; Dr Joseph Ambrosoli. Dr Ambrosoli was the only rehabilitation centre to operate in northern Uganda, which saw fathers not take revenge against the LRA. It is only proper now that many youths in northern Uganda are suffering from addiction without any rehabilitation centre, as we assent to the beatification of Dr Ambrosoli, that Government should construct one rehabilitation centre to help the youth in northern Uganda that are suffering from alcohol and cannabis abuse. I beg to submit. Thank you very much. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: I also remember how Archbishop Odama often risked his life when he met rebels. I saw this as I was growing up in Gulu. Your Grace Archbishop, I am looking forward to a time when we will pay tribute to thank the living people, not only the dead ones. (Applause) (Member timed out.)5.27MS FLA VIA NABAGABE (NUP, Woman Representative, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are remembering the life of a great man in the Catholic Church, who inspired love, selflessness and servant leadership. As leaders in this country, what do we learn from such a person? As servants, we need to continue giving ourselves to the people and not as bosses. We need to go down to the level where we listen to people, commune, commemorate and empathise with them. For me, these are key lessons to all of us - as we continue reflecting on the life of such a wonderful man. We thank God that in his life, he served Christ so that we could all be able to emulate him. Thank you very much. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you. “Papa Francis” -5.28MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a person who almost became a priest –(Laughter)- and as a servant of the people of Buhweju, I want to support the motion.We have had instances where people say, “I cannot work in Buhweju because it is a hard-to-stay area; I cannot work in such a village because it is a hard-to-reach place”. They need hard-to-reach allowances to work in some areas. This is a lesson to us; that you can even work where there is no money and you can be a missionary. I salute the life of this servant of God. Thank you very much.5.29MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will add on to what other people have said about the Venerable Dr Fr Ambrosoli. He is an example to many of us, Ugandans. Do we do the same? 6300THE NATIONAL LEGAL AID BILL, 2022This was a man from a well-to-do country and well-to-do family and yet, he gave his whole life to save and serve the poor people of the north. He even opened institutions for people living with leprosy, which our people could not think of. However, for him, he decided that instead of segregating, neglecting people and living them to die, he decided to establish centres for them.  (Member timed out.)5.30MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo North County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank –THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya is making his maiden speech. (Laughter)MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You made a commitment when you met the Holy Father that you would do everything possible to ensure that this Parliament is an institution that fears God. We thank you very much for granting us this opportunity. (Applause)We are in this Parliament as representatives of the people of Uganda, talking about the works of a man of God who was a doctor; medical doctors are next to God. Before we die, we often have to be treated by a medical doctor.In memory of the works of Fr Ambrosoli, I propose an amendment that we create a digital library that will be updated to continuously remember his works. I beg to move.THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? [Members: “Yes”] The amendment is accordingly made.5.31MS MARGARET MAKHOHA (Independent, Woman Representative, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also second the motion moved by the Prime Minister. The Bible tells us to train up a child in the way he should go when he is still young, so that when they grow up, they cannot depart from it. I take this opportunity to appreciate the parents of Dr Ambrosoli because if he had not been brought up well, we would possibly not be talking about him now. It is now a question to us, as Members of Parliament and parents in this country: How do we bring up our children? If you instill good values in them, then, they will be of help to this country and the rest of the world. However, if you do not care about how you raise your children, then, at the end of the day, nobody will even know about them. We should totally move this motion and congratulate the parents. (Member timed out.)5.32MS HANIFA NABUKEERA (NUP, Woman Representative, Mukono): Thank ypu, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in remembering Fr Dr Joseph Ambrosoli for his humanitarian heart. The lesson that all of us should learn is to be humanitarian in whatever the case may be. He was a doctor and went to a far place in the northern region, yet, when they tell us about northern Uganda, it is a hard-to-reach area. He managed to stay there, live with the people and treated them with a humanitarian heart. I thank God for –(Member timed out.)5.33MS CHRISTINE NDIWALANA (NUP, Bu-komansimbi North County, Bukomansim-bi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We would like to thank Dr Joseph Ambrosoli for serving the suffering people. Sometimes, we want to allocate a lot of money to items to enable us to work comfortably.Look at the zebra crossing; it is enough for us Members to come to Parliament and serve so that we save some money for the suffering. I would like to thank Dr Joseph Ambrosoli for working for the suffering people. It is not that simple to achieve a lot in such an area and conditions. It is very difficult to identify progress, but we are here to thank God for his life. In the Catholic faith, we say, “St Ambrosoli, pray for us.”[Ms Aol]TRIBUTE TO THE VENERABLE GIUSEPPE AMBROSOLI6301THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 16 NOVEMBER 2022THE SPEAKER: Thank you.5.35MR KARIM MASABA (Independent, Industrial Division, Mbale City): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to a great man. I thank the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition for moving and seconding this motion. I will remember Fr Ambrosoli for being selfless and I believe, perhaps, he even loved others more than he loved himself.Some time back, I read one article about his life and legacy while in Uganda and one of the things I read was that before his death in March 1987, he was diagnosed with kidney disease. However, after being diagnosed, he was advised by his doctors to go and seek treatment and stop working, but he decided to go on and work. Therefore, this shows that he wanted to help people instead of him being helped. May his legacy live on.THE SPEAKER: There is a motion.5.36MS SANDRA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank His Holiness Pope Francis, the Catholic Church, the Government of Uganda and the Rt hon. Prime Minister and more especially you, Madam Speaker, for giving the Parliament of Uganda this time to pay tribute to Venerable Ambrosoli. Madam Speaker, I move a motion that the debate be closed and we put the question. I beg to move.THE SPEAKER: Is that seconded; with amendments? Honourable members, I know the Prime Minister wants to say something. You have heard all that has been talked about. Dr Joseph gave selfless service that we need to emulate. Even if we borrowed just two percent of it, selfless service to the people of Uganda and humanity, he was very humane and down to earth.Some of us, when we are in these positions, you feel like you have reached Heaven. Let us be servants of our suffering neighbours. We have very many suffering people; let us be servants. We are here to serve the people. Let us not be the VIPs that we call ourselves, let us be the servants of our suffering neighbours and as the Bible says, we will know them by their deeds. We may be here saying that we are going to do ABCD, but we shall know you by your works. Prime Minister. MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank everybody and my colleagues for your contribution towards my motion. I would like to inform the Rt hon. Minister and the Members of this august House that the Government-THE SPEAKER: I am the Rt hon. Speaker and not a minister. (Laughter)MS NAKADAMA:  Madam Speaker, I am sorry. I would like to inform this august House that Government pledged Shs 1.3 billion towards the celebrations and renovation of this hospital, which has been fulfilled.  (Applause) All the central roads to Kalongo have been improved and some are still being worked on. (Interjections)  Yes, work is still on-going and I would like to inform you -(Interjections)-  work is still on-going. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to invite all the honourable members of this august House to attend the celebrations. I thank you. For God and my Country. THE SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister, thank you very much for the money. Of the money from the President, Shs 800 million has already been reflected on the account and it is there. The Shs 500 million from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development shall be reflected by the end of tomorrow. Therefore, we would like to thank you very much.However, the road to the place where the function is going to take place is impassable. Therefore, Hon. Prime Minister, as you invite 6302THE NATIONAL LEGAL AID BILL, 2022all of us to go there, can you kindly work on the road? We do not want further accidents and you come to pay tribute when people have died.MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, the road is being worked on and by that day, it will be ready. THE SPEAKER: Minister for Economic Monitoring, can you monitor and give this House feedback?MS BEATRICE AKELLO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Give me feedback by the end of tomorrow.MS BEATRICE AKELLO: I will, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Give me feedback by the end of tomorrow; just call and we shall post it on the forum. We would like to thank the Archbishop and the team for sincerely spending the whole day with us here. We do not take it for granted. We have the Pope’s representative here. I know you have blessed all of us in this House and we receive the blessing. We thank you very much for the initiative and as the Catholic community in Uganda, we are forever grateful.Honourable Members, I now put the question that this House adopts the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to Venerable Ambrosoli, professed Member of the Comboni Missionaries of the Heart of Jesus, a medical doctor and educator on this occasion of beatification.(Question put and agreed to.)THE SPEAKER: We will extract the resolutions of this House and forward them over to the Archbishop and all the matters that we have promised in this House will be implemented with all the amendments. I know this House loves the Catholic Church very much. The Government loves the Catholic Church - that is why the Vice-President is a Catholic, the Prime Minister is a Catholic, the Speaker and the Leader of the Opposition are Catholics and many others are Catholics.We thank you very much and may the God Lord take you back safely as you travel back to the northern region.Thank you, I now adjourn the House to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. Honourable members, the Leader of the Opposition was distracting me. I am adjourning the House to 2.00 p.m., tomorrow. As I said before, tomorrow, we have an item on action taken on reports and that is what we are debating. Therefore, all the ministers whose reports were made should be in the House to respond to the action they have taken. House is adjourned to 2 o’clock. tomorrow.(The House rose at 5.43 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, 17 November 2022 at 2.00 p.m.)[The Speaker] TRIBUTE TO THE VENERABLE GIUSEPPE AMBROSOLI