Thursday, 7 November 2013

Parliament met at 2.47 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oath was administered to:

    1.  Ms Oliver Katwesigye

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Katwesigye, on behalf of Parliament, I welcome you very warmly and congratulate you upon your election. You will be sitting on this side of the House. On this side are the members of the Opposition and the Independents and this other side are the members of the National Resistance Movement. The Government Chief Whip will assign you one standing committee and one sessional committee.

I will now hand to you a copy of the Constitution, which you should study and use to guide you, and the Rules of Procedure, which you should master in order to do your work. I wish you well. (Applause) Let me ask the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition to welcome hon. Katwesigye, briefly.

2.57
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of this side and indeed our colleagues on the other side, I would like to sincerely welcome our new Member of Parliament to the House. We are very grateful that she is a member –(Interjections)– The most important information now for you is that she is a member of NRM. (Laughter) You can find out the other details later. So, we are very grateful that democracy is in action. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.58
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, in the same vein, I want to welcome our colleague, hon. Oliver Katwesigye. You will recall that when President Obama was swearing in, and he made an error and he was taken to a private office to re-do the oath; I hope hon. Katwesigye will be given an opportunity in your office to do the same. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, we welcome hon. Katwesigye. You are aware that from the place you are coming from, there are people who supported you and those who did not. As a Member of Parliament, you now must work for all of them. (Applause)

Secondly, I have also been to Buhweju, which is a place that has supported NRM 150 per cent, but the roads in those areas are bad and in any case, there are no roads. I hope you are aware that there are no roads in Buhweju and the people who voted you know that there are no roads. 

I want to conclude by wishing you a nice stay and good luck in this office. But for your information, the Office of the President there is better than the hospital. I believe that you should work on your hospital together with us. We wish you the best of luck in this Parliament. Thank you.
   
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Buhweju is in the news for many reasons, some good and some bad. We have just excitedly received our new member but at the same time, this morning, our former member, hon. Bikwasizehi, who served as the Buhweju MP in the Seventh and Eighth Parliaments, died. So, tomorrow, we shall have a special sitting. After the President has commissioned the car park, we shall bring his body here at 12 noon and have a special sitting at 2 o’clock to pay tribute to him. So, Members, please, be around so that we can do that tomorrow.

Secondly, on Tuesday, we propose that all the chairpersons of the standing and sessional committees will come here to the plenary and give an account of the work that they have done in their committees since we commenced the Ninth Parliament. You will have to account for the Bills, which have been taken to your committees. You must tell us how many have been enacted, how many are pending and why. So, Tuesday, all the chairpersons of standing and sessional committees will be here on the Floor of the House.  

In the public gallery, we have pupils and teachers from Nvirontono Primary School, represented by hon. Sseggona and hon. Seninde. You are welcome. (Applause) We also have Master’s degree students of Uganda Martyrs University Nkozi. (Applause) They are represented by hon. Bbosa Kiyingi and hon. Temulanda Nakawunde from Mpigi District. You are all welcome. 

Hon. Anywarach had something to say in two minutes and then we go to item No. 4

3.02
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for this opportunity. This is a matter of national importance.

The Ministry of Water and Environment has a policy of drilling boreholes which they have given out to all local governments. In the policy, they included two provisions: there must be an independent siter and there must be an independent driller. That policy has caused trouble in Nebbi District. As I speak now, we have lost close to Shs 100 million in dry drilling. 

In my constituency, there is a village called Padyere, which is in Atego Sub-County. There is a water point called Padyere water point that was drilled dry and we lost Shs 20 million there. Also in Akworo Sub-County, there is Biti water point which is in Biti Village, where we also drilled dry and lost Shs 20 million. That also continued to Nyaraburi Sub-County in a village called Pavunde, Pavunde water point. 

The issue is: where do you apportion liability? When you apportion liability on the driller, the driller is paid under the terms and conditions of the contract, which is drilling, and that Shs 20 million is for drilling. The siter is also under a different contract. 
Now, if the siter misleads the driller and you drill dry, you will go back to the siter and the siter will say that they are under a different contract of say Shs 4 million. So, this conflict in policies, I think, should be looked at and harmonised. 

The question now is: is the ministry or the minister aware of such hazardous effects of the policy? Secondly, what then must be done in case you drill dry and we are losing a lot of money? I think that there should be harmonisation of the policy. That is why I have risen on a point of national importance. Our people are denied water and I think that it is not only in Nebbi District as that policy cuts across. Hon. Kassiano Wadri is also nodding and that means that they are also victims of that policy. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: We shall ask the Minister for Water and Environment to address that issue and come back to us. Let us go to item No. 4.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table the proposal to borrow up to Special Drawing Rights 19.3 million from the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) for financing the Programme for Financial Inclusion in Rural Areas (PROFIRA). I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it will be sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.  

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table a proposal to borrow up to US$ 120 million Special Drawing Rights 19.1 million from the Islamic Development Bank to finance the upgrading of the Tirinyi-Pallisa–Kumi and Pallisa–Kamonkoli Road Project. (Applause) I beg to lay. 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the request is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.  

3.07
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Patrick Amuriat): I beg your pardon, Madam Speaker. I think the report of the Auditor-General on the special investigation into the management of loans portfolio by Uganda Development Bank was not delivered by the Clerk’s office. Maybe we shall lay it on the Table later. I am sorry about that.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to raise a procedural issue. We have been declaring the amount we want to borrow since I have been in Parliament. If you say that you are going to borrow US$ 120 million, the bidders and contractors who are here listening will now know that the bill is for US$ 120 million. So, now they will tender their bills around the US$ 120 million. I think we must change the way we handle this.

Madam Chair, if government wanted to borrow money for roads, don’t you think that they should total all the money in bulk; for example, they could say they want to borrow US$ 500 million for roads, so that the bidders bid for the roads without knowing exactly how much is allocated to each road. In that way, we would save a lot. This is better management, which we are trying to raise. 

I hope you understand that we should do this if you want transparency. Now, this is corruption because you are telling them exactly how much is for that road. But if you do it in bulk, you may discover that the road could cost US$ 60 million instead of US$ 120 million. I want you to think about it and you will understand that this is wise knowledge from the eastern region.

MR MATIA KASAIJA:  Madam Speaker, whereas I appreciate the concern, we have two technical issues to look at. One, from every loan we get, there must be a specific resolution made, because that is what our Constitution says. Otherwise, the lenders, without that specific resolution mentioning the amount you want to borrow for that particular project, will never be able to release that money to us.

Secondly, I think the emphasis should be put on our capacity to evaluate. From what I know, for all projects, after the submission we, first of all, carry out a feasibility study, we work out estimates of what we think that project should cost and then we tender out. When we tender out and you submit bids, then we go and evaluate you against our own benchmarks. So, I think the emphasis should be: do we have sufficient capacity within the Ministry of Works or UNRA to be able to work out the details of what is being tendered out and also the capacity to crosscheck and find out whether the bidders actually are in line with what was designed?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I agree with the minister, and I am sure when you went to the Islamic Bank it was after your evaluation. You did a feasibility study, you raised the bills and you cost it at US$ 120 million. That could even include inefficiencies as Government. However, if you had asked somebody who was coming in to tender, he would come up with a different value. 

I am not objecting; that is the reason why you went to the Bank with this amount. What we are trying to do is to find a good way. We can have our estimate of US$ 120 million but we should find a way so that the bidder does not know; he can come with a bid of US$ 80 or US$ 70 million. It is known worldwide.

THE SPEAKER: How shall we advertise a bid without stating the parameters including the funding? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we do consultancy; when they advertise in the papers, they do not put amounts. In fact, here we have advertised even the price and when they are going to bid, they will bid around this.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, let our committees look at that aspect and they can give us a report.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL BIO-TECHNOLOGY AND BIO-SAFETY BILL, 2012

3.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The National Bio-technology and Bio-safety Bill, 2012” be read the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded.

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, the object of this Bill is to provide a regulatory framework that facilitates the safe development and application of biotechnology. Biotechnology refers to any technique that uses living organisms or substances to make or modify a product, improve plant or animal breeds or microorganisms for specific purposes. The Bill designates a national focal point and competent authority. It establishes a national biosafety committee and institutional biosafety committees. 

Biosafety means the safe development, transfer, application and utilisation of biotechnology and its products. The Bill provides a mechanism to regulate research, development and general release of Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs) and for related matters.
 
Madam Speaker, this law should have been passed yesterday. Allow me to give you my personal experience. I visited Namulonge Research Station about eight months ago. I found our young very competent researchers who have developed products but they cannot commercialise those products without this law.
 
Secondly, my colleague, hon. Kajara, just returned yesterday and he has been briefing me. He went to India because we were invited by the Indian Government to study the use of biotechnology in enhancing agricultural productivity. He tells me that those people in India are miles ahead. Their productivity per acre is about three to four times what we have here in Uganda. With an increased population and limited land, there is no way we can be able to avoid increasing productivity per farmer and per unit area. Otherwise, this country will find itself unable to feed itself, may God forbid. On that score, I beg to move that this Bill be considered very seriously.

3.17
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, on Tuesday, 5 February 2013, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented to this House the National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill, 2012.
 
The Bill was referred to the Committee on Science and Technology for scrutiny. The committee, in executing its mandate given by rule 173 (1) of the Rules of Procedure, examined, reviewed and discussed the Bill. We hereby make recommendations to this august House for consideration and adoption.
 
The committee made wide consultations on the Bill with the following stakeholders -

THE SPEAKER: The Members can read those. They can read the methodology for themselves. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, this law looks very interesting; I would plead that you allow the chairperson to read the whole of it because many of us are interested in this.

THE SPEAKER: But honourable Leader of the Opposition, even the methodology? It just mentions the people they met; should he read that for you? You have the report. You can read the background and then go to the findings and observations.

MR DENIS OBUA: Background to the Bill: In April 2008, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development formulated the National Biotechnology and Biosafety Policy in response to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety of 2000. The protocol committed member countries, including Uganda, to establish measures for ensuring the safe transfer, handling and use of genetically modified organisms. As such, a law has to be enacted to make the policy operational. It was in that regard that the National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill, 2012 was tabled before Parliament for enactment.
 
The Bill tabled in Parliament on 5 February 2013 was intended to: 
    • provide a regulatory framework that facilitates safe development and application of biotechnology; 
    • designate a national focal point and a competent authority; 
    • establish a national biosafety committee and institutional biosafety committees; 
    • provide mechanisms to regulate research, development and general release of genetically modified organisms; and for other related matters.

Committee Findings and Observations

Genetically modified organisms are organisms in which the genetic material, referred to as DNA, has been altered in a way that does not occur naturally. This technology is called modern biotechnology, gene technology, sometimes recombinant DNA technology or genetic engineering. It allows selected individual genes to be transferred from one organism into another or between non-related species.

Madam Speaker, genetically modified organisms are mainly aimed at increasing the level of crop protection through the introduction of resistance against plant diseases caused by insects or viruses or through increased tolerance towards herbicides. Insect resistance is achieved by incorporating into the food plant the gene for toxin production from the bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis, commonly called “Bt”. This toxin is currently used as a conventional insecticide in agriculture and is safe for human consumption. Crops with these toxins require lower quantities of insecticide in specific situations. 

The Need for Uganda to have a Regulatory Framework 

The committee learned that traditional biotechnology started many years ago, with farmers growing plants that had desirable traits to increase yield, provide better taste and some that were more resistant to drought. They replanted seeds by selecting grains from their harvests. The process, however, took a lot of time and was at times unpredictable. 

Today, modern biotechnology offers more precise and faster methods to establish improved foods that are abundant, tasty, safe and nutritious. Scientists developed GMOs by applying plant genes to improve food quality and production. Specific genes that carry specific traits, such as better nutrient quality, resistance to drought, pests and diseases, are selected and transferred to another plant to attain more desirable characters, resulting into healthier and higher yielding crops and reduction on production costs for the farmer. An example is the introduction of a specific gene from a common soil bacterium called Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) into maize, thereby producing corn that is resistant to the maize stalk borer but also resistant to herbicides. 

Another benefit of genetically improved crops or transgenic crops is weather resistance. This can enable some crops to withstand severe weather conditions, extending the growing season, and also help reduce crop loss for farmers. It has been established that improved technologies and research are key to driving Uganda’s growth and development across all sectors. 

In light of the fact that Uganda is already conducting transgenic or genetically modified confined field trials, a law should be enacted to create a legal framework for transgenic products or genetically modified organisms.

Modern agricultural biotechnology has greatly contributed to the development of South Africa, India, Brazil, Egypt, Burkina Faso, to mention but a few. Nevertheless, there is utmost need for the technology to be regulated to optimise benefits while minimising any potential risk. Uganda is already conducting confined field trials of crops produced through biotechnology. Before GMOs are released for commercialisation, a legal framework is required to regulate them.

Many African countries are engaged in biotechnology as indicated in Annex A, attached herewith. Some African countries such as Kenya, South Africa, Nigeria, Ghana, Burkina Faso, to mention but a few, already have similar laws in place and are engaged in commercialisation of modern biotechnology. 

The committee observed that the objectives ought to be realigned to harmonise them with the subject matter of the Bill. 

The committee learnt that biotechnology offers potential to address global challenges through innovative approaches and it broadly covers medicine, agriculture, biological engineering, bioweapons and bioremediations among many others. Given that biotechnology is very broad, the title may be misleading since the Bill only provides for the development and application of genetically modified organisms.

The committee, however, noted that if its proposal to change the title of the Bill is adopted by this august House, the title of the Bill will not be consistent with the title of the policy. The committee’s interpretation was that the Bill is meant to operationalise part of the policy, which is handling genetically modified organisms or transgenic organisms.

Madam Speaker, before I lay these documents on the Table, as required by our rules, with your permission I would like to invite the vice chair of the committee to proceed and handle the remaining bit of the report of the committee. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY (Mr Robert Kafeero): Thank you very much, my chair, for yielding ground. 

Fear of the Unknown and Unfair Legal Proceedings

There are fears that Ugandans may not be protected from unfair legal proceedings that may be a result of patenting, hence be sued for naturally reproducing seeds from patented varieties. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Parliament should expedite the Plant Variety Protection Bill to protect farmers and community rights and to guarantee farmers the right to save, sow and reuse and freely exchange seeds. 

Another fear is natural pollination. There is fear that pollen may be naturally transferred from one garden to another by wind, hence contaminating gardens that had not initially been planted with GMO seed. Such pollen flow and seed movement presents a direct economic threat to farmers growing non-genetically engineered and organic products. It causes irreparable harm in the form of lost market, reputation and the loss of the fundamental right to sow the crop of their choice. Despite this factor, seed giants may explicitly attempt to shift the liability of such contamination away from themselves onto the farmer whose field has been contaminated. 

The committee, therefore, observes and learnt that a certain amount of incidental trace level of pollen movement may occur, but it is not possible to achieve 100 per cent purity of seed or grain in any crop production system.

Another fear is that Government may enter into agreement with such giants, causing Ugandan farmers to be bound to purchase seed from them.  

Another fear is the promotion of GMOs. A section of the Ugandan population was not comfortable with the law that intended to promote GMOs in Uganda. They preferred a deterrent law that would protect the health and safety of people, protect the environment by identifying risks posed by or as a result of gene technology, and one that would manage those risks through regulating certain dealings with GMOs.

There is another fear about labelling. People feared the risk of unknowingly consuming GMOs. The committee’s observation is that the Bill provides for labelling of products derived from modern biotechnology or products containing GMOs. We also recommend that the Bill should address the problem of accidental contamination of conventional food by GMO material.

Another fear - this is a very big one, Madam Speaker - is about the terminator gene. The terminator gene is a specific genetic sequence inserted into a seed’s DNA; once activated by a synthetic chemical catalyst of the manufacturer’s choice, the sequence renders the seed and crop it produces sterile. Patented by this company, which is now Monsanto, this terminator technology has no agricultural or economic benefit for the farmers or even the consumers. The only motivation is to protect intellectual property rights according to the owners of the technology. They claim that it allows them to be able to recover investments on research and produce profits from their technology as planters must re-purchase seeds every year.

Madam Speaker, the committee was informed that in a letter to the Rockefeller Foundation, Monsanto said it would not develop the so-called terminator gene for commercial use. Monsanto itself said it would not commercialise sterile seed technology in food crops. In other words, there is no terminator gene technology on the market.

Another fear is that GMOs are a potential risk to human health allergenicity. There is fear that GMOs cause allergic reaction to people. The committee observed that as a matter of principle, the transfer of genes from commonly allergenic foods is discouraged, unless it can be demonstrated that the protein product of the transferred gene is not allergenic. 

While traditionally developed foods are not generally tested for allergenicity, protocols for the test of GM foods have been evaluated by the Food and Agricultural Organisation of the United Nations and the World Health Organisation. Therefore, no allergic effects have been found relative to GM foods currently on the market.

Another fear is about gene transfer. It is also feared that gene transfer from the GM food to cells of the body or to bacteria in the gastro-intestinal tract may adversely affect human health. Our observation is that this fear would surface if antibiotic resistance genes used in GMOs were to be transferred.

Another fear is on outcrossing. It is feared that the movement of genes from GM plants into conventional crops or related species in the wild, – commonly referred to as outcrossing – as well as the mixing of crops derived from conventional seeds with those grown used GM crops, may have an indirect effect on food safety and food security.

We observed that this risk is real, as was shown when traces of a maize type, which was only approved for feed use, appeared in the maize products for consumption in the United States of America. However, the committee learnt that several countries have adopted strategies to reduce mixing, including a clear separation of the fields within which GM crops and conventional crops are grown.

The committee observed that the safety assessment of GMOs generally investigates direct health effects, what we call toxicity; tendencies to provoke allergic reactions, known as allerginicity; specific components thought to have nutritional or toxic properties; the stability of the inserted gene; nutritional effects associated with genetic modification; and any unintended effects which could result from the gene insertion. We, therefore, recommend that the Bill should cater for safety assurance measures with regard to toxicity and allerginicity, among others.

Another fear is environmental risk. There are fears that insertion of GMOs into the soil may cause environmental degradation. 

There is further fear regarding the capability of GMOs to escape and potentially introduce the engineered genes into wild populations; the persistence of the gene after the GMO has been harvested; the susceptibility of non-target organisms – mainly, insects which are not pests - to the gene product; the stability of the gene; the reduction in the spectrum of other plants, including loss of biodiversity; and increased use of chemicals in agriculture. 

The committee observed that environmental risk assessments cover bought the GMO concerned and the potential receiving environment. The assessment process includes evaluation of the characteristics of the GMO and its effects and stability in the environment, combined with ecological characteristics of the environment in which the introduction will take place. The assessment also includes unintended effects which could result from the insertion of the new gene. 

The committee was informed that international investigations were going on, focusing on the potentially detrimental effect on beneficial insects or a faster time induction of resistant insects; the potential generation of new plant pathogens; the potential detrimental consequences for plant biodiversity and wildlife, and a decreased use of the important practice of crop rotation in certain local situations; and the movement of herbicide resistant genes to other plants.

Another fear is that of enslaving our farmers. There are perceived fears regarding the rights of farmers to own their crops. There are potential problems of monopolising patenting of GMOs. Besides, some stakeholders expressed fear that intellectual property rights for pre-existing, uncharacterised genetic material indigenous to Uganda are not exclusively given to Ugandans, neither is there a provisional mandate for such situations.

The committee observed that intellectual property rights address the above concern. We, therefore, recommend that local genetic material should not be patented. Secondly, to protect farmers’ rights, Government should come up with a law that protects them.

On the issue of conservation of indigenous varieties, the committee observed that the plant genetic resources centre – 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. Please, listen to the presentation; you will have time to debate. 

MR KAFEERO: On the issue of conservation of indigenous varieties, the committee observed that the Plant Genetic Resources Centre in Entebbe would be an appropriate reference point for people who wish to continue accessing indigenous crops, but it is threatened by human activities which have reduced the original acreage of the centre. 

We, therefore, recommend that Government should secure the Plants Gene Bank to prevent encroachers from reducing its acreage. Secondly, the gene bank should also be improved upon to meet international standards and to enable it to sustain indigenous plant varieties. 

National Biosafety Committee

A national biosafety committee had been provided for in the Bill. However, in addition to raising the profile of the regulatory outfit by proposing to establish an independent GMO Regulatory Authority, the functions that would have been performed by this committee will be performed by the authority.

On the issue of decision making, unlike in Kenya where every decision must be reached within 150 days of receipt of the application but not less than 90 days, the committee noted with concern that our Bill provides for very few days within which decisions must be taken.

General Observations

Competent Authority

The committee observed that it is difficult to have a promoter of modern biotechnology to act at the same time as the regulator. We, therefore, recommend that an independent competent authority should be established under the Bill to avoid conflict of interest.

We also recommend that the functions, composition, structure and term of office of the competent authority should be clearly spelt out in the Bill.

Modern Biotechnology 

The committee observed that the definition of the term “modern biotechnology” as indicated in clause 3 of the Bill was based on the Cartagena Protocol. It is, however, acknowledged by scientists that modern biotechnology has been developed beyond the recombinant deoxyribonucleic acid or DNA as it were at the time of the signing of the protocol.  

Modern biotechnology now includes Ribonucleic Acid (RNA) which was not envisaged at that time. Therefore, we recommend that a comprehensive definition that will cater for biotechnology, modern biotechnology and Nano biotechnology should be provided for in the Bill. 

Application to Conduct GMO Research 

The committee recommends that in order to protect local researchers, a researcher or research institution that applies to conduct GMO research in Uganda should not be allowed to conduct GMO research without a recognised local research institution. 

On the issue of decision-making on application to conduct GMO research, our recommendation is that the minimum number of days within which to make a decision on any application should be specified in the Bill. On the issue of review and appeal mechanisms, we recommend that an appeals board should be provided for in the Bill. The chairperson of the appeals board should be a person who qualifies to be a Judge of the High Court.

On the issue of trans-boundary movement of GMO’s, the Bill did not adequately address remedies in the event –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I did not intend to disrupt the vice-chairperson of the Committee on Science and Technology but it would appear to me like he has gone to the next stage of making proposals. I do not know whether it is procedurally right for him to bring this at this point? Wouldn’t it have been better for him to bring these proposals as amendments to the Bill, upon the third reading?

THE SPEAKER: No, he would want you to think about the amendments before you debate so that during the debate, you can also address his proposals. 

Honourable members, this is an important Bill; I think Members want to understand what it is about. Proceed, vice-chairperson.

MR KAFEERO: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. 

Trans-boundary Movement of GMO’s 

The Bill did not adequately address remedies in the event of damage or sufficient likelihood of damage to the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity resulting from living modified organisms that find their origin in trans-boundary movements as required by the Nagoya Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol on Liability and Redress to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, which was adopted in Nagoya, Japan, on 15 October 2010. We recommend, therefore, that loss of biodiversity should be guarded against.

Bio-security 

A section of the public was concerned that the Bill lacks a provision on biosecurity. It was believed that the biosafety provisions in the Bill were inadequate to handle the biosecurity matters. Therefore, we recommend that Government should table Bills on other forms of biotechnology and those that take care of bio-security.

In conclusion, it is general knowledge that there is a challenge of food insecurity in Uganda mainly caused by lack of high yielding seed varieties, over reliance on rain fed agriculture, crop resisting pests and diseases and increasing population, among others. The committee is, therefore, convinced and persuaded that modern biotechnology may provide a solution to many – (Interjections) - of the above mentioned factors –(Interjections)– hence the Bill should be passed with amendments into law to enhance food security. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this report be adopted and also, with your indulgence, I invite the chairperson to officially lay this report on the Table. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: This is very serious collaboration and co-operation.

MR DENIS OBUA: Madam Speaker, in conformity with rule 193, clause 1 of the Rules of Procedure, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Science and Technology on the National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill, 2012. I beg to lay. (Applause)

In conformity with rule 208 of the Rules of Procedure, I beg to lay on the Table, on behalf of the committee, a file containing minutes of the proceedings of the committee on the National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill, 2012. I beg to lay. 

On behalf of the committee, I beg to also lay on the Table a file containing all the submissions from the over 35 stakeholders who appeared before the committee on the National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill, 2012. I beg to lay.

Finally, I beg to lay on the Table, on behalf of the committee, a document of the committee containing responses and decisions taken on all proposals and submissions from the stakeholders. I beg to lay. 

Madam Speaker, thank you and I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair, vice-chair and the committee. The report has been signed by over 20 members, beyond the minimum. I believe that this is an intricate Bill and I would want Members to study it during the weekend, then we can start the debate on Tuesday.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do not in any way intend to dispute the fact that we can internalise the report, as you guided, and we come back on Tuesday, but we have some preliminary issues we thought we could bring to your attention and to the attention of the whole House. One is whether this country needs this Bill, especially when we over produce food.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, you are now going into the merits of the Bill. On Tuesday, you will be able to submit as to whether we need it or not.

MR ODONGA OTTO:  Madam Speaker, I would want to find out if this Parliament would become agents of GM giants like Monsanto and we present such a sensitive committee report without a single minority report. This means that the international GM cartels are using this House to sell their patent -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please sit down. Honourable members, you may feel strongly about this Bill but your work here is to deliberate; stop making allegations. The Bill will be discussed on Tuesday. You go and read the Bill and the reports and we shall discuss on Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, we are not objecting to your ruling; we are going to read the report. However, this issue affects 80 per cent of the population of Uganda because this is the agricultural sector. 

I would plead with you, Madam Speaker, that you give us time to go and consult because this is a serious matter that is going to affect the farmers. I would plead that you give us some time so that we take this Bill to the population and tell them, “they want to remove these beans and they are going to bring these ones”.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I have to inform the House that last week, I was in Mbarara and I was invited by Caritas Mbarara, Western Uganda; all bishops and all scientists and all priests and people in agriculture were in Mbarara. They put us in the room and said that this is a very important Bill for this country. It is important because the moment we start doing the cross pollination of GMO’s, our crops are going to change.
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are now debating.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I was giving information that the public wants to debate this issue. Let us take this Bill to the public and we come back with feedback. I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you can see that the entire House has come together on this Bill. We will need a whole year to consult on this Bill before we can come and debate this issue. I beg to move.

THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO IN-CHARGE OF POLITICAL MOBILIZATION (Mr Richard Todwong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank you for giving me this opportunity. I consulted my colleagues and on behalf of Government and as the acting Chief Whip, we have no option if your honourable chair can submit to the request of the Leader of Opposition in Parliament; Government has no objection to the proposal that we can take this Bill and consult the population. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we give you one month to consult. 

Join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Mivule Primary School, represented by hon. Ruhindi and hon. Ssempala. Also join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Uphill Academic Primary School represented by hon. Bagole and hon. Kabuule. (Applause)

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ON GOVERNMENT COMPENSATION PAYMENT TO BEACHSIDE DEVELOPMENT SERVICES IN THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2009/2010.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report was presented comprehensively on Monday; it is now eligible for debate.  I think the copies have been distributed.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. As you can see, copies of these reports are just being distributed. I would like to request you to give us at least one extra day to go through and internalise this report, because it is a report on a very important subject. We will benefit from an extra day to read and internalise, then come and have an informed debate.

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, the report was presented here comprehensively. My problem is that after today, if I allow you to go with the copies I will have to print other copies. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Ideally, as a committee, we would have had no objection to the adjournment.  However, we are also getting concerned because we have other reports on the Order Paper and yet we are competing with other committees. 

Also, once these reports are written and submitted and not debated, at times the information becomes stale. We also have another report on the OPM and others. So, our worry is that if we postpone, we are not sure that we will get space on the next Order Paper. This is an opportunity for us, so we shall seek your guidance whether –(Interruption)

MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think Members are only, in a subtle manner, requesting that you permit the House to go and read the report and you also agree that the report will be on the agenda at the next sitting. This is so that we do not lose value of the recommendations therein but at the same time, we do not lose value of the quality of debate. 

I would, therefore, implore you, Madam Speaker and colleagues, that if you permit, you could put this report on the agenda of the next sitting and then we would come and present a qualitative debate; other than in the interest of saving the resolutions or the recommendations therein, we lose the quality of debate that we would derive from reading the report.
 
MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, whereas I agree with the submissions of my two colleagues, I want to make this special appeal to the administration of Parliament. All these investigative probes that we undertake are time bound. Once we make a recommendation and we complete our reports and we submit them to the administration of Parliament and they are not brought here timely for debate, all our recommendations in this case - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Wadri, it is not the problem of Parliament. It is not my problem. This report was presented and Members said they wanted time to read the text and debate today. It is not me who has a problem; I am ready. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, my appeal is not only limited to this report that we have today. I know my committee has a number of reports, which are before the administration of Parliament, and some of the recommendations that we have made are being taken over by other agencies of government before we present them here. That is the point I am making. 

As for this report, if it is said that we will consider it on Tuesday, well, we have no choice; we will go by that. I am just making a general appeal that when these committees submit reports let time be found so that the recommendations are not in vain. They will be stale and at the end of the day, we become impotent. It is as if we have done nothing. 

THE SPEAKER: Can you also appeal to your colleagues to be ready? Now I am ready and they are not. It was presented earlier; you were not here.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it is true that this report was presented and there are some recommendations which can be overtaken by time. However, if somebody has been found to have stolen Shs 1 million and he has paid back and the report comes saying that he has paid, well and good. 

I want to appeal to our colleagues that let us allow Members to read the report so that we can debate from an informed point of view. I do not think anybody is against this; in any case, those of us on this side would be more interested in seeing that this report is disposed of at a very fast rate so that the recommendations are implemented. I thank you.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, we concede. 

MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, even as you say that we debate this issue on Tuesday, as I sit here I do not have a copy of the same report, and I think all of us here do not have. So, how do you expect me to debate? I think the Clerk’s office should try to help us and avail us with copies of these reports. 

It is not only this report, but very many times, reports are only given in the middle here and most of us miss out. So, I want to request that we are given copies of this report. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, debate is deferred to Tuesday. If you are not ready on Tuesday, it will be adopted without debate. Let us go to the next item.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT ON THE FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF UGANDA DEVELOPMENT BANK FOR THE PERIOD 2002 TO 2010

4.05
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Patrick Amuriat):  Madam Speaker, thank you very much for the opportunity given to the committee to present a report on the performance of Uganda Development Bank Limited (UDBL). This is a report for 10 years of the audited accounts for the bank. This report was written and concluded by April 2013 and I am happy that we have been given an opportunity to present it.

This report is presented under Article 90(3) of the Constitution of Uganda and rule 169 of our Rules of Procedure. The standing Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises worked through a number of reports as I have alluded to. We examined and scrutinised the audited accounts of UDBL from 31 December 2001 to 31 December 2010. 

I will go straight to the background of the bank. The bank was first developed as a finance institution of Uganda and established under a decree of 1972. Since its establishment, the institution has been wholly owned by the Government. The main objective of the bank is to provide and finance development projects and activities in various sectors of the economy with particular emphasis on agriculture, industry, tourism, housing and commerce.  

In order to achieve its objectives, UDBL provides financial support in form of loans and by way of engaging in equity participation- (Interruption)

MR SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we are going to land in the same problem we did when distributing the earlier report. The reports do not seem to circulate to the wider audience and it may require receiving reports on one day and then taking another 10 days to read them. So, my procedural question is: can we be provided with reports so that we follow what he is reading? Otherwise, this will end up like the earlier reports. 

THE SPEAKER: The iPads are soon coming –(Laughter)– because that will solve the problem. How many of you have copies? 

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I wish to seek the indulgence of the House; we actually provided the original for photocopying and by yesterday, we had been assured that there would be enough copies. However, considering that we have a backlog of reports to present, Madam Speaker, I would plead with honourable colleagues that at the least, accept us to present the report and when we are ready to debate, we could debate. 

These reports are going to go stale, Madam Speaker. Some of the reports are actually stale as I speak now, because they have been on the shelves for a very long time. I would like to plead with you, honourable colleagues, that you allow us to present these reports; otherwise, we will not only have a backlog of work but also a backlog of reports to present. I plead with you.

MRS JOY ONGOM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the presenter and I assure him that as a House, we are not opposed to debating. We are only saying that we do not have copies of the report. All the Independents have not received even a single copy –(Laughter)– and I think the other side also do not have copies. We would want to follow whatever he is reading so that when it comes to debating, we do it from an informed point. Can we have copies so that we follow the debate?

MR MUKULA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In order for us to do justice to most of the pending reports in Parliament, I would urge the House to allow the committee chairperson to read the report and it is captured in the Hansard. At the same time, the parliamentary administration should at an appropriate time, – even now – circulate the document and we can adjust and have this debate take place next week. This will help us save time and we proceed. I urge the Members to take this advice. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have assured the House that more copies are coming and given the importance of the report and the fact that we have a lot of pending work on the Order Paper, we can allow the committee chairperson read it as we wait for more copies to come. 

However, Madam Speaker, we suggest that this should be the last time that we are doing this because our administration knows that we are 386 Members. So, every time there is an item on the Order Paper, they should prepare for us so that we do not raise this question again. For now, colleagues, let us allow the chairperson to read the report. Those of you who have ever produced a report know how difficult it is to come to the Floor and you are not given an opportunity to present it. Thank you. 

MR TODWONG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we wait for your wise counsel and guidance on this particular issue, I invite my colleagues to read rule 207 (1) of our Rules of Procedure: “Timeframe for committees to report. Every committee, except committees where specific assignments are made to which a matter is referred, shall report to the House within 45 days.”

There were petitions that were brought to this House by the public and they were forwarded to various committees of the House. There is a lot of business before the committees but up to now, we even do not know which committee is handling which specific assignment. This is because the schedules of activities of committees are not given to members. This is the reason why we have always been ambushed with reports and we find ourselves not ready to debate.

I would request, through your honourable chair, Madam Speaker, that you prevail over the Clerk’s office to make Members know which business is before which committee and which report is available for debate in subsequent sittings of Parliament, so that Members are prepared.

Secondly, I request you, colleagues, to allow the committee chairperson to proceed with the presentation of the report as we wait for more copies. This is because we have already deferred two items on the Order Paper this afternoon. If we make this the third, we might not seem to be serious as the Ninth Parliament. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we issue the Order Paper, it shows the business for that day and business to follow. So, I expect Members to be read that and anticipate what is coming next. 

Honestly, honourable members, I think it would not be fair to the country if we say that we understand English but we want the copies. Let us listen so that at least the report gets off the chairperson’s docket and then we debate when we get the copies.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues, for understanding. I will try to be slow in my presentation so that it is easy for Members to comprehend.

The Uganda Development Bank, the first development finance institution of Uganda, was established under decree of 1972. Since its establishment, the institution has been wholly owned by the government. The main objective of the bank is to promote and finance development projects and activities in various sectors of the economy with particular emphasis on agriculture, industry, tourism, housing and commerce.

In order to achieve its objective, Uganda Development Bank Limited (UDBL) provides financial support in the form of loans and by way of engaging in equity participation. To enable it finance the various projects, UDBL is empowered to borrow funds from both local and foreign sources within the limits determined by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on behalf of the Government of Uganda.

In 1998, the government adopted a staggered reconstruction and development programme, which focused on rehabilitation and restoration of macroeconomic stability. Being the country’s apex development finance institution, UDBL was expected to play an important role in the country’s economic reconstruction and recovery programme by mobilising external resources and deploying them in viable projects. Uganda Development Bank Limited pursued this mission earnestly and was able to obtain large credit from external financiers like African Development Bank, International Development Agency, European Investment Bank, European Economic Community, Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries Fund and the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA).

With these funds in hand, UDBL’s focus of activities shifted to financing medium and long-term projects in agriculture, industry and tourism. The bank is financed by two types of borrowed funds: the loans from the Government of Uganda as well as funds directly borrowed from multinational financial institutions but guaranteed by Government of Uganda.

Going by the decree that established it, UDBL was required to finance projects that are technically feasible, commercially and economically viable and socially desirable. Priority was given to:

i) 	Existing projects requiring small assistance to improve their operations.

ii) 	Projects with a scope to maximise the country’s resources and add value to products.

iii) 	Projects aiming to produce quality products at internationally competitive prices targeted to export.

iv) 	Projects creating new job opportunities for the local people.

Since 1997, the bank has been undergoing reconstruction, during which period only minimal lending was done with the objective of keeping it as a going concern. The bank has now embarked on implementing aggressive lending strategies with a view to take up her position as a lead institution in the provision of development finance in the country.

In 2002, UDBL was divested into a public limited company in accordance with the PERD Act Cap. 98 by instrument number 46 of 2002. This led to creation of Uganda Development Bank Limited, a government company classified under class II of the first schedule of the PERD Act, cap 98.

Corporate Governance and Leadership

During the period under review, that is, 2001 to 2010, the board of UDBL was drawn from senior and retired civil servants as well as from the private sector. For close to 10 years, the board was chaired by Mr James Kahoza, a retired civil servant, who had worked as Secretary to the Treasury and the Auditor-General. He handed over the chairmanship of the board in May 2012. The other prominent public officers on the board were drawn from the Bank of Uganda and the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development. Among the prominent people drawn from the private sector is the current Minister of Finance, hon. Maria Kiwanuka.

On 16 May 2012, the Minister of Finance appointed a new board to spearhead the operations of the bank and they include Dr Sejjaaka Samuel; Mr Charles Victor Byaruhanga, who represents the Ministry of Finance; Mr George W. Nyeko from the BOU; Mrs Harriet Omoding, who is a human resource specialist; Dr Stephen Robert Isabalija, who is a member; and Ms Patricia Adong Ojangole, ex officio member. She was the head of internal audit but has been substantially appointed as the chief executive officer of the bank by the new board.

The new board established three standing committees: audit; credit and risk; and planning and general purpose. The board started their work and informed COSASE that they had suspended the entire management team for failure to produce accurate and timely financial statements. Following internal processes, the board fired the suspended officers and embarked on a process of recruiting a new management team. The board requested the Auditor-General to conduct a forensic audit of the loan portfolio of the bank to help ascertain potential loss estimated at Shs 10 billion.

By the time of writing the report, the board had informed the committee that the forensic audit report had been produced and was being studied with a view of bringing to book those who might have led to financial loss in the bank. The report is yet to be tabled before Parliament. It will be tabled on Tuesday. 

The board has drawn up a board charter that stipulates the roles and responsibilities of the chairperson, members, committees, the chief executive officer and the company secretary. It also states the powers of directors, code of conduct, board’s remuneration and how meetings are conducted. 

The board informed COSASE that their main focus was to create a conducive environment for faster growth of the bank in providing development finance. They stated that they were instituting strategies and policies to support this cause with the main focus of ensuring good governance and capacity development; recapitalisation of the bank; financing projects in line with the National Development Plan; and increased co-operation with multilateral development agencies. 

Outreach

The outreach of the bank has been presented by regional, sectoral and portfolio distribution. 

The total exposure by region is as follows: By 30 June 2012, central region, Shs 11.7 billion representing 14 per cent; Kampala, Shs 46 billion representing 56 per cent; eastern region, Shs 13.1 billion representing 16 per cent; western region, Shs 5.5 billion representing 6 per cent; and northern Uganda, Shs 6 billion representing 6 per cent. Those of you who have the report will follow from the table. I wish to encourage you to share these copies of the report, honourable colleagues.

Portfolio distribution by product: Under the product distribution, long term loans continued to dominate the portfolio with Shs 60.48 billion. This was followed by trade finance with Shs 21.5 billion and equity investment, Shs 558 million. All this is shown in the table below.

Exposure by sector: The distribution of the growth portfolio by sector as at 30 June 2012 is summarised in the table that is on top of page 11, for those of you who have the report. I know you will have them at the time of debate.

Financial Performance of the Bank 

The financial performance of the bank has been presented through trend analysis of key variables extracted from a summary of financial statements presented as Annex 1 and Annex 2 of this report. A review of the total comprehensive income of the period 2001 to 2010 shows a very undulating phenomenon, as indicated on figure 1, which is also from the committee’s analysis of information given to us. You will see an up and downward trend in as far as comprehensive income is concerned. 

From the trend reflected in the figure, it can be construed that over the years reviewed, the bank’s income and profitability has not been stable and systematically growing. Since the bank’s divesture in 2002, it realised a drop in comprehensive income to a loss of Shs 445 million. 

The performance picked up in 2005 was largely due to exceptional income of Shs 5.445 billion realised as a result of recovery of a loan from BM Technical Services Ltd which hitherto had been written off. The performance posted the highest peak in the year 2008, as you can see from the graph, largely attributed to the income from fair value gain on investment properties worth Shs 9.67 billion. 

Total Assets

On total assets, the bank has assets that include both fixed and non-fixed assets mostly used to generate revenue. The bank, in addition to assets held in loans and advances, holds assets in investments held to maturity and investment property which yield income. The total assets in general reflect a positive trend over the period reviewed as shown in figure 2. It keeps rising and rising.

Liabilities

Over the period reviewed, the total liabilities of the bank were largely drawn from trust fund amounts due to the Government of Uganda and amounts due to the Bank of Uganda. Generally, the liability showed an undulating trend, which might be a sign that the bank did not properly plan when to acquire a given liability. 

Total Equity 

In the period reviewed, total equity was increased from Shs 18.034 billion in 2001 to Shs 90.887 billion in 2010 as presented in figure 4. The total equity was represented by issued capital, net assets transferred capital distribution pending allotment and retained earnings among others. 

The net assets transferred were to a tune of Shs 17.128 billion, which was converted as part of issued capital in 2002. However, despite the huge capital contribution from the Government of Uganda to the bank, the review did not trace evidence that any dividends were paid to the government in the period under review. 

We would now like you to turn to observations and our recommendations.

Performance Measurements and Remuneration 

The board, we observed, had developed a charter stipulating how it conducts business in guiding the operations of the bank. However, it lacked a mechanism by which the performance of the board can be appraised or measured. 

In addition, a review of the remuneration schedule for the members of the board showed that all of them are paid retainer fees, including those nominated from public organisations such as the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Bank of Uganda. These payments can be conceived to be accessing double payments from the Consolidated Fund. In the absence of a performance measurement mechanism, the committee could not be certain that there is value for the retainer fees paid. 

We wish to recommend as follows on this: Retainer fees should only be paid to members of the board who are drawn from outside public offices. In addition, the Auditor-General should conduct a special audit to ascertain how much has been paid out as retainer fees or any other irregular payments made to public officers in all government commissions, statutory authorities and state enterprises with a view to enforcing the recovery of these funds. 

Further, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the board should develop and adopt a mechanism for either self-assessment or external evaluation on the performance of the UDBL board. 

Rent 

The committee observed that whereas the bank’s registered office and principal place of business at Ruth Towers was rented at the time of reporting, it owns the MTN Towers which it has let out to MTN (Uganda) Limited. The committee believes that once run efficiently, the bank is capable of making profits and making the best use of their own building to enhance visibility. In other words, we feel that there should be a time when they should go and occupy their own premises to save on rent as well. 

Bank Outreach

We observed that as at 30 June 2012, the bank outreach had remained concentrated in Kampala City with 56 per cent as compared to other regions in the country. In the same period, it was indicated that the bank’s exposure to agriculture and fisheries was only 31 per cent of the total book value, yet agriculture employs more than 80 per cent of Ugandans. We wish to recommend that the bank works out modalities for increment of funding towards the agricultural sector. 

In addition, its outreach across the country and in key strategic sectors needs to be broadened with the view of promoting balanced development in the country.

Asset Growth and Dividend Payment 

The committee observed that whereas the total assets and total equity of the bank grew steadily in the period reviewed, such growth was not correlated with the growth in the comprehensive income. In addition, no dividends were remitted to the Consolidated Fund during the period reviewed. 

We wish to recommend that the bank should run all its operations with a business sense, with the necessary prudence of economic growth, viability and sustainability. 

Besides, Madam Speaker and honourable members, the bank should remit dividends to the Consolidated Fund as a return to the contribution the Government has made in the form of issued capital. 

Concerns of the Auditor-General on the Accounts of UDBL

In 2001, the Auditor-General observed out-dated finance and accounting policies and procedures manual. The bank was yet to update its finance and accounting procedures manual. The manual being used by the finance department was last updated in 1991 by the time of reporting; that was our observation. 

A draft finance and accountability policy and procedures manual of May 2012 was presented before the committee and was still awaiting approval of the audit committee and the board. We wish to observe that the finance and accounting policies and procedures are critical as a basis to implement effective – (Interruption) 

MR OGWANG: Madam Chair, this is now the second time that the chairman is not giving us correct years. The first one was 1980, now this one on this page here is 1999 and you are reading 1991. Could you please clarify which year you mean in this report?

MR AMURIAT: I beg your pardon. This was just an error. We have read what is printed there over and over again. If I misread it, take it that what is printed on the paper is what we meant as a committee. I will correct that for the Hansard, Madam Speaker. 

The bank was yet to update its finance and accounting procedures manual. The manual being used by the finance department was last updated in 1999. A draft finance and accounting policies and procedures manual of May 2012 was presented before the committee and was still awaiting approval from the audit committee and the board. 

Our observation is that the finance and accounting policies and procedures are critical as a basis to implement effective management and internal control systems in the bank. The board and management’s failure to update these policies and procedures for over 13 years is tantamount to gross negligence and incompetence. 

We recommend that the board should expedite the process of consideration and approval of the draft finance and accounting policies and procedures manual, 2012. 

Further, the board should provide the necessary skilled staff and an effective information management system to facilitate effective implementation of finance and accounting policies and procedures. 

The second observation under this year, 2009, is absence of a risk management policy. The bank had not yet put in place a formal risk management policy framework, which spells out the various risks it was likely to face, their causes and measures to be undertaken to mitigate them. 

Without a risk management manual or formal risk management framework in place, management might not be able to adequately identify, monitor and respond to risks in a timely manner. The board of UDBL in its 39th meeting held on 7th and 17 June 2010 approved a risk management policy and agreed to fill the risk management unit with a risk manager, an economic researcher and a senior risk officer. 

Our observation is: whereas the committee received a risk management and procedures manual, which was approved by the bank, a quick review showed that it was hurriedly prepared without necessary attention and due care. The manual was poorly formatted and the table of contents had numbers which were not matching with the contents. Most importantly, the manual had a proposed governance structure and functions of the risk management unit as opposed to an approved and functional structure. In addition, the proposed risk management structure of five people headed by a director, risk and economic research, was not yet functional. 

We recommend that the board should review, update and ensure effective implementation of a comprehensive risk management policy and procedures framework. Also, staff required to manage the risk management unit should be recruited as a matter of urgency.

Out-dated Business Strategy

This was also a query of 2009. The bank was yet to formalise and update its long-term strategy. Top management had been relying on short-term plans or budgets designed to guide the company through short, successive periods. The bank’s long-term strategy was last updated in 2004. Such a long-term plan should incorporate, at the least, a mission statement, goals and objectives. 

Business Strategy and Critical Success Factors 

The new board acknowledged the need for the bank to reposition itself as the leading provider of development finance. It has worked with the management team to draw a strategic direction for the bank. However, the strategy is yet to be formalised. 

Our observation is that the bank has developed a new vision, which is, “Drive sustainable socio-economic development through innovative financial products and services”. It has also developed a new mission, which is, “Profitably financing enterprises in key growth sectors.” These have been translated into objectives, strategies and performance targets in the form of approved and functional business or strategic plans. 

However, these vision and mission statements are not inspiring enough for an institution of its nature. The vision statement is always a single statement describing a long term desired change stemming from the existence of an organisation. It inspires people to have an endless pursuit of a particular world view. A mission statement on the other hand should show the purpose or reason for the existence of an organisation. 

We recommend that the bank reviews its vision and mission statements to reflect a clear view of the purpose of the bank and strategic actions that management intends to embark on to pursue its mission. Management has to develop and keep updating its comprehensive, integrated and up-to-date business strategy to steer the bank to achieve her core mandate in the economic development of the country.

Lack of Accounts from Associated Companies  

This query consecutively arose in 2002, 2006, 2007, 2008 up until 2009. The UDBL obtained shares from Kajjansi Roses Ltd as part settlement for a loan given to Kajjansi Roses Ltd, a client who had defaulted.

On 1 July 2002, an agreement was signed between UDBL, Kajjansi Roses Ltd and Muljibhai Madhvani and Company Ltd in which shares were issued to UDBL. As a result of this, UDBL’s interest in Kajjansi Roses increased to 28 per cent, turning the investment into an associate which, according to accounting standards, is to be recorded using the equity methods. 

The bank did not, however, account for this investment in accordance with the requirements of these standards. The bank attributed the failure to non-availability of audited accounts of Kajjansi Roses Ltd because their board of directors had not met to approve them. The accounts have since been signed. However, the bank disposed of its shares in the associate in 2010. 

The committee observation: Uganda Development Bank Limited took a very long time, between 2002 and 2010, to address the issue pertaining to Kajjansi Roses Ltd, which was evidence of lack of prudence in the management of the bank’s affairs. Management informed the committee that it had disposed of its shares in the company in 2010. In the absence of the audited accounts, the dividends due to the bank could not be ascertained. 

We recommend that the bank should always carry out due diligence in as far as all their business transactions are concerned, and ensure that its accounting methods strictly adhere to international accounting standards.

In addition, Government should look at the audited accounts of the associated companies to establish dividends due to the bank and recover them. 

Loan Disbursements and Filing Procedures 

This was observed by the Auditor-General in 2009. From a review of the loan files of the following entities, the committee discovered deficiencies including absence of the latest audited financial statements: GAF Apartments and Entertainment Centre Limited; Lake Mugogo Resort Company Limited; Garuga Resort Beach Hotel Limited; and Zigoti Coffee Works Limited. The absence of vital information in the loan files of these entities signifies weak controls in the credit monitoring and review process. 

In addition, there was no evidence of insurance of securities held by the bank. Some of the examples of the clients were Western Meridian Hotel Limited; Mbarara General Enterprises Limited; Kumi Hotel Limited; Victorious Education Services Limited and Zigoti Coffee Works Limited. There was no evidence to suggest that the bank had carried out due diligence reviews before issuing the loans. This posed difficulties in ascertaining the different customers’ financial performance to ascertain their ability to continue servicing their loan facilities. 

The bank acknowledged that the accounts of Garuga Resort Beach Hotel Limited and Lake Mugogo Resort Company Limited were not available at the time of the audit because the projects were still at the construction stage. However, Garuga Resort Beach Hotel Limited has since cleared the loan. 

The accounting officer informed the committee that the bank carried out due diligence before management approved any loan, and all securities held by the bank in 2009 were insured except eight projects, which have since been insured. The bank’s management explained further that the clients were reluctant to pay annual insurance premiums after loan disbursements because most insurance companies insure for one year. 

The committee observed that failure to secure audited financial statements from the funded projects and lack of up-to-date insurance arrangements are big deficiencies in lending at the bank. This could expose UDBL to severe risk and losses, including closure or liquidation. It was negligent of management to take no action as the companies failed to renew their insurance policies for loan securities.  

We recommend that the bank ensures that all loans are insured and all projects financed must regularly submit audited accounts on the performance of their business to the bank. Management has to monitor loan assets and take appropriate measures to ensure that borrowers renew their insurance policies. This should be made part of the terms and conditions of loan disbursement. 

Non-performance of Reconciliation for Suspense Accounts 

This was an observation made in 2009. The bank had a number of suspense or clearing accounts for which no reconciliation had been prepared. Reconciling these accounts took a long time and delayed the completion of the audit. The reliability of financial statements was brought into question because of such accounts. 

In addition, if management did not keep abreast with all the clearing or suspense accounts, these could be used as avenues for perpetuating fraud. The bank explained that this was a result of parallel manual and computerised systems being used at the same time, causing delays in reconciling and integrating data. 

We observe that suspense accounts can be associated with fraud and inaccurate financial reporting at the bank. There was no evidence that investigations were carried out to eliminate the possibility that that fraud was the cause of the suspense accounts. 

We recommend that the board commissions a special audit on the suspense accounts to ascertain their actual causes and to find a permanent solution to this persistent problem. 

Definition of Impaired Accounts 

This was an audit query of 2009. The bank’s definition of an impaired account was actually, when management considered that an account is likely to be impaired. This was inconsistent with IAS 39, which emphasises on an account showing indicators of impairment. There could be some accounts which qualify for impairment assessment under IAS 39 and which could not be considered for impairment testing based on the bank’s policy guidelines. As a result, the provision for impairment losses during the year may have been misstated. 

We observed that the bank agreed that the provisioning policy was not consistent with IAS 39 and that the bank had since adopted IAS 39 and indicators of impairment as outlined in the lending guidelines. We recommend that the Auditor-General performs a compliance audit of the bank with IAS 39 in the subsequent external audits. 

Financial Statement Closure Processes

Again, this is a query of 2009. Weaknesses were observed in the bank’s financial statement closure process. Some of the previous year-end audit adjustments had not been posted in the accounts. In addition, there was a lot of closing adjustment entries passed during the course of the audit, which delayed completion of the audit. This cast doubt on the reliability of the financial statements for decision making by stakeholders. 

The bank explained that new modules led to the generation of adjusting entries and that this was not expected to reoccur as staff is now more conversant with the new system. 

We observed that failure to adhere to the financial statements’ closure process indeed cast doubt on the reliability of financial statements for decision making by all stakeholders of the bank. In addition, this was a sign of a weak finance and accounts department together with their accounting system and policies. 

We recommend that the board through its audit committees should review the existing accounting system, policies and competencies of persons in the finance and accounting department with a view to permanently rectify the anomaly registered in the financial statement closure process. 

IT Issues 

Business Continuity Plan 

The bank has not yet put in place an enterprise-wide risk framework and a comprehensive business continuity disaster plan. The bank explained that the business continuity plan was being prepared and would be ready by 30 November 2012. In addition, plans were underway to transform the bank house located in Munyonyo to an in-house training centre and also a disaster recovery centre. 

We observed that without a functional enterprise-wide risk management framework and a comprehensive business continuity disaster recovery plan, the bank cannot guarantee the reliability of her records and safety of crucial assets as well as data. 

We recommended that the bank expedite the putting in place of a functional business continuity plan and disaster recovery plan, in any case not later than 30 June 2013. 

Change Management Control 

The bank did not have any formal documented procedures that were to be followed to initiate, authorise, prioritise, develop, test and implement system changes made at programme level. Furthermore, there was no log of changes kept to indicate all amendments or changes made to the different applications. 

Failure to have a clear change management process in place may result in unauthorised, inappropriate and untested changes being made in the IT environment. The bank produced before the committee a draft information communication and business communication policy and procedures manual dated August 2012, which was to be approved by the board. 

We observed that failure to have functional information communication and business communication policies and procedures in the bank, which partly uses computerised systems, creates enormous risk exposures due to uncertain authorisation and audit trailing mechanism. 

We recommend that the board should expedite the approval and effective implementation of the draft IT policy manual. The bank needs to keep updating its IT policies and practices to meet the changing environment in which information technology in our society is today. 

Legal Access Controls

The following issues were noted as risks to a possibility of data being compromised and creating loopholes for unauthorised user access: 
    1. There was no formal documentation indicating user access creation and rights approval on user access forms.
    2. There was no form used for modification of user rights.
    3. There is no clear procedure followed to ensure deleting of accounts of terminated users.
    4. User access was never reviewed to make updates to changes corresponding to the ones made into the system. 
    5. The IT functions did not monitor all the user accounts to identify dormant accounts. 

We observed that whereas the bank claimed that it had put in place user access forms addressing the problem, a review of the IT manual did not show a dedicated section on logical access control. We recommend that the board of the bank ensures that logical access control constitutes part of the IT policies manual of the bank and is made functional. 

Backup and Restoration Process

Data stored offsite is only updated once in a week and there was no procedure in place for signing of and acknowledging successful completion of backups. The bank explained that it was working out modalities to address the problem but was being constrained by lack of resources. It also noted that because of the small size of its data, it was not cost effective to undertake such a venture. 

We observed that whether the size of the data is small or otherwise, any financial institution must institute comprehensive backup and restoration processes to safeguard against possible loss of data. The manner in which the board and the management were treating the matter is tantamount to negligence and irresponsibility. The UDBL should institute an effective backup and restoration process for all its key data. 

National Social Security Fund Computation on Basic Pay

It was observed that UDBL computed and remitted NSSF contribution for its staff on a monthly basis. However, it was noted that NSSF deductions were computed based on the basic pay rather than gross cash emoluments. The bank paid to its staff cash allowances such as transport, fuel allowances and overtime but these were not included while computing NSSF dues.

This was an exposure to the bank as it remitted less contribution than it should have. The bank acknowledged that in earlier years, it did not computerise NSSF on gross pay but basic. However, NSSF is now computed on gross cash emoluments.

The committee reviewed and considered evidence in which NSSF acknowledged receipt of Shs 33,846,138 million being payment of principal arrears and Shs 252,800 for interest as well as a letter in which a penalty of Shs 64,449,787 was waived in line with section 14(2) of the NSSF Act Cap 22. Having seen evidence of corrective measures, we recommended that this query be dropped. 

On investment property of 2008, the bank recognised a fair value gain on investment property of Shs 9.67 billion based on an independent valuation done in 2008. Hitherto, the last fair value of investment property was done 2005 and since then, no fair value gains or losses have been recognised in the financial statements. IAS 40 requires that a fair value of investment property should reflect market conditions at the balance sheet date and the gain or loss arising from the change in fair value of investment of property be recognised in profit or loss for the period in which it arises.

Had the bank been carrying out annual fair value assessments as required by IAS 40, the fair value gain of Shs 9.6 billion included in 2008 income statements would have been progressively recognised in the respective accounting periods. As a result of the above, the profit for the year was overstated and the opening balance of retained earnings was understated. However, the misstatements could not be qualified. The bank explained that due to cost implications, it could not carry out annual re-evaluations.

It was noted that failure to comply with IAS 40 by the bank led to inappropriate reporting of its annual financial performance. We recommend that the bank strictly adheres to the provisions of IAS 40; management has to develop internal capacity in the accounts department to carry out evaluations so as to reduce exorbitant costs arising from hired firms.

On financial instruments recognition and measurements of 2008, IAS 39 requires that an entity shall assess at each balance sheet date whether there was any objective evidence that financial asset or group of financial assets were impaired. If any such evidence exists, the entity shall determine the amount of the loss and the difference between the assets carrying amounts and the present value of the estimated future cash flow excluding future credit losses that have not been incurred discounted at financial assets original effective interest rates.

This was done as at 31 December 2008. However, as at 31 December 2007, the company’s loan impairment was based on number of days in arrears and fixed percentages and not estimated value cash flows as required by IAS 39. The bank did not make an impairment assessment and thus the impact on the financial statements of the deviation in prior years from the requirements of IAS 39 pertaining to the above issue could not be assessed.

Our observation is that, whereas the bank applied IAS 39 with effect from 31 December 2008 there was no evidence that it made the necessary adjustments of the previous years, thus the profit and loss accounts together with the bank’s balance sheet could have been misstated. We recommend that the bank should make the necessary adjustments as a result of non-adherence to IAS 39 for the period 31 December 2008 for the purpose of accurate financial reporting to stakeholders.

We will now turn to a query of 2006/2005/2004 on trust funds

The Auditor-General queried trust funds received by UDBL for three consecutive years; the details are that trust funds were received by UDBL from the Government of Uganda; the resulting loans were not assets of the bank and were therefore not reflected in the bank’s assets side of the balance sheet.

However, funds received from the government to be loaned out to trust fund loan clients were included as liabilities of the bank until they were disbursed to clients. Similarly, repayments by trust funds loaned clients to the government were included as liabilities of the bank until they were passed on the government. An agreement on administration of these funds was between the bank and Government of Uganda on 26 March 2006, which required the bank to charge an agency fee based on the interest and from the borrowers as well as recharge all expenses incurred in the execution of their role as agents retrospectively from 9 May 2001.

However, no accrual provisions for the agency fee incomes has been included in these financial statements since no recoveries have been made on the funds lent out since 2003 - we will be considering that later in the report.

UDBL had entered into a loan agreement with various borrowers of these funds. It was not however that some facilities were non-performing. These were: Apparels Tri-Star Uganda Ltd, Phenix Logistics Uganda Ltd, Rooters Ltd, BM Technical Services Ltd.

We observed that there was no signed agreement between Government of Uganda and UDBL regarding these funds and who was to bear the loss in case of default by the borrowers. Besides, there was reluctance in follow up and recovery of the disbursed amounts on the part of the bank.

The committee noted that UDBL was simply being used as a conduit to pass over huge monies to these entities on a non-written agreement based known to officials of ministry of finance. The bank was not given an opportunity to carry out due diligence as to the credibility of borrowers of trust funds. Government imposed borrowers on the bank without consideration of their financial status and ability to pay back. This led to non-performance of loans by several companies including Apparels Tri-star, Phenix Ltd, Rooters Ltd and BM Technical Services Ltd.

We recommended that it is important for the bank to always have a formal memorandum of understanding with the Government of Uganda on the management of bad debts that are mainly emanating from trust funds provided by the government. 

In all transactions, the bank should adhere to its lending policy when handling transfers. The government should allow the board and management to run the bank’s operations professionally. The bank’s lending policies should guide the disbursement of trust funds without interference from Government. 

The investigative arm of the government, criminal investigation department and Inspector-General of Government should investigate these loans with a view of recovering the monies and punishing officials found to have mismanaged the process. 

On share capital, a query that dates back to 2000, 2002, 2004 and 2005 included in the bank’s balance sheet under shareholder’s funds is an amount of Shs 17.12 billion, under the name of “net assets transferred”. Also included is Shs 1.167 billion under the name of “Government of Uganda capital contribution”. 

Whereas these amounts are under shareholder equity, they do not agree with a definition of equity under IAS. Besides, it was not clear whether the funds constituted liability to the bank. There were no alternative procedures that could be used to obtain details regarding the correct treatment for these funds. The accounting officer informed the committee that this was the rightful description of the funds. 

Our observation is that management may have used false accounting systems to cover up for losses of funds diverted from the bank. The committee insists that given the amount of money involved, it was impossible to allow for use of false accounting. 

We recommend that the financial statement of the bank for the financial years 2001/02, 2004/05 be investigated by Government with a view of establishing the nature of funds mentioned, and the credibility of such statements so that the culprits found to have deliberately manipulated the financial statements of the bank can be handled in accordance with the law. 

Loans from the Government of Uganda in the report of the Auditor-General of 2001/02 through to 2004
The issues on loans from the Government of Uganda arose as follows; included in the balance sheet of 2004, were borrowings from the Government of Uganda amounting to Shs 4.018 billion. An independent confirmation from the government regarding the completeness and accuracy of the liability has not been received. 

Further, a loan agreement with the government in respect of the long term loan has not been executed. A provision of Shs 866 million has been made for interest expense on the loan. This provision is computed at five percent per annum and in the opinion of management, it is made to cover the possibility that the interest at the rate yet to be agreed may ultimately have to be accrued from a date earlier than that on which the agreement will be signed. 

These are summarised as follows: borrowings from the Government of Uganda amounting to 4.018 billion 2003; borrowings from the Government of Uganda amounting to Shs 5.999 billion and the related interest payable of Shs 562 million computed at five percent per annum in 2002, and 7.5 percent per annum, Shs 262 million in 2001. The bank explains that on 17 February 2003, UDBL received a letter from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development confirming the loan term of Shs 5.999 billion. 

The bank drafted a loan agreement to affect the loan but the government did not execute it. The committee observed with concern that the bank received funds from the government without any formal agreement reached with the government. It was therefore impossible to determine whether the monies in question were equity, loan, or a donation to the government. 

We recommend as a committee that the Ministry of Finance and the management of UDBL should as a matter of urgency declare the nature of these funds and formalise them either as loans, equity, donations, or as is the case. This should as well be formalised in written and signed memorandum of understanding between the two parties or to be covered as taxation. 

The taxation issue arose as follows:
    1. The bank had not filed tax returns and had not settled its corporation tax liabilities with Uganda Revenue Authority. Any potential additional liabilities arising from this have not been accrued in the bank’s financial statements. 

    2. The bank had made taxable profits during the period ended 31 December 2002 amounting to Shs 2.286 billion. However, management has offset the taxable profits against tax losses incurred. The total potential unrecorded tax liability for the period ended 31 December 2002 amounted to Shs 686 million shillings.

    3. The bank had made taxable profits during the period 31 December 2001 amounting to Shs 691 million. However, management has offset the taxable profits against tax losses incurred by Uganda Development Bank as it was called then, which in their opinion can be utilised by UDBL. A confirmation that UDBL’s tax losses can be utilised by UDBL has not been received from the tax authorities. The potential unrecorded tax liability for the period ended 31 December 2001 amounts to Shs 207 million. 

We reviewed and considered evidence on how the bank resolved and cleared the taxation, and we recommend that we are satisfied with the evidence and the explanation given and recommend that the query be dropped. 

We now move on to loans and advances. Queries of 2003 and 2004 and these queries are as follows: 
Bassajabalaba Hides and Skins Limited. Included in loans and advances, is a loan facility given to Bassajabalaba Hides and Skins Limited. As at 31 December 2004, the loan balance amounted to Shs 5.611 billion including accrued interest of Shs 371 million. 

This loan was non-performing and therefore the amounts outstanding may not be recoverable from Bassajabalaba Hides and Skins Ltd. However, a loan loss provision of Shs 2.62 billion has been made in the financial statements against Bassajabalaba Hides and Skins Ltd outstanding amount of Shs 5.611 billion. You should note that the full amount is not provided for. 

As at 31 December 2003, the loan balance amounted to Shs 5.546 billion including accrued interest of Shs 306 million. This amount was a non-performing one with a loan loss provision of only Shs 1.048 billion made in the financial statement against Basajjabalaba Hides and Skins Ltd.

The committee was informed that this loan was cleared in a consent judgement and a debt swap between Government of Uganda and Basajjabalaba. However, it has now become public knowledge that the judgement presented by Basajjabalaba that gave his compensation claim against Government is suspected forgery for which proceedings are on-going in the courts of law. The purported settlement could therefore have all been a sham. We recommend that the property of this company and its directors should be attached to ensure that the loan is recovered in full.  

GBK Dairy Products Limited and Golden Crest International Limited

In 2003, the bank had transferred non-performing loans, that is GBK Dairy Products Ltd and Golden Crest International Ltd amounting to Shs 1.884 billion and Shs 97 million respectively, to the Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust (NPART) and reduced the amounts payable to the government by these amounts. The government has not confirmed its agreement to reduce UDBL’s liabilities to it. The bank’s profits may have been overstated by Shs 1.981 billion and the amounts due to the government by the same amounts. 

The committee is concerned that there may have been complacency on the part of Government in handling this loan and other loans. UDBL could have been used as a conduit for funds from Government to preselected companies. The transfer of these loans to NPART amounts to a classification of them as funds completely lost because the performance of NPART in recovery of such funds lacks a good track record.

We recommend that the bank’s management be allowed to run the bank professionally and efficiently if it is to rejuvenate and achieve the objectives for which it was created. The assets of GBK should be attached to recover the funds in question other than declaring them non-performing.

In concluding this report, we would like to observe that over the years covered, UDBL was not ran in accordance with sound prudent business principles and practices. Gross interference by the Bank of Uganda and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development ruined the independence and professional running of the institution. 

Internal restructuring is necessary to rid the bank of non-competent officials. The committee was promised by the ministry that a new board would be constituted and restructuring done. 

In addition, Parliament has received a special report from the Auditor-General on the bank’s management and the committee will be able to report to the House on individuals culpable in the mismanagement of the bank as well as the current status of the bank’s loan portfolio. While the new board was constituted, its success will largely depend on the extent to which the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Bank of Uganda will allow it to operate independently.

Madam Speaker, we have come to the end of this report. I beg to move that this report of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises on the matter of the performance of Uganda Development Bank Limited for 10 years be adopted by this House. I beg to move.  (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I now beg to lay the minutes of the committee and also the original bound copy of the committee report. 

I thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Members, for your attention and I thank my committee Members for this noble job that they have done in bringing this report to this House. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Amuriat and COSASE for this 10-year report on the Uganda Development Bank. Hon. Members, the report has been signed by the necessary number. The bulk of the papers are really just annexures. So I do not know whether you have internalised it sufficiently. It was very interesting; I am sure you were listening. So, can we have contributions? I know you were listening very intently. 

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, whereas we appreciate and thank our colleague for presenting a very good report, we do not have copies to use as a basis of debate on the Floor of the House. I do not know how we can go about this. If we are availed copies, we can actually proceed with it. I propose that we get copies. We do not have copies as we are seated here. So I do not know how we can follow the debate without copies.

MS NAMARA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like also to thank the chairperson of COSASE for this elaborate report and indeed very astonishing report.

Madam Speaker, you ruled that we allow the Chair to present and copies would come in due course. We attentively listened. It is a report that requires every Member to read and understand these issues. I seek your guidance whether Members should not get copies, we read over the weekend as we are going into the weekend and then debate ensues next week.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, if I give you other work for the weekend, I do not know what will happen because you already have an assignment of Beach Side; you have the reports by the chairpersons. Can I surrender my - (Laughter)

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since you had earlier ruled that we listen and take notes, that is actually what I was doing. So I am of the view that we proceed with the debate because we have so many reports which are pending and of course carrying work over the weekend will affect our marital obligations. (Laughter) So I beg that we proceed with the debate. 

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Government takes this report very seriously and we want to debate it seriously to get to the bottom of it. The purpose of this is to make improvement; that is why we as Government want all of us to get copies, read the report and internalise them and come and debate effectively. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think those who are ready can start. 

5.29
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Madam Speaker, since there are a few Members who are ready, I would beg for more time. (Laughter) I listened carefully to the report from the committee on the Uganda Development Bank. When I looked at the mission and purpose of this bank, I was thrilled – 

THE SPEAKER: Let me donate my copy to hon. Kibuule. 

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, thank you for your generosity, but I have been seated nearer to you and have remained without a copy.  (Laughter)

When you listen to this report, with due respect, the purpose of setting up this bank was to support the business, especially the agriculture enterprise and transform the economy – all the purposes for this bank show a good set up. But what has transpired shows that maybe those behind the establishment of this bank had different reasons. 

From what is being presented, you cannot believe having a bank without proper systems, without clear policies; no updated rules and regulations – how can you handle money when you are in such a state! 

So I am wondering, who are these “good Ugandans”, responsible for masquerading under such a very important project? This shows that right from the onset, they got it terribly wrong and that is why everything went the way it did. The design and those involved in it did not mean what they said or put on paper. 

So I think it is a shame right from the design stage for Government, which has technocrats and other valuable people, to have a setup of this nature. 

Madam Speaker, I am sorry, but I want to give a general condemnation. I condemn all those who have been involved in the setup of this bank; they have been terribly negligent. If you look at the amount of money we have lost as a country and the distortion of the principles of banking – the discipline that goes with banking has been terribly violated. We cannot tolerate this kind of behaviour to go on without clear remedial measures and punishments. If we do not punish the culprits who are involved, then we will be setting a very bad precedent. 

So, I feel that Parliament must pronounce itself on this matter; let us bring to book all those who have been involved in setting up these shoddy schemes because there is a racket that I have seen across the board. This racket is very dangerous for this country. We have seen this happen –(Member timed out.)

5.34
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to thank the Minister of Works for acknowledging that Government should look at this report as a serious issue. But I also implore him to know that the mistakes which have been committed are entirely a responsibility of Government. So if they took it as a serious issue, would they have committed such mistakes? 

Now, let me go to the subject matter. When you look at the companies named here, for instance, GBK - go to Mbarara and you will see some of the assets of this company. How can you say that such a company failed to pay its loans? 

I am aware Kumi Hotel which is named here – I already have a copy of the letter which the same bank has written to the owner. The letter states that failure to pay the loan, they would have to recover the money by selling off the hotel. How can you convince me that GBK can walk away freely without paying back the money yet the company from Kumi is being put on notice? 

Let us consider those companies which have failed to pay back their loans; honestly, do you think that these companies can really fail to pay their loan portfolios? I think there is something wrong with Government and specifically with the people who supervise these institutions. 

So, Madam Speaker, I want to thank the committee for identifying some of these challenges, but the recommendations will not help us. I think these recommendations should be followed up to help the country recover its money. For instance, I heard my friend Hon. Mawanda saying that Basajabalaba paid off the loan and he wants to prove evidence. So what if such evidence is produced here that Basajabala’s company of skins and hides paid back the money, who then will bear the losses incurred by this bank? 

I want to conclude by saying that we should pass these recommendations and I request my government to help us implement the recommendations, which have been made by the committee. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.36
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to debate like a Ugandan. First of all, I am not a man who likes taking loans; but some time back, I took one but we really had to sign documents before I could be given the money. My problem is how can a whole bank, run by bankers, give out loans without processing documents? It is like the doctor operating somebody without anaesthesia. 

So, to me, this is suicide of economics, for those who studied banking –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, doctor, for giving way. You just look at the attachments. You will see Muhakanizi directing that, “Pay” because he was the Deputy Secretary to Treasury by then. Now he is the Secretary to Treasury; you find the Minister for Finance, Rukutana directing that “Pay”. So whom do you blame? You should blame those people who were directing. They would get tax-payers’ money and then tell the bank, “You just pay”. 

So the people whom we should hold liable are those who directed for payment. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you very much, hon. Nandala. I want to thank Engeener Amuriat for being a wonderful person and for bringing this report. If this thing of some individuals getting money continues in this country and it goes unchecked, I can tell you, we are going to have a scenario where a Ugandan will grab anybody that is giving this money on Kampala Road and they chop off his ear - this is painful. It is public money that is being given to people and there is no documentation.

There is also a problem of equity. The biggest parts of land that we can develop to produce food that is enough for this country is in the North, from Nwoya up to Adjumani. But how much money was given to northerners - only six percent and all the money remained in Kampala where people are being compensated. I do not want to talk about them because they are my neighbours and some of them are my uncles but we have heard the names.

My problem is the managers of UDBL and this board. This one I am going to direct it to hon. Ajedra; I think you are the one here who is representing the Ministry of Finance. What do you do in the ministry if you can have a board of such people who put on ties and they cannot even do anything? They are like scarecrows; why are you not dissolving this board immediately because you have heard - do not complain that you do not have a report; it is shameful - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before hon. Alaso comes in, I want to confirm that this bank is not “Uganda Development”; it is “selective development” because even when I became a Speaker, I tried to borrow Shs 600 million to complete my hotel in Kamuli but they made me move; they made me write documents - I dealt with consultants paying money. They said, “Yes, we are going to give you.” In the end they said, “Shs 600 million is a lot, why don’t you take Shs 200 million?” I said that if I wanted Shs 200 million, I would have applied for Shs 200 million. They did not give me and I am the Speaker.

5.40
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee of COSASE for this detailed and very informative report. It is very obvious that in 1971, someone had a vision and the vision was that the agricultural sector, fisheries and tourism would raise the country on a path of development and unfortunately to date even with the existence of that bank, these three remain the least financed in the economy.

If I had to summarise the report, it would appear to me that it simply says that there are no systems in place and the bank is being run like a cattle market. You also take your goat and you do not care if it steps on whose chicken provided you sell it.

The only thing I can comment on is the matter of political interference with the way this institution has been run. If you go to page 31, the committee looked at this in detail; how can you run a bank which is not independent? It cannot carry out due diligence on who borrows money; it does not decide on how to follow up the loans; it is being directed. What is killing Uganda is systemic corruption; it is corruption which is run in a racket-like manner from the Ministry of Finance to bank of something, to this other place until you get to the final consumer then they sit down and they divide the proceeds.

I would like to recommend on top of the recommendations put here about investigating the board and the rest of the people who do not do professional work, that the people in the Ministry of Finance who have been interfering with the running and management of the bank be investigated because this is where the leakages occur. I also want to propose that this report forms a working document for an immediate review of the bank’s operation.

Is it possible that in six months’ time, the sessional committee calls back the bank to this Parliament and causes them to present the extent to which they have implemented each of these recommendations? We would like to highlight to the managers of this institution that the procedures there are totally unacceptable and ordinary Ugandans, school proprietors cannot access money.

It is good you gave evidence yourself, Madam Speaker. It is impossible - I have accompanied borrowers to these banks and the frustration is just insurmountable and ordinary people cannot be developed using those procedures. Thank you.

5.43
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the hon. Amuriat and his colleagues for this wonderful report. When you read this report, the first impression is that there is just reckless management of the bank. But on a second thinking, you just see a criminal cartel running a criminal racket and using the bank as a conduit. That is what it is here.

The reason Government took a decision many years ago to get out of business is because they convinced the country that you do not mix politics and business. That is why the famous Uganda Commercial Bank was actually sold. But what is happening, this bank is now being managed politically. If you want a loan, you go to finance or actually State House and then somehow they throw money to the bank and say “lend to Mr Todwong” not the one looking at me - not from Nwoya of course. 

The reason you lend through a bank is because you want this loan portfolio to be managed professionally. But how do you loan through a bank and there is no due diligence and someone sits calling himself a chief executive of a bank with a PhD and that bank has legal officers who went to law school and banking officers? The whole institution just leaves a lot to be desired.

We would like to thank the hon. Amuriat for mentioning these companies, but in law, we talk of a principle called “lifting the veil”. We are looking at, for example, Tri-Star Apparel, Phenix, who owns these companies? Who owns GBK? I think the committee should have gone ahead and lifted the veil and we get the names of these guys who have been literally swindling public resources.

Everybody will realise that all economies that have taken off have development banks. Go to China; if you are involved in construction, there is a bank which lends money to people in the construction business. If you go to agriculture, there is an agricultural bank. Here, we are lumping all businessmen in the development sector into commercial banks. All of them are running to Crane Bank. How can you go to Crane Bank to get a commercial loan to invest in agriculture? You get traders like the ones hon. Kyambadde looks after being involved in trading - export and import. You go to a commercial bank, then you get Mr X who is involved in fisheries - he goes to the same bank borrowing at the same interest. It doesn’t make sense! 

When I hear about this thing of fundamental change of 1986 - is this where it has brought us to? Is this the fundamental change, which this country was promised in January 1986? And if this is a fundamental change we were promised then I regret to say –(Member timed out_)

5.49 
MR JACK WAMANGA WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Madam Speaker, I also want to add my voice to those who have spoken before me, to thank hon. Patrick Amuriat and his committee for a wonderful report. While listening to all this I got so ashamed and embarrassed, and I was telling my colleagues that that is why I don’t sit on that side; it is because of such acts. 

The bank was formed in 1972 to help Ugandans start up some business in agriculture, tourism and hotels. We thought this bank was going to help Ugandans; we thought this bank was going to have professionals to run it. But for Government and Ministry of Finance to interfere in the running of the bank they set up, is to let Ugandans down. 
When people come with briefcases, you think they are investors. They come to get money from here; from Uganda Development Bank -Phenix Ltd got money from Uganda Development Bank; even grants that were given to this country are withheld in the Department of Belgium in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 

There is a country that gave us $5 million as a grant, but this money was diverted. What have Ugandans gained from these foreign companies? You interfere in the running of the bank and the money is given. I was looking at a letter that was written by the lawyers asking Government to offset the loan owed by it to somebody of Shs 5 billion and the bank went ahead to pay. 

Surely, was this bank meant for Ugandans! I know of somebody in Mbale who wanted to borrow money from Uganda Development Bank to buy a combined harvester and was turned down. But look at the people who are getting these loans. Surely you people, aren’t you ashamed of what you have done to Ugandans? This is a terrible shock. 

I want to thank the committee for the recommendations and I want to ask you, for once, to swing into action because this is really a terrible report. It is so embarrassing for the government of the day. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.53
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee of COSASE for a job well done. I am being threatened by the honourable from the lost counties.

PROF. KASIRIVU: Madam Speaker, having listened to this attentively and especially to hon. Katuntu and his assertion of lifting the veil, wouldn’t it be procedurally correct that this report is referred back to the committee so that more information comes out to enable us make good recommendations based on that further information, which would have come out in the committee?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are only four companies - there are issues of management; there are issues of supervision; and there are issues of administration. If we send it back, all these will be lost. But of course the committee can pick up those issues in the ordinary way, we can instruct them to lift the veil in relation to that. But there are so many other areas and we should not lose the opportunity.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the committee has done a good job and they will need more information, which we have. A few minutes ago, I was talking to hon. Jack Wamai about a person who took over Lira Spinning Mill called Gwodong. He is a Chinese and one of those who also got money through UDB but he is not –(Interruption)

MR TODWONG: Madam Speaker, I recognise the heavy hearts in which my colleagues are debating this report. I also know that there could be problems in pronouncing certain names. For the Hansard and the record of Parliament, is it in order for my colleagues across the Table to pronounce names that are almost like my name on the Floor of Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when you mention the other name, you say the Chinese.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: There is a Chinese with the name that nears the name Gwodong. Madam Speaker, why we are raising this, this Chinese man, when he came he was first given $ 1.5 million, then another $1 million. However, what he did was to just carry the money away. He went and opened a sauna in Beijing. None of us has followed him as Lira Spinning Mill goes down. If you went to Lira Spinning Mill, Madam Speaker, you would cry. 

There are many things we want to look at. So, we are not saying that the report is so good; we only want to add more recommendations so that we deal with those individuals. At an appropriate time, upon which I will beg your indulgence - if any of you has borrowed money from a commercial bank, they say your interest rate will be 21 percent per annum. When you borrow Shs 1 million even if you were supposed to pay at the end of the year, you would still pay Shs 1.21 million.
 
But what they do, at every end of month, the interest becomes part of the principal. So at the end of the year you pay almost Shs 3 million when you borrowed only Shs 1 million. So these banks are stealing from us. Our own bank would have been Uganda Development Bank. At an appropriate time some of us are going to court to sue all the banks for cheating the people of Uganda.

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the COSASE Committee for a job well done. However, I want to remind this House of one time when President Amin was in this House after the return of the body of the late Kabaka Mutesa II - he told those people who were around that once upon a time in this House, there sat Ugandans but because they failed to execute their mandate objectively, they dismissed them and that they would only allow them to come back when they have learnt their lesson. 

When you walk the streets of Kampala these days, you will find that Ugandans have turned their anger on this House. They blame us for not being assertive enough to apprehend or to come up with strong resolutions so that we can rid this country of corruption, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker, this bank which is being destroyed today was created through a decree made by Idi Amin. The Government of Idi Amin has always been despised by even the present Government - (Interjections) - this one. They have called Amin and the other presidents swine and whatever. But it is so shameful that in this present day Uganda we even have a report from the Human Rights Watch, which indicates that the corrupt in this country are being protected by the government - all these people who have been mentioned in this report are not strangers; they are the usual names, year in, year out. All reports, which have been brought to this Parliament, will always have the name Basajjabalaba and we all know who Basajjabalaba is. 

We have heard of parties which have been dismissing members but some people need to be apprehended, isolated, even in your own parties. How can you have a chairman of the entrepreneurship - your treasurer, all the time featuring in the reports and then we blame the technocrats? What should they do? It is very clear, from this report, that this bank is just being used as a conduit. Money is sent there and money is fetched with orders from the same people –(Interruptions)

MR SEBUNYA: Thank you, for yielding the Floor. I did not want to interrupt her contributions because I am a Member of the committee. When we are deliberating and doing such a report we cannot really know which party they support. We only look at flaws made in the financial industry - (Interjections) - I am part of the committee, once we get a corrupted system, we put it up as Members and we do not refer to each other in terms of parties. That is the information I wanted to give you. We are Members and we are part of these people who agree with what other Members signed for in the report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please conclude.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was making this statement to appeal to Members that we should forget the issue of defending others because of their political stand at the moment - (Member timed out_)

6.01
MR PHILLIP WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First, let me thank my colleague, hon. Patrick Amuriat and the committee for the wonderful report. Reading this report, if you are a patriot, it makes you sad but these are the normal things we hear about every day in our country. 

Madam Speaker, last week, I was visiting South Korea as an MP, a member of the ICT Committee. That country was bombed down 60 years ago into rubbles. It had nothing and had a president called Park Chung hee. He was a dictator and a soldier. He was the father of the current lady president of that country. He used to give out money to identified patriots to develop companies and firms. But if he gave you money to implement what you had promised and you didn’t, you would end up in jail or underground. 

For the last 20 years, we have been talking about technocrats in Ministry of Finance but it is the President of the Republic of Uganda who gives directives always only that always people who come through him have failed to implement, honour him and do what he asks them to do. We have had a series of them; they are given money, they run away with it. 

The first one is the person who was given money to run Masese Fish Factory. He was from Iceland. He fled with the money. We have a man now who is an ambassador in this country, a Consular called Kananathan. He was given money for this Tristar and he is here. He is in the country now representing Sri Lanka in this country. You cannot arrest him. So, we have a series of these people. 

We have also these homeboys. The homeboys are given money because they are homeboys and they will help the President. Why don’t you help the President, you homeboys who are given this money in these home companies?

Madam Speaker, I would have wanted the chairman to give us figures for these companies - the money which was given initially and the money which is current. For all these companies, which have been enumerated here, there are no figures attached. 

It is also proper that the chairman, because he has the names, unveil the names so that we know exactly who owes us, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

6.04
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to add my voice to thank the chairperson and Members of COSASE for this comprehensive report. 

When Uganda Commercial Bank was being privatised, I was in this House and one of the reasons advanced were that we wanted to introduce a component to support production, that is, farmers, dairy keepers and all these. It is not happening. 

This Parliament has been at the forefront to capitalise Uganda Development Bank, because it had been our inspiration that we could have a bank that would pay attention to production and development of this country. 

Madam Speaker, just a few weeks ago, we heard that the Management of UDB had been interdicted or suspended by the IGG. I felt very happy because as you mentioned, to get money from Uganda Development Bank is as hard as some people say, looking for a horn of a dog. To get it! (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I am also one of those who submitted an application to UDB. This Parliament is the one, which passes resolutions to borrow money to capitalise Uganda Development Bank. You are summoned, you go there, you present; you carry out the evaluation; you carry out the financials analysis and you give them everything. After about eight months, I was invited from a workshop in Munyonyo, “Come to UDB. Come and collect your letter.” I actually opened the letter when I reached Parliament here and it was just regret. (Laughter) 

After a week, there is a company called Savannah Commodities, which alone had been given Shs 25 billion. I wanted Shs400 million, with collateral security and a financial report of my property and I could not be given it? After paying money for business proposals and everything, there is nothing which I got.

There is a very big problem –(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: The information I want to give hon. Hood Katuramu is that, even the third most important person in this country, in the names of the Speaker, applied for a loan of Shs600 million and she was denied. (Laughter)

MR KATURAMU: So, Madam Speaker, since we accepted to liberalise the banking sector, this is the only bank that can lead our inspiration goals into development and therefore we have a duty, as Parliament, to put it to order –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, we have seen a number of investors being helped in this country. But what is UBD doing now? I know it is their entitlement to demand for their money. Kumi Hotel borrowed money from that bank – Shs 350 million – about six or seven years ago. To-date they have paid Shs 617 million but they are still in arrears of about Shs 200 million because of the economic problems. They want to sell Kumi Hotel but the proprietor has asked for three months to clear these arrears but UDB has refused, saying they want to sell the hotel.

MR KATURAMU: Madam Speaker, I think it is important that Parliament seriously re-examines how this bank is being run. This is because it seems there is crisis management in UDB. If you went to examine what happened in the last three or four years, you will see how many members in management have been sacked and new ones brought in –(Member timed out_)

6.10
MS EVELYN KAABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for this good report. The board members who were selected to carry out this work had the qualifications but no will to professionally govern the bank. How can you come up to govern a bank without a framework for performance evaluation of the various levels of management? We have managers who have been there but have nothing to show – they have no value-for-money for what they have been earning. The Ministry of Finance sets up a framework to measure the performance of both the board and management. 

Secondly, they should also get an external body to be able to recover this money. The board members have been earning a retainer yet they are not full-time board members. Can we get a body to recover the money from these board members?

Then the other issue is that, the companies that have been mentioned here have their assets attached; we have been talking about very many companies – we have been talking about Basajjabalaba and I remember we, as PAC, presented a report here. What have we done about Basajjabalaba? Are these untouchables? Can’t we get a body to attach property of these companies? Let this be an outside body because I know Government may not be able to do it.

Then how do you declare a loan as non-performing when the company has assets? I am moving a motion that we set up an external body to recover this money within a specific period of time – like six months – and then we see how we can move on with ensuring that people who take Government money pay it back. Thank you.

6.12
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (IN-CHARGE OF POLITICAL MOBILISATION) (Mr Richard Todwong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The most fundamental thing that NRM Government has done is to make such reports to be discussed in the open. Secondly, the quest to fight against corruption; the redemption of the image of Ugandans is not of Government alone is in our hands. I recognise with a heavy heart, as I said before, with which my colleagues are contributing to this report. 

Madam Speaker, we have all travelled and have seen how countries are developing; everywhere you land, you will see how public sectors are progressing in other countries. But in Uganda, as you land, you see private initiatives; the public sector’s initiative is reducing.

Madam Speaker, I want to add my voice to those that have spoken here that as Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, under your chairmanship, we need to recover monies that have been stolen from Government. Secondly, before I was appointed a minister, I was a member of the COSASE and I was part of the team that went through this report. It is disheartening to see that people seem to be stealing with impunity in the government that I love, and serve – the government that we all admire. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Order, please.

MR TODWONG: Madam Speaker, I read the committee’s report from page 17 to the end; the observations were very accurate but recommendations were weak. I expected the committee to make recommendations that are stronger; we need to shake the monkeys off the mango trees and preserve the tree. (Laughter)

As I conclude, Government is committed and will continue to be committed – and I believe that with the support Parliament is deriving from the people of Uganda and the NRM Government, this report will be acted upon by the government and you will see results. Thank you.

6.15
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have seen this before on the Floor of the House but the spread – what we call the “spread” in financial terms – the lending rate when we go to the bank; the difference between how much we borrow at and how much they give you when you are saving here in Uganda, is the highest in the whole of Africa. When you go to the bank to borrow, it is at 30 percent but if you want to save your money with the bank, they give you seven percent. 

And because of this, the cost of capital is almost the highest on the continent. So the bank like this one would be a ray of hope. But now the cost of capital has led people to mismatch the financing. That is why you get somebody getting an overdraft to finance construction of a building. That is very dangerous and you should not do it – getting an overdraft to finance an agricultural project? You cannot do that. And so a development bank like this would be a ray of hope for our businessmen. 

You cannot develop an economy if you do not develop small enterprises because they are the ones who employ many people. Actually in the United States now, 70 percent of the new jobs are created by the small and medium enterprises. Now, if these cannot access loans from a bank like this one, then we have a problem. 

So, it is important that this report has come and it is important that the government is taking it positively. We hope that these recommendations are adopted and implemented. It is also important to note that actually corruption should not be politicised; a corrupt FDC person is as bad as a corrupt NRM person. (Laughter) Let there be no impression that we sit in a parliamentary caucus – whether FDC or NRM – and say, “Let us go and support this corruption.” There is nothing like that!

Madam Speaker, but who regulates Uganda Development Bank? I do not see any comment about Bank of Uganda. Did you ask what is happening because I know that they are very strict; Bank of Uganda has been very strict on banks?

So, it is important that we support these recommendations and follow them to the latest in order to ensure we protect this bank for it to defend and support the businesses of Ugandans. 

Out of the 23 banks, we actually have few Ugandan banks and you never know where Stanbic Bank invests their profit. They take them away. You never see assets of Standard Chartered Bank; they take them away. It is important that we support a bank of our own especially a long-term bank that can support the businesses of Ugandans. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.19
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In annex 8 of this report, a minister from the Ministry of Finance wrote a letter to the Executive Director of the Uganda Development Bank stopping them from recovering the loan from Basajjabalaba; that they had written to the Bank of Uganda and were in the process of restructuring all the companies for the benefit of all. 

Madam Speaker, I want this House to have a specific recommendation. This time, we must even mention names because the minister has even written his name on the letter and signed. Therefore, we must start with this minister who even stopped the executive director from recovering the loan. The annex is here. 

I want to tell Ugandans especially at higher levels of decision making that the time for privatisation is over. The Americans who started it are going back to state-owned enterprises. Therefore, I want to inform those who are still stuck here trying to work negatively so that by the end of the day they will buy these banks that their time is over. 

From what I read in this report, these people sat down and said, “let us work this way so that when we go to Parliament, we shall tell them ‘we told you Government cannot own enterprises’” –(Interjections)– please, let us take this one off. So, it was intentional, not that anybody professional could mess up issues at this level. They knew what they were doing. They were doing it intentionally because their interest was to buy this bank at the end like they have done to other state enterprises in this country only that time is over. 

Madam Speaker, this report has also showed that Ugandans are capable of managing their own economy.  But I have realised from this report that even the foreign investors that we thought were coming in to support our economy in fact came to invade us by taking even the little we had. All the companies mentioned here were using our taxes in whatever they were doing. They didn’t even come with their own money. Therefore, what we need to do is to support our own local investors here other than claiming – I even want to say that let us investigate these companies that we call of foreign investors. They might be our own here –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you have half a minute to conclude.

MS OLERU: Madam Speaker, I recommend that we investigate those companies that we call of foreign investors. I believe that these companies might be owned by our own people here. We are not getting any money from the foreigners who go with all our money and leave our people poor. I assume there are our own people here who have used these people to protect their interests. If we do a proper investigation, we might find that the shareholders of these companies are Ugandans and we shall even hold them tougher than we would do for the foreigners. 

6.24
MS LINDAH TIMBIGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. The impact of this bank and its operations seems to be so intense in that I am requesting the committee to include, in the recommendations, something on the protection of borrowers and their property. Because I have seen that the intention of this bank, however much it is making losses somewhere, is to make the Ugandans crippled. 

I am also requesting that Bank of Uganda writes a report informing the Parliament of Uganda, through the committee and your Office, Madam Speaker, about the operations of this bank because it is the one that authorises the operations of all financial institutions in the country. 

Madam Speaker, I am also tasking the office of the IGG to take keen interest in this matter. It should also be involved in the implementation of the recommendations of the committee because as citizens of this country, we need protection. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, let us hear from the Leader of the Opposition. Five minutes. 

6.27
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, I want to concentrate on the letters. I will seek your indulgence. First, the big losers of this money are the people of Uganda – the taxpayers because much of the money came from the taxpayers - the Consolidated Fund to UDB. As the Member said, there was a channel to steal money and I want to agree with Members that we must deal with those who channelled the money. 

I will start with the letter written by Mwesigwa Rukutana on 23 April 2003. He says, and this is about Basajjabalaba and Hides and Skins “Stop recovery…” I am sure you have seen that letter. “I am advising you to stop recovery…” that they are waiting for Bank of Uganda which is supposed to be the administrator. 

Madam Speaker, the next letter I want to refer to is the letter written again by Rukutana – these letters are many – giving a loan to Jinda International Textiles Corporation of US$1.5 million. It is dated 11 September 2002. He says, “I am writing to confirm that we are already processing funds equivalent to US$1.5 million to your bank. These funds are to enable you lend the above company under the terms as specified in the letter dated 30 August 2002. Please ensure that the loan is well secured and the machinery are consigned to UDB Account Jidah International Textile Corporation. I am therefore requesting you to make the necessary arrangements to have the machinery goods transported immediately.” He is telling UDB that the money has already been approved for the other company and it is the machinery that will be taken to that company. 

Madam speaker, you would see for yourself that the bank hands are completely tied; they are just hostages. When you go to the back of that same letter again he is saying that “give this company” - that is on 3 October 2002 – “Shs 2.7 billion that was secured early this week.” And they are now adding them more Shs 2.7 Billion! But that is Rukutana as usual. 

Now let us go to Dr Muhakanizi; he gave everybody he wanted. He gave Kashwada Phoenix $ 1.5 million on 18 March 2010; he is directing UDB not to collect money from Bassajabalaba because he is going to handle the process by compensation. On 8 Feb 2002 he is giving a directive to the Managing Director of UDB to give $ 1.5 Million to phenix to enable them manufacture and export textiles under AGOA. Whoever does not know phenix; it is former UGIL and do you know the board members? That is Wavamuno and Kashwada. And for you who are not aware of the information, when they overthrew Obote in 1985, he had just been given money to go and import equipment for UGIL. When they overthrew Obote, he remained in Japan. The whole $4 million remained with Kashwada in his pocket. When NRM Government came to power, it rehabilitated the factory.

MR TODWONG: When His Excellency President Obote was overthrown in 1985, he was not in Japan but Singapore.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: We are talking about Kashwada.
 
MR RUHUNDA: In Toro, we have Kaswara. I don’t know whether you mean Kaswara from Toro or Bunyoro. Can you be clear on the person? We need to know who that Kashwada is.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, this one is called Kashwada; he is Japanese - unless there are some Japanese in Toro. What I was trying to say is that when NRM came to power, it rehabilitated UGIL then during the privatisation process when they had invested a lot of money, Kashwada again came back to buy UGIL. He tendered for half a million dollars when we had invested over $10 million; and of that half a million dollar, he only deposited a hundred thousand. He has never paid the balance of four hundred thousand up to today.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I want to inform hon. Nandala that there must be a relationship between Kashwada and Mr Muhakanizi because here there is a letter which he wrote on 8 Feb 2002 and he was writing it to Dr A. K Apiya, he said, “You will recall sometime back I told you”- which means their things are very personal-“that government has decided to provide USD 5.9 to M/S phoenix to enable it to manufacture and export garments and textiles under AGOA”. I have learnt from Mr Kashwada of Phenix that they needed $1 million immediately and $ 0.5 million later. I am now requesting you to apply for funds equivalent to that money. I will be grateful you could act quickly.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, what we are trying to derive from this is that you can imagine somebody - this is UDB - there is a Ministry of Finance, which is managing the Treasury; it uses the bank to get money from the Consolidated Fund without you appropriating it in Parliament and gave it to some individuals. You can see $ 1.5 million and I want to thank doctor - this is more or less a personal letter and he was directing. I am reliably informed Muhakanizi now is the Secretary to Treasury. This time he might carry the whole Treasury to these very people.
 
There are more letters that you can read for yourself but of interest is the capitalisation of UDBL. This is a later dated Friday, 28 September 2009. It talks about capitalisation. But Government was saying UDB was supposed to be capitalised for Shs 100 billion. 

They were asking Government to give them money but they were not capitalised. Now what they did they were giving money to people like Kashwada and Jinda and telling them the money they have directed to them be used to re-capitalise the bank. Now without capitalisation, the bank could not run. I am not saying they did bad to refuse to give you money, but this clearly shows that the bank may be undercapitalised.
 
Now it has to wait for Treasury to give it money so that they can lend you. So I think you made a mistake. You should have gone through Finance for them to pass on the money to UDB but you were lucky your letter was entertained. But imagine the Leader of the Opposition applying for a loan, what will happen to that letter? They will just throw it away without even looking at it.
 
This is what the bank is saying in the first paragraph but that one is bolded. They say, the loans given out from these funds are not assets of the bank. That means when the bank gives that money out, it is not treated as an extra asset. If it is not the asset we have no authority or energy to go and look for it. And the people who should have looked for it are the Secretary to the Treasury, who had directed and the minister, hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana who had done it. 

Given the fact that now money is lost and these people who directed are available, it’s important we take sanctions to deal with criminals. When they were giving $ 1.5 million, I am sure they were picking part of it. When I was Chairman of PAC, my sister Kabakumba said I was a torture chamber - when the owner of Bwebajja died. The man said he had asked for a bigger amount of money but he was given less. He doesn’t know where the balance had gone. Because of pressure he had to die. Those who had low pressure like Kashwada are still walking around. Mr Gwadong from China is busy swelling up while the other man who was under tension died. 

So, I want to plead with Members that all those who signed and made public money get lost should be held personally. That is the recommendation I want to move that people like Keith Muhakanizi should be held personally liable for the loss and be charged in courts of law for stealing public money using such methods - people like Rukutana. 

Madam Speaker, the Bank of Uganda is a very dangerous institution. It closes other banks for mismanagement, but leaves others. This UDB was never closed because Bank of Uganda was using it for its own interests. It says, “We are transferring money -” there is a bank statement there – this is money from the export finance facility from Bank of Uganda to UDB. That shows that even Bank of Uganda transferred money to UDB, which we call export finance facility and that money went missing and they were never bothered. If the Bank of Uganda can transfer its money - by the way, I want Members to know that the export finance facility was money we borrowed purposely to lend to upcoming businesses, and it was being managed under Bank of Uganda. At some point, they had to transfer that money to UDB, but they never followed it up. 

Under normal circumstances, if this was a non-performing asset, they should have closed the bank and management should have been held liable. So, even people in Bank of Uganda who transferred our money and it got lost should also be held liable for the loss they caused. 

Before I conclude, I want to plead that we pass this report with additions and I request the committee to add the exact values for the money lost. For example, there is $1.5 million and 2.7 billion; but it could be more. We want it to be categorised and then we tie it to individual who signed it out so that they can be arrested. All these companies have assets and they are around; even the people who are mentioned here, like Rukutana, he was promoted, now he is a Minister for Children and Women, while Keith Muhakanizi is now the Secretary to Treasury. We better stop him now, otherwise he can easily carry away the whole treasury and we will be in danger. 

Now, the committee says taxes were settled with losses brought forward. Again I request colleagues from that committee to go and tabulate to show us how losses and profits were made so that we can avoid loss of information. 

In conclusion, I want to thank the committee for the good report and I thank Parliament for accepting this report at short notice. But the recommendations need to be further tightened. Thank you. 

6.42
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the chairman and his committee, for the job well done. I also want to appreciate the colleagues who have contributed. I would like to say that the purpose of such a report is to find out what was unknown. Now that we know, it will not remain unknown –(Laughter)

Therefore, we must act on what we know –(Interjections)– yes, because now we know. If we do not act on it, then we become also accomplices because we would have known and not taken action. Action is required because there is proof in the documents mentioned here. So there is reason to go back and act – of course legally. You don’t just go and hung somebody because their name is mentioned here. But there is legal machinery which will be employed to take this further. Let people who are believed to have committed crime answer. 

Now, there are people whose names are not mentioned in this report, but have gone on the record of the Hansard as accused - but those people who are accused will have no chance to come and defend themselves here because they are not Members of Parliament. I think such statements, once made, must be substantiated or the document must be laid on the Table for further investigation.

A case in point is the $ 4 million related to Kashwada –(Interjections)– you may not be interested in it, but I am interested in that. That $ 4 million was not mentioned in the report here; it is an allegation brought from outside the report – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to give information to the Prime Minister. What we are trying to bring in is the character of the persons we are dealing with. I know you are a former minister of finance. If you check your records, you will see much of this information I am talking about. You know Kashwada very well and so does your Government. 

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, if the Prime Minister cared to read the report, he would see that it is all contained either in its body or in the annexures; the annexures are part and parcel of the report. I advise the Leader of Government Business, Gen. Ali to thoroughly look at the report and internalise it and then give us information based on what he found in the report. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I am not accusing anybody or denying anything. I am simply saying, if somebody is not mentioned in a report and their name is brought into the report, and that person had no chance to come and defend themselves here, then such allegations should be substantiated. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, Kashwada is Phenix?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Yes, I know he is of Phenix, but on the $4 million – by the way, this is the statement that Obote’s Government gave Kashwada $4 million and he went away with it to Japan. When Obote was overthrown, he came back and he kept quiet. He pocketed the $4 million – (Interjections) – if the report says so, I have no problem, because the report will be sent to the investigating machinery and Kashwada will be called. Madam Speaker, I am on a legal point; I am not on hearsay. I am saying, if Kashwada is mentioned here, I have no problem with that. And not only Kashwada, if anybody is mentioned here, then let them come here and explain themselves. Let him come and explain what happened to the $4 million given to him by Obote Government, because Obote Government was a Government in Uganda and Amini’s Government was Government in Uganda; anybody’s government in this country is a Government in Uganda. So all this money must be accounted for – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Point of order, hon. Ogwal.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I feel very uncomfortable to put the Leader of Government Business to order. Whereas we have carried a bi-partisan debate on this matter, he is diverting us by bringing in the money that the late Dr Obote’s Government gave to Kaswadda. You cannot, as Leader of Government Business, make reference to a government that has given money to a company and it did not pay. He took away that money and came back and never paid, and I am speaking as the former chairperson.
 
At that time, I was referred to as “Chairman” of Uganda Development Bank; the first woman Chairman of Uganda Development Bank –(Applause)– I want to say that actually when I took over, you had just been Minister for Finance, because I took over after the overthrow of Idi Amin. You had just been Minister for Finance and I had to put into place professional systems. I called in Price Water House, a firm of auditors to first audit the bank, put the system right professionally before we could proceed with the operations of the bank. 

I am surprised and I am shocked, that is why I could not even make my contribution, that the two female ministers for finance have had roots in Uganda Development Bank: Syda Bbumba served in the Department of Accounts and Maria Kiwanuka’s husband was the Corporation Secretary in the bank, and then later became the Chairman of Uganda Development Bank. Both ladies have had roots in the Ministry of Finance but this has not come out in the report. It is important for us to know who has been driving what.

Secondly, as the Leader of Government Business, he needs to us about the role of the Ministry of Finance in supervising Uganda Development Bank. What is its role? You need to tell us that before you even look for the members of the board to explain where the money went. Find out from the Ministry of Finance who gave the authority. I left that bank with very clear management manuals, financial regulations and all the systems that any international finance institution will respect. It was the most well run bank in the country at the time; I was politically given a letter of exit in 1986. (Laughter)

Is it in order, therefore, to continue misleading the House that Milton Obote’s Government gave Phenix – Kashwada money for running the company? I want to give you information. Phenix was UGIL (Uganda Garment Industries Limited) and you have no record anywhere in the banking system where Milton Obote’s Government gave money to Kashwada and if you do, come back to this House and give us the evidence because you were the Minister for Finance and I took over the leadership of that bank after you left. 

So, is it in order, Madam Speaker, for this man, who is the Leader of Government Business, to mislead this Government and the House and country about facts that are hurting all of us? We have never stopped crying for UCB; we have never stopped crying for Cooperative Bank; and now you are even making us cry more by seeing Uganda Development Bank ‘die’ under your hands. When I was chairman of the bank and I run it very professionally and well, is he in order – (Laughter) - to continue misleading this House by giving wrong information based on wrong premises? Is he in order, Madam Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have benefitted from the institutional memory. We now have very good information to know what to do. Let us close.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI:  I want to thank the former Chairman of UDB for giving us the information that we did not know – now we know and we shall thank her for that information. (Laughter)

But I also wanted to say that actually we are saying the same thing from different backgrounds. So, I have no problem with all the statement my sister-in-law has said. However, one thing that I want to correct is that I did not say anything about the Obote Government as I was quoting what I heard from the House here. The Leader of the Opposition said $4 million was given to –(Interjection)– which government? Obote had two governments. However, he is the one who said it. So I was trying to actually defend the Obote Government –(Laughter)– if you followed me carefully. I am not condemning the Obote Government but defending by asking the Leader of the Opposition to bring proof. It does not matter when the money was given. That is all I said. I did not personally call it the Obote Government. I was quoting – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would always be happy if a Member like a Leader of Government Business can say exactly what I said. Maybe for emphasis before I put procedure, I said that UGIL under Kashwada was given money by the Obote Government to go and bring equipment – (Interjections) - let me explain. In the process, the Obote Government was overthrown. This gentleman never returned but remained there with money and only came back during the NRM Government, which never demanded for the equipment he had gone to purchase.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude, Prime Minister. Do not fall.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: The former chairperson has had enough. (Laughter) We are actually thanking the same – I wanted the Leader of Government Business to help –(Laughter)– no, the Leader of the Opposition – God forbid, that was a slip of a tongue. 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members.        

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Slip of a tongue is normal. So, God forbid. However – (Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Order, members.

GEN, (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I am asking the Leader of the Opposition to help us by giving us proof. It is good Kashwada is here; he is not dead. So prove to us so that we can call Kashwada and he explains. It does not matter which Government gave money to Kashwada. This is my appeal and after we ask this –(Interjections) – no, leave me to say what I want to say. We speak differently because we have different mind sets. 

I should be allowed to say that this document should go for further investigation. But also we need more documents and proof from people like the Leader of the Opposition to enable the Government to investigate it further –(Interjection)– yes, you can tell us where to get it and if the chairperson of the committee says “there it is in the annexes” that will be good to refer to it. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this time.

THE SPEAKER: But I do not think that we should ask the Leader of the Opposition to do the proof. The allegations have been made and the machinery of Government should swing into action. The Government should check with Bank of Uganda, the Ministry of Finance – it is the responsibility for the Government, as machinery.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I have no problem, Madam Speaker. What I am saying is: What really we can do with some of these allegations? If everything is mentioned here, then we shall follow it up. That is why I said that this document should be taken for further investigation and if everything is included here, then there is no problem –(Interruptions)

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, thank you. There is a route that our resolutions follow, especially those from accountability committees and I am sure that the Rt Hon. Leader of Government Business knows this. We know that from here, there is going to be a Treasury Memorandum produced arising from our resolutions and then that Treasury Memorandum will be audited to see whether the government that hon. Gen. Ali represents in this House has adhered to the recommendations of Parliament. 

I stood up to ask whether it is procedurally right for the hon. Prime Minister to come here and express ignorance, and at the same time divert the attention of the House from a report. We have a report with recommendations; I know there have been amendments of our recommendations, and there are proposals for new recommendations to be adopted by this House. I propose that we adhere to the contents of this report and if there is necessity to adopt further recommendations, this should be done.

But while I am on the Floor, Madam Speaker, may I just say one or two things. There is a proposal that we categorise money that has been lost and tie this money to individuals. The committee would undertake to do this. There was also a question as to who regulates the Uganda Development Bank. We know that the Bank of Uganda does, as it regulates all commercial banks activities in this country. 

There was a proposal also for the committee to find details of the shareholders of the companies mentioned and their directors. We also undertake to bring to this House next week this information. We will also tabulate information on taxes to show that tax money was paid and therefore justifying our recommendation for the query to be dropped. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, I put the question that this House adopts the report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you will answer on the Treasury Memorandum. Is it six months?
 
MRS OGWAL: Six months is far. Let it be within one month.

THE SPEAKER: You know, you have not been bringing Treasury Memorandums on our recommendations, all of you. So, you abide by the law and bring us a memorandum in three months. Thank you very much. 

Do we have the reports for URA? 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT ON THE FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF UGANDA REVENUE AUTHORITY FOR THE PERIOD 2001/2010

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I wish to seek your indulgence. The report on the Uganda Revenue Authority is quite big. It will probably take us up to 8.00 O’clock to present it but we have a smaller report that is on a petition over the Nsambya Uganda Railways piece of land. It is not as big as the URA report.

So, I would like to propose that you allow our committee to present this report even if it is not going to be debated today so that we start on a new page on Tuesday, when it will be possible for us to debate. If possible, we can present it. It would take about 40 minutes to do so and may be 30 minutes for colleagues.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, apparently we do not have sufficient copies. I know the other time Members listened very intently but I don’t want to overtask them to just continue using their brains alone. We shall finish them on Tuesday. So, Clerk, make sure the copies are done so that we can finish this business. House is adjourned to Tuesday next week at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much.

Oh, sorry; tomorrow, we have a special sitting for the late Bikwasizehi and of course before that we have the commissioning of the park. But it is true that the other House is adjourned to Tuesday but tomorrow we have a special one for hon. Bikwasizehi. The body will arrive at midday while the House will sit at 2.00p.m. Thank you very much, but first, we will open the park at 10.00 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 7.03 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 12 November 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 
