


Tuesday, 13 November 2018

Parliament met at 3.28 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I apologise profusely for the late start; I was invited for a meeting on some weighty state issues out of Kampala and that is why I delayed. I hope we shall be able to make up for lost time.

First, I would like to inform the Members who came in through by-elections and Members representing the new districts that we are going to arrange a three-day induction seminar. I expect all those who came after August 2016 and all those who missed the general induction in July 2016 to attend.

The seminar will take place at Mestil Hotel, Nsambya. It is what used to be a police barracks. The seminar is non-residential from 19 to 21 November 2018. It is really important that you attend so that you get a bit of what your colleagues got.

We have, in the public gallery, members of the Ad Hoc Committee of Money and Bills and related matters from the Gauteng Province Legislature, South Africa. Please stand up. They are led by Mr Radebe. They are here to benchmark and share experiences with our committees of Parliament. They include:

    1. Hon. Mbongeni Radebe (Member) 
    2. Hon. Mokgethi (Member) 
    3. Hon. Gak Gersbach (Member)
    4. Hon. Randall (Member)
    5. Ms Lerato Chiloane (Research Officer)

We also have, in the public gallery, teachers and pupils of Happy Times Senior Secondary School, Wakiso. They are represented by hon. Ssempala Kigozi and hon. Nansubuga Seninde. They have come to observe the proceedings. 

We also have, in the public gallery, pupils and teachers of Abasada Christian Nursery and Primary School from Kumi. They are represented by hon. Charles Ilukor and hon. Monicah Amoding. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have a delegation of Speakers and Deputy Speakers from Kabale District represented by hon. Bahati and hon. Catherine Ndamira. (Applause)

We also have a delegation from Luwero represented by hon. Muyingo and hon. Nakate. I think they are under training. They are from Bamunanika County. They are here undergoing training on their work as councillors. 

Honourable members, as I welcome you to this sitting, I really would like to express unhappiness and to condole with the families of the children who perished in the fire at St Bernard SS, Mannya in Rakai District. We offer our condolences to their school mates, friends, staff and their families. 

I hope that the Government will really hasten efforts to find the perpetrators and bring them to book. Please, let us observe a minute of silence in their honour.

(The Members observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we are very popular this week. We have, in the public gallery, youth leaders from Kitgum District. They are represented by hon. Oscar Omony and hon. Margaret Lamwaka. They are welcome.

Last week, I attended the meeting of the Executive Committee of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. I am happy to report that CPA has confirmed our hosting of the 64th Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference in September 2019. We have an organising committee and the Secretary General of the CPA will be coming to Uganda to assess our readiness. I would like to ask the committee to polish up their assignments so that by January, they have a good report for the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association’s Secretary General.

Honourable members, while we were on recess, two individuals who had rendered services to this country died namely; hon. Sarah Nyendwoha Ntiro, the first woman graduate in East and Central Africa and the former Attorney General and Member of Parliament, hon. Peter Nyombi. 

I wish to clarify that the people who are entitled, as of right, to lie in state here are the sitting members of Parliament. For any other high level serving senior leaders, like the President, it is automatic.

For some time now, Parliament has been grappling with situations we have not budgeted for. We budget for members of Parliament. However, where we have not budgeted, people are brought here, the communities are abandoned here and the Clerk must find money to feed them and take them back to their homes. It is a bit of a problem. 

During the last Parliament, I wrote to the Prime Minister and asked him to tell us, in addition to the sitting Members and the leaders of the country, who else is eligible to come here so that we can prepare. There has been selective laying here; those who do not have a strong lobby in the Cabinet are not brought here.

Therefore, I again demand from the Government to give me the criteria for those who are not in the House who should come here so that we know and inform the Members. If the Government wishes to bring their motions for tribute, do bring them because now we are in session. That is why I refused to call the House from recess.

I also would like to talk about an event that happened last week in the Church of Uganda in Busoga. For over 10 years, we have been advocating for the recognition of Bishop Hannington who died 133 years ago. Finally, on 29 October 2018, the President declared that, that day will be a public holiday so that we can go for the pilgrimage like we do to Mucwini or to Namugongo. He was the first martyr of 1885 and he died with 67 other people but all this time, they had not been recognised.

I would like to thank the President for the announcement and I hope the Minister of Public Service will move to gazette the day so that next year, the people of Uganda can go and pay homage to those 68 people. 

I would also like to thank the members of Parliament who came - the Leader of the Opposition was there in person and over 30 members of Parliament. Thank you so much for coming. 

Honourable members, in relation to our work, we are behind schedule. We had planned that the First Meeting would deal with legislation and the Second Meeting with reports of the accountability committees and other reports. However, we are overflowing from the First Meeting into the second while still on legislation. 

I would, therefore, like to appeal to those committees where Bills are pending that we would like to finish them between now and Christmas so that when we go to the Third Meeting, we concentrate on the Budget issues. 

In that regard, we shall not be able to handle matters of national interest today. They will come in tomorrow because we have started late and do forgive me for that. Nevertheless, we shall probably need to sit longer hours so that we can complete our work.

Finally, last week, I was invited for the Adventists Business Conference at the Uganda Manufacturers Association. They are still complaining that their children are forced to do exams on their Sabbath and they have asked the Government to respond to their query but it has not done so. 

Therefore, I would like the Minister of Education and Sports to tell us what to do because they feel that they are being discriminated against and forced to work against their faith. I hope the minister will be able to tell us what to do about that. Let the Government tell us so that we tell them the answer. I am just a messenger and I am delivering what they sent me. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

ON THE FIRE OUTBREAK AT ST BERNARD SECONDARY SCHOOL, MANNYA, RAKAI DISTRICT

3.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Muyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Ministry of Education and Sports would like to inform the general public that there was a fire outbreak that gutted the senior three boys' dormitory at St Bernard's Secondary School, Mannya on l2 November 2018 at around 11.30 p.m. A number of fatalities have been reported.

The Ministry of Education and Sports, the Uganda Police Force, security agencies and the local community have been working together to contain the distressing situation and reassure parents and the community.

The First Lady and Minister of Education and Sports, hon. Janet Kataha Museveni, together with the technical team from the ministry visited the school and held a meeting with the parents and the local community to console them and convey Government's sympathy to the bereaved families. The Ministry of Education and Sports condemns such barbaric acts that put the lives of our children in danger. 

Madam Speaker, preliminary reports indicate that the suspected cause of the fire was arson, as per the details of the case reported to Mannya Police Post under SD REF 03/41/11/2018. Investigations into this tragedy have commenced.

The number of students, who died, was confirmed to be nine by yesterday, while 40 students escaped with injuries of varying degrees and are hospitalised in various health facilities, as outlined in this statement.

The deceased S.3 students, whose remains were taken to Masaka Regional Referral Hospital for post mortem and DNA tests are:

    1. Geofrey Lutaaya 
    2. Remegious Tamale
    3. Charles Suuna
    4. Antonio Ssekitende
    5. Sam Nsubuga
    6. Emmanuel Kasozi
    7. Timothy Bukenya
    8. Sharif Dodiye
    9. Moris Basiita

Of the 40 injured students, 25 were rushed to Mannya Health Centre. Kalisizo Health Centre has eight and those in Kitovu Health Centre are seven. They include: 

    a)  Mannya Health Centre

    1. Boaz Akaninjura
    2. Richard Mogonza
    3. Joel Katuka
    4. Davis Kizza
    5. Isaac Niwabire
    6. Benson Agaba
    7. Julius Kanwagi
    8. Rashid Haruna
    9. Chrisystom Kiweewa
    10. Reagan Luboobi
    11. Kennedy Mweruka
    12. Kevin Mugonzi
    13. Mike Nsaasa
    14. Mathias Kato
    15. Frank Ayebale
    16. Charles Walugembe
    17. Eddy Nduya
    18. John Sserukeera
    19. John Kigongo
    20. Juma Kaweesi
    21.  Godfrey Sensarile
    22. Peter Kayiwa
    23. Moses Tumwine
    24. Derrick Muyombya
    25. John Bosco Ssekyanzi 

    b) Kitovu Health Centre

    1. Rashid Bbosa
    2. Geofrey Alinaitwe
    3. Bryan Sendyoowa
    4. Jerome Atlas
    5. Frank Kamanda
    6. Henry Sserukeera
    7. Billgates Nuwagaba

c) Kalisizo Health Centre

    1. Davis Kizza
    2. Charles Walugembe
    3. Rashid Haruna
    4. Chrisystom Kiweewa
    5. Boscho Ssekyanzi
    6. Julius Kanwagi
    7. Derrick Muyombya
    8. Ronald Sserukeera

Police cordoned off the crime scene immediately after getting information of the fire disaster and so far eight people suspected to be the arsonists have been arrested.

The Government of Uganda joins the rest of Ugandans to mourn this great loss. We have made some financial contributions to the bereaved families to assist them with burial expenses and to each of the families of the injured students towards medical expenses. Government will continue to monitor the progress of the admitted students.

Madam Speaker, all heads of education institutions, school management committees and boards of governors are further reminded to strictly observe and adhere to the security guidelines issued by the Inspector General of Police for ensuring safety and security of lives of students in education institutions. 

In particular, measures should be taken to enhance their preparedness and capacity to respond to fire emergencies, including provision of fire extinguishers and firefighting skills for all members of the school community, including the students.

Government assures the public that they will do everything possible within their means, to bring the perpetrators of this heinous act to book. The Government will work with the Rakai District Local Government, after the investigations have been completed, to reconstruct the damaged structures.

May the souls of the deceased rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as far as I am concerned, this is for information purposes because investigations are going on. It will be difficult to control what we say and how far we go in this matter; so, let us wait for an update from the minister later. I am sorry but it is difficult to discuss this matter now. 

Honourable members, if we start discussing this matter, I do not know where we will stop. Let us go to the next item. Okay, I will only allow the Leader of the Opposition to give a condolence message.

3.48
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. We all mourn with the families that have lost their children. We take our children to school and come back with corpses, which are unrecognisable. 

It is not easy but this is not the first time; you can count the times. After two weeks, this will also be history and it will be business as usual. I think we will not go into details but what we know is that we have been receiving statistics here but we have not received investigation reports. At least these investigation reports should be made                public and for us to see the way forward and to completely eradicate fire outbreaks, especially in schools.

The Minister of Education and Sports is tempting us to go a little further and say, without the investigation reports of the past fire outbreaks, she has no business in this House. She has to resign or be forced to resign. Why do we have to investigate if the reports are never made public? The investigation reports must come. How many fire outbreaks have occurred from 2008 to date? You can say anything but maybe you are not part of that family that has experienced this. 

I am a teacher and how come there were no fire outbreaks in schools previously? Madam Speaker, before I sit, I would like to say –(Interruption)

MS SARAH BABIRYE: Madam Speaker, as a youth representative, most of the people that died are fellow youth and as a mother, I know how it feels. Is it in order for a lady and a leader for that matter, to politicise an issue that is really painful to almost every Ugandan to say that we should censure politicians, as if it is the First Lady that burnt down the schools? Is she in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, I allowed you to give condolences. Let us invite the Minister of Health. 

3.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (Primary HealthCare) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Madam Speaker, I rise to make a statement on the Ebola outbreak in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and how the Government of Uganda is prepared.

As of today, 13 November 2018, there have been no confirmed cases of the Ebola viral disease in Uganda. The Ministry of Health remains on highest alert and together with partners, efforts have been put in place to not only screen but also manage any identified suspect cases in specially established Ebola treatment centres.

The ministry completed an assessment of all the national border districts with DR Congo and prioritised them into high risk, moderate risk and low risk districts. This is in addition to Kampala and Wakiso districts, including Entebbe International Airport.

The DR Congo Ebola viral disease statistics as of 11 November 20l8; since the Ebola outbreak, the DRC’s Ministry of Health has so far registered 329 cumulative cases and out of those, 294 cases were confirmed and a total of 205 deaths had occurred, translating into a case fatality of 62.3 per cent. The two affected provinces in DRC are in North Kivu and Ituri.


Madam Speaker, Health and front line workers in those affected provinces have been vaccinated and the security concerns remain the biggest challenge because of the conflict. Therefore, it is limiting tracing of the contact person.

How prepared are we and what is our response to this outbreak as a country?

There are no confirmed cases of Ebola viral disease in Uganda. However, in terms of risk assessment of the current risk for Ebola viral disease that spread from DRC to Uganda, on 28 September 20l8, the World Health Organisation revised its risk assessment for the outbreak, elevating the risk at regional level, including Uganda. 

For that matter, 28 border districts in Uganda have been categorised from very high risk to medium risk of Ebola viral disease across borders that spread due to the worsening insecurity situation in DRC and considerable cross-border population movements from daily commuters. It has been estimated that more than 5,000 to about 20,000 people on market days, including traders and refugees from Ituri and North Kivu, arrive via formal and informal crossing points.
 
We have three categories:

    1. High risk; these are districts that have been linked to this high risk category with affected health zones in Ituri and North Kivu provinces and refugee hosting close to affected areas include Ntoroko, Kasese, Kabale, Bundibugyo, Bunyangabu, Kanungu, Kisoro, Rukungiri, Rubirizi, Kikuube, Hoima, Kampala and Wakiso.

    2. Moderate risk; these are districts with direct links with DRC but not with Ituri and North Kivu provinces. These are refugee hosting districts and include Arua, Maracha, Nebbi, Zombo, Yumbe, Moyo, Adjumani, Koboko, Lamwo, Kabale, Kamwenge, Kyegegwa, Kyenjojo, Isingiro, Buliisa, Kagadi, Pakwach, Kampala and Wakiso. 

    3. Low risk districts; these are the rest of the districts in the country.

Preparedness strategy for our country 

The preparedness strategy was recommended by the national task force for managing disease outbreaks in our country with the main objective of enhancing Uganda’s capacity to prevent, detect early and effectively respond to the Ebola viral disease that might spread from DRC to Uganda. 

We have made a draft national Ebola Viral Disease Contingency Plan that has been developed and is pending approval. The following strategies have been proposed for the achievement of this objective: 
The Ministry of Health and partners, since the declaration of the EVD outbreak in DRC in August 20l8, have implemented the preparedness strategy.

What has been done by the country so far?

The national taskforce has ensured coordination and mobilisation of resources for effective Ebola viral disease preparedness and response. The chairperson of this taskforce is the Director General Health Services at the Ministry of Health at national level while at the district level; the taskforce is chaired by the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs). 

There has been screening of all people crossing into Uganda at official designated border points in the high risk districts. Active case search continues in the community and health facilities in all the high risk districts by the Uganda Red Cross volunteers and the Village Health Teams. 

Suspected cases of Ebola continue to be picked, isolated, treated and blood samples picked for testing by the Uganda Virus Research Institute. 

Ebola Treatment Centres have been established at Bwera, Bundibugyo, Fort Portal and Ntoroko Hospitals, just in case we get cases requiring admission. 

Infection, Prevention and Control (IPC) measures training has been conducted in all the five Districts of Kabaraole, Bunyangabo, Kasese, Bundibugyo and Ntoroko.

Case Management and Surveillance trainings have been conducted in the seven districts of Kabarole, Bunyangabo, Kasese, Bundibugyo, Ntoroko, Wakiso and Kampala.

Risk communication and community engagement is ongoing nationwide. This is to ensure that communities are sensitised and can timely report any suspected Ebola cases. Currently, there is on-going compassionate use of the recommended Ebola viral disease vaccines for healthcare and frontline workers. Vaccination is ongoing in those high risk districts.

The national task force has mobilised all logistical support for EVD preparedness and response. Two walk-through temperature scanners have been installed at Entebbe International Airport both in the general and VIP arrival lounges. One scanner is going to be installed at Bwera in Kasese and another at Kisunga border post in Bundibugyo within two weeks. Another scanner will be installed in Busia in due course. 

The Ministry of Health hosted the Independent Oversight and Advisory Committee (IOAC) for the WHO Health Emergencies Programme on 15 to 19 October 20I8 with the objective of reviewing the Uganda Ebola viral disease preparedness. They visited four of the 12 high-risk districts namely; Kasese, Bundibugyo, Ntoroko and Kabarole where they made the following recommendations to strengthen EVD preparedness: 

The committee was satisfied with the country's level of preparedness. However, they advised the ministry to intensify community surveillance because of people who might use non-official border points.

Cross-border meetings

On 02 to 04 October 2018, the Ministry of Health hosted a cross-border meeting in Entebbe that brought together participants from Rwanda, Tanzania, Burundi, Kenya, South Sudan and Uganda. The key output of the cross-border meeting was an updated Memorandum of Understanding between the aforementioned countries on cross-border surveillance and working more closely together to control the outbreak and further spread.

In terms of sample transportation, five sample transportation vehicles have been distributed across the seven districts. This is to quickly transport samples from suspected cases to UVRI for testing and confirmation of the Ebola viral disease. 

Water Sanitation and Hygiene Hand (WASH)

WASH facilities with soap and Jik have been provided at hospitals and health facilities to improve hand washing and patient hygiene.

Personal Protective Equipment has been provided at the regional referral hospitals of Fort Portal and Hoima. The national task force however recommended that these should be provided at each of the high risk district offices to shorten response times. 

Ebola Treatment Units have been established at border crossing points in Kasese, Bundibugyo and Kabarole for isolation of cases that meet the Ebola viral disease case definition and in case of any confirmed cases for specialised treatment. 

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, it is important for us to know that the Ebola virus causes an acute, serious illness, which if not treated early, is often fatal. Ebola is introduced into the body through close contact with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected animals such as chimpanzees, gorillas, fruit bats, monkeys, forest antelopes and porcupines found ill or dead or in the forest. 

Ebola spreads from human to human via direct contact with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected people and with surfaces and materials like beddings and clothing contaminated with these fluids. 

Burial ceremonies that involve direct contact with the body of a person who has died of Ebola can also contribute to the transmission of Ebola. Humans are not infectious until they develop symptoms.

Ebola presents with sudden onset of fever, fatigue, muscle pain, headache and sore throat. This is followed by vomiting, diarrhoea, rash, symptoms of impaired kidney and liver function and in some cases, both internal and external bleeding. 

Prevention of Ebola 

We need to avoid contact with fruit bats or monkeys and the consumption of their meat. 

Avoid direct or close contact with people with Ebola symptoms, particularly with their bodily fluids, without appropriate protective wear. 

Wash hands with soap and water or use alcohol hand rub regularly, especially after visiting patients in hospital.

Report promptly any person in your home or neighbourhood with Ebola-like symptoms to the nearest health facility or the toll free number that has been availed. 

We need to practice prompt and safe burial of people suspected to have died of Ebola, with the help of a trained health workers.

Health handling care workers should use Infection, Prevention and Control measures when handling all patients. 

The public is, therefore, requested not to panic because the Ministry of Health is prepared to control and contain Ebola, should it cross to Uganda. 

The public is also requested is be vigilant and report any rumour, alert or suspected case of Ebola to the nearest health facility or the following toll free number that has been availed. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, before we go into this matter, I would like to announce the presence, in the public gallery, of a delegation of members of Parliament from the National Assembly of Malawi, together with their staff. They are here on attachment. They are:

    1. Hon. Ralph Joama
    2. Hon. Maxwell Thyolera
    3. Hon. Lingston Belekanyama
    4. Hon. Patricia Mkanda
    5. Hon. Dr. Allan Chiyembekeza
    6. Hon. Martha Lungi
    7. Hon. Boniface Kadzamira
    8. Dr. Ronald Mangani
    9. Mr. Jeffrey Mwenyeheli
    10. Mrs Tilly Likomwa  
    11. Mr Lovermore Nyongo
    12. Mr Richard Santhe
    13. Mr Loncious Chipendo
    14. Mr Martin Phiri
    15. Mr Fredrick Kamwani
    16. Mr Lawson Chitseko
    17. Ms Chikosa Banda
    18. Ms Judith Sikaloka
    19. Ms Nancy Chikandira
    20. Mr Matthews Mlongoti
    21. Mr Henderson Falinya and 
    22. Major Sikaloka Kaliati

You are all welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, during this session, the minister reported on preparedness about two months ago but I think this is just to reassure us. We had two hours of debate on this issue so this is just a reassurance. I would like us to have a limited debate because we had two hours in this session on this matter. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. Mine is an appeal that if it does not displease the House, we should adopt a format of presenting ministerial statements to Parliament.

From the first statement, you were at pains to even rule on it. If we adopted a format for when a ministerial statement is read, it would really help Members appreciate what is actually taking place.

On a lighter note, in case the issue is on capacity, since we have an induction on 19th to 21st November for Members who joined Parliament late, they can also organise one because –

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of procedure?

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, the procedural point I am raising is whether it would not be procedurally right that we adopt this format of presenting statements to Parliament –

THE SPEAKER: So, are you happy with this minister?

MR MWIRU: Yes, I am happy with the minister and I am only appealing to this House that we adopt this format so that whenever a minister comes here, it is not a question of coming to Parliament and talking like it was with statement that was presented first. 

There are issues to do with these schools. Primary schools are managed at the centre. When the minister spoke, he did not even talk about these matters –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I stopped the debate, not because of the way the minister wrote the statement but because the matter is under investigation. That is the reason. However, I thank you for commending the minister.

4.13
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, I would also like to thank the honourable minister for the statement. The first experience of Ebola was in Gulu and it was very nasty. The honourable minister also talked about vaccines and vaccinating only the health workers.

We have border districts like Kasese and Bundibugyo. If this vaccine is tested, we would like to take care of the health workers. We are still mourning the late Dr Lukwiya whom we lost due to Ebola and who was very instrumental in even discovering Ebola. We lost very many people. 

I know it is good to take care but instead of us waiting and then reacting, if this vaccine is tested, I wonder whether we cannot take care of those districts that share markets, health facilities, schools and a lot of other things, including water points.

I am very sure that what you want to give to our health workers is good enough because we want to take care of the health workers. Therefore, let us also take care of the people who will meet each other unknowingly. Ebola is not only about hygiene; it is a very difficult thing. This is what I would like the honourable minister to clarify so that we take care of our people. Thank you.

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter, as the shadow Minister of Health of this country. As much as the Minister of State for Health has made a very good submission to the House regarding the strategies that Government is coming up with, the minister has not clearly explained the strategies that the country is adopting vis-à-vis the African Union and the Southern African Development Community (SADC) Protocols on how to respond at a continental level on this matter.

THE SPEAKER: What rule is that? Hon. Ochen, what rule requires her to cite the SADC Protocol? What rule has she offended?

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, I would like to make a submission; give me the opportunity to make a submission.

THE SPEAKER: No, I will come back to you. You are smuggling through procedure. Wait, I will call you - (Laughter) - take your seat.

4.17
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I would like to clear the air because yesterday, it was reported on social media that there is an outbreak of Ebola in Rukungiri District.

Yesterday, two samples were taken to the Uganda Virus Research Institute in Entebbe and both were negative and I have confirmed this with the honourable minister. I would like to comfort the people of Rukunguri that it has been confirmed that there is no Ebola in the district.

I am a Member of Parliament and Nyakibale is in my constituency; so, it is my role to clear the air. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ochen, you can now make your submission in three minutes. 
 
4.17
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Madam Speaker, when looking at very contentious issues like Ebola, we should be mindful to be broader in our strategy. I am talking about this because this country receives visitors through Entebbe and other border points. 

The minister should have assisted this country by convincing the African Union that brings together SADC and the Great Lakes conflict region, which houses that place - even if the DRC has challenges, its neighbouring countries should step up their roles so as to address the question of Ebola at the source by beefing up capacity whichever way. Other countries from Europe are the ones trying to intervene in DRC and yet we, the neighbouring countries, seem to be doing very little.

Uganda sent troops to Somalia, which is hundreds of kilometres from Kampala. How can we, with such rich experience, fail to send our experts from Uganda to participate in the DRC to rescue the situation? 

Madam Speaker, it is important that we go an extra mile to address the problem from the source, which is flowing into Uganda and East Africa so that we do not find ourselves with a calamity that is bound to continue in DR Congo and the neighbouring countries.

In addition, Government should expand its strategy and not limit it. Otherwise, the minister’s submission was good but it must be magnified to bring a continental approach on board.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ochen, I hope you acknowledge that the Government of Uganda supported the Ebola outbreak in West Africa. They did a very good job and we even commended them here in the last Parliament. Please acknowledge that Government has, in the past, handled it very well.

4.22
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the minister for the good statement but in her statement, she concentrated on the mid-west; Bundibugyo, Kasese and Fort Portal and she left out the other part of Kigezi where we have Kisoro, Kanungu and Kabale, which hosts all the refugees from DR Congo. 

Like hon. Kaginda said, Kanungu was recently suspected to have Ebola. However, I am happy that it was ruled out and according to the statement, the ministry has to do more at our borders. The people there have to be alert because there are so many people entering and exiting and we cannot know who is safe and who is not.

If it means stationing vaccines at entry and exit points, so be it. Otherwise, the training is good but we need more than that.

I would like the ministry to do something for the other side of Kigezi that is Kisoro, Kabale, Kanungu and Rukungiri but more especially Kisoro and Kanungu where those people have settled. 

THE SPEAKER: Kanungu is in the statement, maybe Kisoro.

MS KARUNGI: Madam Speaker, they have not done much for Kanungu like the other districts.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, look at page 3. We have Ntoroko, Kasese, Kabarole, Bundibugyo, Bunyangabu, Kanungu, Kisoro, Rukungiri, Rubirizi, Kikuube, Hoima, Kampala. They are category one - high risk.

4.24
MS ANNE TUMWINE (Independent, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the report. I am from Ntoroko, which is one of the high risk districts. 

We share a market and other facilities with Congo and we have a porous border but we do not have tents at some entry points where people should be checked. In her report, she did not give details and I would like to report that some of our border points do not have tents. 

We have health workers who are volunteering but they are not facilitated at all. We are worried that they will be discouraged and leave the centres and we shall have a problem.
The minister should take note that these health workers, who are giving their services, should be facilitated so that they do not neglect the centres.

Secondly, we do not have enough ambulances. We only have one, which was donated by medical teams and it is on one side of Kanara Town Council. The other entries at River Semiliki do not have a standby ambulance to evacuate people in case of any problem. Can we please have an ambulance on that other part of Ntoroko?

There is also inadequate sensitisation and people do not know what is taking place. They should be sensitised enough in public fora on what is happening now and on how they should take care of themselves. Thank you.

4.27
MS ZAITUN DRIWARU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for giving information about the Ebola outbreak in the neighbouring country.

Ebola is a very dangerous disease and currently, there is a campaign in the country. However, you have said that the vaccine that you are planning to use for immunising health workers has not been tested yet. You need to take note of that and do something about it.

Secondly, as districts hosting refugees, we face a big challenge because refugees come in and leave at any time and in the rural areas, people die without receiving treatment. This means that they don’t get proper diagnosis and their relatives bury them in the usual way. Government must take a deliberate strategy to protect individuals in districts hosting refugees. 

The minister mentioned the high risk districts; however, the refugee hosting districts should be categorised among the highly risky areas because there are people who come and go every day. To me, when there is an outbreak in a neighbouring country, it affects our country too because you do not know who is coming in and where the person is going to stay. This puts the whole country at a big risk. 

Also, the Government, up to this time, has not taken any deliberate move to sensitise the country. The rural people down there do not know there is an Ebola outbreak and that they are supposed to wash their hands with soap. Therefore, I urge the Government to put more emphasis – (Interruption) 

MAJ (RTD.) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to clarify to the Members that it is not wise to start declaring epidemics when they are not there. It hurts the economy and exports. We should leave this subject matter to specialists and we should listen to them. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Driwaru, have you finished? 

MS DRIWARU: I need to conclude, Madam Speaker. (Laughter) Hon. Minister, why are you annoyed? I am supposed to talk – why do you want to stop me yet I am at a high risk border? The ministers should listen to what we tell them. 

In conclusion –(Member timed out.)

4.32
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO: (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this information to Parliament. I heard the minister talked of Jik for washing in hospitals. I would be very happy if this Jik for hand-washing could also be extended to schools. At least, secondary schools and health centre IIs and IIIs can buy Jik so that our children in schools and people at health centres, especially in those districts, wash their hands with Jik so that we boost prevention. 

I also feel that alert messages of the issue – somebody might have passed through an area. Alert messages in all languages of Uganda should be sent out so that in case of anything, it is easy for the people to identify this problem and report immediately. Otherwise, I thank the minister for the message.

4.32
MS JACQUELINE AOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I wish to appreciate the minister for her report. We will wash with Jik until it gets finished; we will try to control until the control measures have also - I do not know what will happen. 

Personally, I am for the root causes. Where does Ebola come from? It always comes from Congo. We will never stop demonising Congo for Ebola. Just four weeks ago, we were in Nairobi and during the screening we were asked how many times we had been to Congo. “When did you last visit Congo?” - As if Congo is the birthplace for Ebola. 

We need to know where Ebola comes from. I am sure people are laughing at us as we speak about Ebola. We need to know the root cause; I will always stand for the root cause. There have been other disease outbreaks and people are doing this or that. I do not know whether it is some business going on but we would like to know the root cause. Thank you.

4.34
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for updating the country and for a good statement. Also, I would like to thank the ministry for so far containing Ebola. 

However, I have two issues I would like to raise to the minister. First, in the statement, I did not hear updates on the resource envelope they are using for fighting the Ebola viral disease; whether they have enough funding or they would still need more money because this is a high risk job and it would only be done well if the people who are managing it are well facilitated. I would like to know this from the minister.

Secondly, the minister has talked about the porous borders but she was not conclusive. I would like to know Government’s commitment or what strategy has been taken to fill that gap on the porous borders where people normally come into the country. As you are aware, our borders are so porous and people also use many of the illegal entry points other than the designated ones which are for business. Can we know what Government is going to do because I believe it is better for us to prevent other than putting in resources.

I would like to know the level of collaboration between the Government of Uganda and the Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo in an attempt to control this virus so that we stop it from getting this side. What efforts can we put to support the Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo? 

Finally, the ministry must communicate to Ugandans not to misuse social media to declare the outbreak of Ebola in the country without getting the information from the ministry so that it is only the ministry to declare an Ebola outbreak. It should not be anybody sharing things that would affect tourism and bring a lot of unrest and insecurity in the country. Thank you.

4.36
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): I would like to thank you for the opportunity. I also would like to thank the minister for the good report. Prevention is better than cure. Everybody must know that we have gone through this before and it was terrible. 

Now, that we have known about this Ebola outbreak a little bit earlier, we should be much more prepared. Ebola is just across the border in Congo. Every other day, people come through Kitagata into my area from Tanzania, Rwanda and Congo. However, on page 4, the minister is telling us that two Walk-through Temperature Scanners have been installed at Entebbe International Airport for general and VIP arrival lounges. What about the departure lounges? Are you suggesting that it is only those people coming in that are carrying it? What about those going out?

Secondly, the minister said one scanner is going to be installed at Bwera in Kasese, one at Kisunga border point and one at Bundibugyo within two weeks. Two weeks is a long time. It should be the next day. We have been running around - what about the Contingency Fund? It is supposed to help in this kind of emergency. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that money is supposed to be used for these very important emergency cases so that we have many scanners everywhere to contain the people who are already infected. I would like to call upon you, honourable minister, to instead come tomorrow - if you do not have the money - and ask for an emergency fund so that you get as many scanners as possible in all points: Mutukula, Kitagata, Murongo, Gakitumba and many other places should all have one each. Even here at the entrance of Parliament; why shouldn’t we have it? (Interjection) Yes, why not? You are leaders, remember? Supposing it happened here yet we get very many visitors every day?

Therefore, these are some of the issues that I thought were a little bit left out. About others, I thank you. However, use that other contingency fund and let us come out very clearly that this is an emergency and that we should prepare such that in case it comes, we are not harassed like we were last time. I thank you.

4.39
MS CATHELINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, honourable minister, for the report you have given to the House. I would like to thank the Government for it has begun immunising frontline health workers. However, what about other intellectuals? Do you want to tell us that it is those people who matter to the country yet we are also open to dangers?

According to the research on Ebola, the prevention process is not fool proof. We hear that symptoms can take up to three weeks to appear in a person carrying it. I don’t mind where you have put Kabale. If you are a traveller, how long does it take you to reach to Kabale or other districts you have not mentioned?

Another issue I would like to raise is that last month, as a Committee on East African Community Affairs, we were in Kasese; on that border we were told that a majority of the travellers use panya routes. It means that even those who are sick do not use the main roads where there are checkpoints.

I would like to inform you that Uganda is at stake because Ebola is just a matter of time to reach everywhere. My colleague said that we need to know where it is coming from; as a country, we need to invest a lot in research and development if we want to know and cure what is hindering us. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to console hon. Ndamira. I have confidence in the Government on this issue. We have had about four Ebola outbreaks in the region and the Government has come out on top. Do not be discontent.

4.42
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable minister for a very elaborate report and for assuring the country that Uganda so far is Ebola-free. Well done honourable minister and the Government.

She reported that already there are 205 dead and 329 victims within a very short period of time in DRC bordering us. What compounds this is the conflict going on right now in the DRC. Therefore the people who are coming are not fleeing from Ebola but from the conflict; coming for safety and protection to us in Uganda.

Here is my challenge now honourable minister, if you can listen. This disease is extremely dangerous as you mentioned. Actually it is worse than HIV/AIDS because it kills instantly. 

In your strategy, I did not hear you talking about quarantining all these people coming into the country. It is better we take preventive measures before this thing explodes in our face. All those people entering should be quarantined and the first line of vaccination using an Ebola vaccine should be targeting those people including the health workers.

Therefore, my appeal is that all these people entering Uganda - whether they are fleeing the war or Ebola - should be quarantined until they are thoroughly cleared before they are let in. Otherwise, the moment they pass the border, many of them are heading to Kampala, Kabale, Koboko, Rukungiri and everywhere (Laughter) Let us have them quarantined and vaccinated. This is my appeal. Thank you very much.

4.44
MR PETER SEMATIMBA (NRM, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. I would also like to add my voice to those that have thanked the minister for a very positive report. I encourage members of the public to recognise that report for what it was that we don’t have External Ventricular Drainage (EVD) in Uganda and we should not exaggerate or come up with stories that it is there.

As we put pressure on the Government to do the needful, I implore this august House and its Members, through you, Madam Speaker, that we too can make a difference in protecting Uganda against EVD. I would like to implore honourable members of this House to please use your influence and voices, and your radio stations - for those that have them - but most importantly the organs of Government over which we have influence - to go out there and cause awareness in our constituencies.

If we teach our people how to detect and look for EVD, and teach them how to manage suspects or suspicious cases, and manage fatalities; if all people are knowledgeable of how to do these things, then Uganda is going to be safer. This is something we can start doing today as we put pressure on Government to do the needful. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.46
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. And thank you, honourable minister, for the very good statement. And being from Bundibugyo, which is one of the risk areas, I would like to agree that what the minister has reported is true. These interventions are going on. 

I also thank Government, through the Ministry of Health, for indeed containing this dangerous disease at least for the last one month. In Bundibugyo we have been on tension but it has been contained.

Just for emphasis, hon. Byarugaba mentioned - honourable minister, you mentioned that the National Task Force has mobilised all the logistical support necessary for our preparedness. But again you go ahead to mention that the walk-in scanners for Bundibugyo and Bwera will be installed in two weeks’ time. Why are we going to take this time before we install the scanners? That is a long time.

For emphasis also, I would like to talk about the recommendation from the team that came from the World Health Organisation. The issue of surveillance is very important. Madam Speaker, the border with DRC, especially for Bundibugyo, is a small river - River Lamia - which you can cross at any point. If you consider the percentage of people that cross through the gazetted border at Busunga, for the record, it can be around five or 10 per cent.

The majority of the people cross from places that are not gazetted or recognised but small paths. And if you are going to control from the border point at Busunga, then we are looking at a very small percentage of the people that cross.

However, on the same note, this part of Congo that borders Bundibugyo is very backward in terms of services and many other areas. 

We share with them our health facilities and schools. Primary and secondary school children cross from Congo every day to come to our schools and our health centres as well as those who come to their gardens –(Member timed out_)

4.49
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka County South, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When it was confirmed that DR Congo had Ebola, I remember being the first person to raise the matter of national concern on the Floor of Parliament. I indicated that, as Kyegegwa, we are a refugee-hosting community. 

By February this year, we had 25,000 refugees but right now there are 80,000 of them. All this influx comes from Congo. I requested then - and I do so now - that the transportation of these refugees should be stopped for some time. 

I requested that at least we establish holding centres at the border, where you would keep them until it is clear that Ebola no longer exists. I remember clearly that the Minister of Health then, hon. Sarah Opendi said, “No, we have screening centres at the border.” She mentioned Ntoroko and other areas. In the minister’s statement today, the risk factor for the district of Kyegegwa has been hiked to “Category B”, which means that we are under a bigger threat than we were then.

Madam Speaker, I am requesting this Government – I do not know why we are very eager to take up refugees and risk our own people. In Kyegegwa, we already have 80,000 refugees in addition to the 500,000 indigenous people of the district. We are on the main route of the tourism city of Fort Portal; we have Katonga Game Reserve and we connect with Kamwenge, which are also tourism centres - We are risking our people. 

I am requesting that this exercise of ferrying refugees should be halted for the time being until DR Congo is declared to be free of Ebola. Thank you.

4.52
MS PROSSY AKAMPULIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My issue is about Rubanda. I would like to thank the minister for the comprehensive report although Rubanda was not mentioned anywhere. It is a district that is in the middle of the three districts that you read for us; that is, Kisoro, Rukungiri and Kabale.

Madam Speaker, I was in the district for the whole week and that is when they talked about Ebola in Rukungiri. My people in Rubanda were worried because Rukungiri and Kanungu are next to us. I am happy that the Member of Parliament from Rukungiri rose and clarified that there is no Ebola in Rukungiri from what the minister told him. 

However, my worry is that the minister has in her statement elaborated different measures. Even when you still go to different health centres around the country, there is nothing that talks about Ebola.
 
First of all, when you go to the health centres, it should be the first place to talk about what causes Ebola, how you can get infected or what you need to look out for to see if a person has Ebola. However, in all health centres there is nothing like a chart; it could easily communicate. 

Therefore, I would like to request the honourable minister that let the ministry come out clearly to talk about the causes of Ebola. It should also translate the message into our local languages for our people when they put up charts or any other means of communication. 

When they talk about other diseases such as the six killers diseases like Measles, they would come out with charts and brochures, give them to communities but Ebola is not being talked about. It is true that there are measures that are coming but how is the community prepared? 

I therefore request you, honourable minister, to come out clearly and inform the communities. Thank you.
 
4.54
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also applaud the minister for the statement. I do not like to repeat much of what has been said. 

However, whereas we are doing well in terms of our preparation, our neighbours, especially Kenya where I also border on the other side, seem to be doing much more than us. When we talk about scanners, I appreciate that you have considered Busia Border Post as one of the areas to get one but Malaba was left out. I would like to inform you that when you cross from Malaba to Kenya, the first encounter is a scanner on the Kenyan side. This means that our neighbours are moving faster than us in terms of preparation. This is a call on us to also enhance - let us not isolate the borders - but let us get all the border posts. 

In Malaba, we have traffic of 1,780 trucks that cross on a daily basis and 400 going back. Many of these commuters include our neighbours from DR Congo, among others, so we are so vulnerable –(Interjection)– Let me take the information.
 
MR WOBOYA: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. We are talking about borders in the eastern region but let us be comprehensive. Let us know that we have Suam border on the other side of Sebei, Lwakhakha in Bugisu, then Busia and Malaba. All these areas need to be given attention because there are truckloads and lots of human beings coming in and going out of the country. 

Therefore, we need to strengthen screening in all these areas. Thank you.

MR ANGURA: Thank you, colleague, for the information. Madam Minister, as I conclude, I would like to request that let us reinforce on the attention of our health centres at the borders. The borders have very many visitors that go across and it would be better to empower them to attend to this calamity before it escalates. Otherwise, thank you for the statement.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had indicated earlier that we should have limited debate because we debated this about two months ago. Let me invite the minister to respond but I would like to touch the issue of one scanner for the general arrivals at the airport. Supposing three planes arrive together, won’t the message go that you are going to be inconvenienced in Uganda? Put in place a few more scanners and also for the truck drivers who are moving back and forth.

4.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (DR Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank all the honourable colleagues who have raised quite useful information. Their contributions have been quite useful that they will enrich our level of preparedness.

There are those issues that certainly I will not comment on because they are useful; we will take it to the ministry like the issue of the scanner and stepping up surveillance. There are helpful issues that will add and step up our level of preparedness for which I am grateful.

However, I would like to add few issues for clarification and clarity. Let me send a signal to the public, especially the social media because sometimes the communication that comes from there can cause a lot of panic in the public. I would like to caution that unless the information comes from the Ministry of Health that there is an Ebola outbreak, the public should not panic as some of those are not realities.  

A lot of issues have been raised about the vaccines and I must say that these are meant for compassionate use. It has been through clinical trials. The efficacy and safety has been proven that it can be used. However, as I said, it is an ongoing clinical trial proven safe. That is why it is called a ring vaccine being used for frontline healthcare workers and those that have come close to people suspected to be with Ebola. 

In terms of standards that my colleague has raised, so far the Ministry of Health has been commended for using the internationally-approved standard of the level of preparedness which has been recommended by WHO. Other than that, we are within the recommended international measures of how to prepare, manage, and contain the problem.

Very important issue on the border: This is not only to the Ministry of Health but it is a cross-sector issue that we can discuss further with other colleagues in their ministries, including the challenges of entry through the border - formal and informal routes.

I have mentioned quite a lot in the report. Isolation points have been put. Suspected cases of Ebola have been isolated until proved otherwise before they are allowed to join the public.

I have also talked about preventive measures which have been enriched to the schools and others. We welcome those ideas.

We talked a lot about the issue of collaboration. We had a cross-border meeting with the neighbouring districts to get a way forward. We are probably going to hold more meetings with the neighbouring districts in regard to what to do.

On the issue of finance, I mentioned that resources have been mobilised from our partners. However, when there is need, we shall probably knock on your door in cases where we really need support. For example, issues of scanners and other issues can come up.

As I conclude, I would like to request you kindly to allow my colleague to also share one or two issues that have been raised.

5.01
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the Minister of Health. I would like to make one comment on the safety and efficacy of the vaccine because it has been raised. 

This is to assure Members that the vaccine has been cleared by WHO and other expert groups. It is a relatively new vaccine and trials have been going on since the 1980s. It has really been tried on many volunteers including Africans, Europeans and people from America. In 2017, WHO and other expert agencies allowed it to be used. When you read about it, you will see that it is called “an investigational vaccine” but has been cleared. 

The vaccine being used is for only one strain of Ebola called Ebola Zaire. There are two main strains – Ebola Zaire and Ebola Sudan. I am answering the Leader of the Opposition that it is epidemic-specific. 

In this case, the strain involved is Ebola Zaire and its use is still limited to few categories. That is, for people who have been in contact with somebody who is confirmed to have Ebola – either alive or dead – within the last 21 days. Then the contacts of contacts; that is the immediate family members and neighbours. That is why we called it “ring vaccination” because you create a ring around somebody who has been confirmed to have Ebola.

Vaccination is also done to frontline health workers, both local and international; those who are involved in managing the epidemic and also health workers who are in communities which are at high risk – in this case, as the minister said, the districts which are bordering DRC. That is why the vaccinations are taking place there. 

At the moment, there wouldn’t be a justification to start vaccinating in northern Uganda or eastern Uganda, but Kasese definitely qualifies. 

I would like to agree with my sister, hon. Karungi, that the Ministry of Health should find resources to extend the interventions to mid-western Uganda and also north-western and south-western Uganda, especially in the districts which border the DRC. There is however no cause for alarm.

Management of such epidemics is guided by international guidelines. At the moment, there is no strong justification, from an epidemic control point of view, to stop people from coming into Uganda. 

What is important are the measures the minister has identified; strengthening surveillance and also educating our people to be on the lookout. Strengthening the systems locally to ensure that if there is any identified case, it can be managed and the population is continuously sensitised. 

There is, therefore, no need to stop people coming from DRC or to stop refugees from coming as long as the measures are put in place as the minister was saying.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Join me in welcoming the chairperson, district councillors, the sub-county chairperson and sub-county councillors from Luweero. I had mentioned them earlier, I do not know if they are still here. Hon. Muyingo and hon. Nakate are their MPs. Also join me in welcoming district councillors from Kasese represented by hon. Mbaju and hon. Kiiza. They are observing the proceedings. You are welcome. (Applause)

Earlier, in the communication, I forgot to mention that two of our colleagues are not able to be with us. Hon. Dhamuzungu was involved in an accident and broke his shoulder but he is out of danger. Hon. Judith Babirye is also indisposed. So they are not able to be with us today.

5.06
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to present the petition from the out-grower farmers from Ngora District concerning the waste that has occurred in that very place. We are presenting this petition under Rule 30. Allow me to read it the way it is.

THE SPEAKER: Do not go into details. Just read the title and the prayers.

MR ABALA: The title here is “The humble petition of the undersigned” There are 51 people who have signed representing the other members of the cooperatives, out-growers in the fruit industry, especially orange and citrus fruit farmers of Kobwin, Ngora, Kapir, Mukura and Ngora Town Councils in Ngora District.

Madam Speaker, here are some issues that I would like to highlight if you could allow me because the prayers are only three. I beg for about two or three minutes only, please.

THE SPEAKER: Alright, just read one and two and then proceed to the prayers.

MR ABALA: Showeth and states that:-
    1. The subject matter of the petition pertains to the immense set-back in the marketing of fruits grown by fruit farmers in Ngora District. 
    2. Your humble petitioners aver that for the last three months, the fruits of their labour on orange farms have literally and metaphorically gone to waste (Laughter) as a result of the unfulfilled promises of Government through the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. 
    3. This particularly arises from current government policy to encourage farmers in the Teso sub-region to take to citrus fruit farming on the basis that a fruit processing factory will be built in the sub-region for value addition on their fruits as a means for poverty alleviation and invariably wealth creation. To-date, the fruit factory has not been opened and as such, scavenging middlemen are exploiting the rural-based farmers by offering as low as Shs 15,000 only for a double bag of fruits weighing over 150 kilogrammes, thus exposing the farmer to an abominable loss. 

THE SPEAKER: Go to the prayers. 

MR ABALA: Now, therefore, your humble petitioners pray that: “

    a) Parliament enjoins Government through the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to compensate the fruit farmers for the losses suffered in the current season.
    b) Parliament enjoins Government through the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to expeditiously address the challenges faced by the farmers. 
    c) Parliament investigates the challenges of out-growers in the fruit industry as a means to streamline the value chain for better growth of the industry. 

Madam Speaker, your humble petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray and hereto; and the humble petitioners have appended their signatures. In fact, 51 of them appended their signatures on behalf of over 1,000 members in this cooperative of fruit growing in Ngora District. I thank you so much. 

Madam Speaker, allow me lay on the Table the original copy of the petition. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. I do not know why you did not add a fourth prayer to demand the exact date for opening the fruit factory but maybe the committee can look at it. Therefore, I will send it to the Committee of Trade, Tourism and Industry for perusal and report back. Thank you. 

PRESENTATION OF REPORTS OF PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATIONS ABROAD

THE SPEAKER: Is hon. Gonahasa here? Okay, let us go to the next item. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT BILL, 2017

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we had covered a good part of the Bill and stood over some clauses but we had not touched the schedules. Let us finish the schedules and then go back to the body. 

Schedule 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that schedule 1 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 1, agreed to.

Schedule 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that schedule 2 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 2, agreed to.

Schedule 3

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that schedule 3 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 3, agreed to.

Schedule 4

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that schedule 4 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 4, agreed to.

Schedule 5

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (MR KEEFA KIWANUKA): Madam Chair, the committee proposes that we replace part 1 of schedule 5 as follows: 

“Prohibited and restricted chemicals 
Part 1 - Chemicals prohibited under the Stockholm Convention on persistent organic pollutants…” Thereafter, we have a table that contains a list. I do not know whether I have to read the whole of it. 

The insertion is for purposes of clarity. There were problems with the way it had been formatted and we are just making sure that it is properly formatted. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You said, “Part 1 (a) chemicals prohibited under…” you are breaking the title. So what is the rationale? 

DR KIWANUKA: The headings on the table are “chemical and CAS Number”, “activity” and the “specific exemption”. The first one is Aldrin whose CAS Number is 309-00-2, which is just formatted to have - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we stand over it and go to schedule 6? 

DR KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, the way it is formatted in the Bill is that you have “Aldrin” under “chemical and CAS Number”. Then, under “activity”, we have “production”. Finally, under “specific exemption”, it is stated as “none”. Just as an example, what it means here is that you have “Aldrin” as one item and then CAS number “309-00-2” as another item. However, “Aldrin” and “CAS Number” should be one item and should not be separated.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you saying that there is one chemical? 

DR KIWANUKA: We have Aldrin and moving across under “activity”, we have “production” and then under “specific exemption”, it is stated as “none”. Then, under “Aldrin”, we have “CAS Number 309-00-2”, then you have “use”. The CAS Number should be a continuation of Aldrin. The two are not supposed to be separated. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But they are separated elsewhere; I see Alpha, Beta, chlordane separated.   

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to seek for clarification from the minister because this schedule has some sanctions which are included in the tax measures. Why should we bring this schedule which can appear in the tax as a prohibitive measure? The Finance Act involves import and export. Why should we bring this schedule here? Why don’t we leave it to the other measures? Do we need it?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable member, do not send people on a fishing expedition. This law is about the environment and please, relate to the environment and let us keep it to this law. Don’t tell them to go fishing in the tax law, the other amendment and –

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: What I am trying to say, the implementing agency - anybody who is involved in bringing the chemicals is prohibited, the tax measures are there. They are defined under Harmonised System (HS) codes. These are defined under HS codes in international trading. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development can attest to that. Any prohibitive substance imported into the country must be classified into a certain nomenclature before it can be imported. The moment you involve import and export, then it needs to be classified. Once it is classified, then it is prohibitive -(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, honourable, for giving way. The information, I would like to give you is that yes, the finance Bills will come in but the classification as prohibition must come from a specific law which is this one and that is what we are doing. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable member. You know, this is the law governing the environment and the users are going to use this law. Uganda Revenue Authority can use the other law and it must be accessible.

DR KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank hon. Niwagaba. However, I would like to add that, this is a framework law and it has been agreed upon by this august House. 

This one is given and we are not the ones developing it. We have already signed and accepted it. What we are doing here is to make sure that it is properly formatted as it is supposed to be. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Committee Chair, I think what he wants is like – something because it has the CAS number almost together with the name. Is that what you want? We shall direct the clerk when they are formatting the final text to ensure that the drug and CAS number run together. Will that make you happy?

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to seek for clarification from the Chairperson or the minister. This particular schedule makes reference to the Stockholm Convention. I would like to know whether it has been ratified. If it has been ratified, whether it would not be in order even if it has not been ratified to include it as part of the schedule. By referring to it, without it being part of this law unless it has become part of our law under the ratification of the Treaties Act, we would be missing the point.

DR KITUTU:  Madam Chairperson, this convention on persistent organic content was ratified. It is already operational and it has been domesticated. In the Environment Act, we are just repealing the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that Schedule 5 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 5, as amended, agreed to.

Schedule 6, agreed to.

Schedule 7, agreed to.

Schedule 8, agreed to.

Schedule 9, agreed to.


THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us go back to clause 31.

DR KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, the committee recommends inserting new schedules after Schedule 9, which will become schedule 10, 11 and 12.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a new schedule be introduced into the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New schedule 11, agreed to.

MR NIWAGABA: Schedules should be from 10 because the old schedules stop at 9. You had put the question to Schedule 11 only?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, I started with Schedule 10. Honourable members, I put the question that a new Schedule 12 be introduced into the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New schedule 12, agreed to.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, if the amendments on the schedules are being brought by the committee chairperson then he should read those amendments because what are we now adopting other than what he has introduced, we do not know.

Therefore, the question should be like the new Schedule 10, be added, he reads and we adopt it but this has not been done. Let Schedule 10 be proposed by the committee chairperson, and we listen to it before it becomes part of the Bill.

Schedule 10

DR KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, “Schedule 10: items for consideration for the inventory of biological diversity: 

    1. Ecosystems and habitats: Containing high diversity, large numbers of endemic or threatened species, or wilderness; required by migratory species; of social, economic, cultural or scientific importance: or, which are representative, unique or associated with key evolutionary or other biological processes.
2. 	Species and communities which are threatened: Wild relatives of domesticated or cultivated species; of medicinal, agricultural or other economic value; or social, scientific or cultural importance: or importance for research into the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, such as indicator species: and
3. 	Described genomes and genes of social, scientific or economic importance.” It is just listing the inventory that should be added.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposed new Schedule 10. I put the question that the new Schedule 10 as proposed be introduced into the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 10, as amended, agreed to.

New Schedule 11

DR KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, we had stood over this one in relation to clause 199 and –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Would you like us to go back to it, first?

DR KIWANUKA: I think clause 199 is again subject to clause 75. I request that we stand over this.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Let us stand over Schedule 11.

New schedule 12

DR KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, schedule 12 is about permitted activities in protected areas like wetlands. There is-
“
    1. brick making;
    2. recreational activities such as sport fishing, maintenance of green spaces;
    3. cultivation;
    4. drainage;
    5. sewage filtration;
    6. fishing using fish gear and weirs, fish farming and other aquaculture;
    7. construction of transport and communication activities such as roads, railways, telephone lines; and 
    8. burning.”

The idea is just to give a feel of what it is that is allowed in protected areas.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, you know, we first had schedule 4 and it talks about the regulated activities in the wetlands. I do not know whether you are differentiating between the wetlands and protected areas because we have dealt with the brick making, recreational activities, cultivation, sand and clay was not there, drainage, sewage filtration, commercial exploitation of wetlands; are you differentiating between the wetlands and the protected areas?

DR KIWANUKA: Madam Chair, we are assuming protected areas may include wetlands. We are hoping that the minister will gazette them and once the areas are protected, the committee is recommending that these are the activities that can be allowed in those areas.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is schedule 4 dealing with? In Schedule 4, the Bill talks of regulated activities in wetlands and they are more or less what you have said here. However, in schedule 12, you are saying that these are permitted activities in protected areas. Are they regulated or permitted? 

DR KITUTU: Madam Chairperson, I feel like schedule 4 and schedule 12 are repeated. So I request that we drop 12 because the activities are already in schedule 4.

MR NIWAGABA: I thought protected areas are wider than wetlands? Wetlands may or may not necessarily be protected areas but there are other protected areas which are not necessarily wetlands. Therefore, with that concept, I believe we would need this schedule. 

The only challenge I would have is on two and three. If you say “recreational activities such as” you leave it so wide that a person may even start putting up golf courses in protected areas because it is part of recreation activities. Someone may put up stadia in protected areas because it is part of recreation. 

Then cultivation; if you do not restrict cultivation in protected areas, what if a person decides to plant species of trees that are detrimental to that specific protected area? 

We need to be restrictive enough in order to continue the purpose of this Bill which is to protect the environment.

I, therefore, seek your clarification, honourable minister as to whether it is not important that you look for ways of redrafting the two – recreation activities and cultivation with a view to restrict activities along that nature.

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. As a committee, we thought that mentioning these activities –(Interjections)- yes, we are trying to protect the environment but we must live with the environment. 

Once you say protection and you do not mention the permitted activities, everything will be prohibited. Just because we singled out these activities does not mean that you wake up and go and take up these activities. 

In the regulations, there are specified guidelines on how you come to undertake these activities in those protected areas; for example, the brick making. 

There was a debate about land titles where somebody’s land has got a wetland. The reasoning, and as per the Constitution, was; you can have land in the wetland but you are regulated, you cannot just go and undertake activities. You have to first go and have a permit to undertake a particular activity in that protected area. That is how we singled out these activities. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister and chairperson, I realise we have no definition of what the “protected areas” include. It is not there. I think you need to define a protected area. 

DR KITUTU: Madam Chairperson, I would like to throw more light on what we mean by regulated activities. When we mention regulated activities, they are permitted but under certain conditions. 

When you put in the law that cultivation is permitted, then how will you regulate it? That is why we use “regulated”. So, under regulated, we permit but under certain conditions.

We normally develop regulations, like on wetlands, where we take these same activities which we allow in wetlands under certain conditions. So you will be given a permit and that permit has conditions with dos and don’ts. 

I still see that schedule 12 is redundant because saying you regulate then you permit - it is the same. We shall be permitting but under certain conditions.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I still want to know what constitutes of “protected areas”. Is it only the wetlands? Is it the national parks? Is it the forests? Why are you saying you are regulating the wetlands but you are permitting use of protected areas?

DR KITUTU: Madam Chairperson, under this law, it is true we did not define protected areas. I was discussing with the chair about some emerging clauses. For example, a minister will be allowed to declare an area a special conservation area so it goes under protection. I, however, think we need to define it because even river banks and lake shores, mountainous areas, all those are supposed to be protected under certain guidelines. Therefore, we shall have to add on more in the law to define the term “protected areas”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we leave this for now? They may need the advice of their technical people to craft this. Can we stand over it as you –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Maybe, instead of standing over it, I think after looking through, I will do the retraction and concede to the minister’s prayer that this schedule be deleted. After looking through the Bill, section 53 strictly refers to management and utilisation of wetlands. So, I think I agree with her. We can delete this particular schedule and it will cause us no harm since schedule 4 is already there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, this one is dealing with the wetlands. We have talked about the national parks and the mountains. We have talked about all the rivers. Are you going to leave all those people to burn bricks on the river banks?

MR SSEGGONA: Chairperson, the problem is, it is brought under a wrong section. When you read the schedule itself, it is brought under Section 53. Now, when you look at the substantive Section 53, you are going to find - as the chairperson observed - that it relates to wetlands, yet “protected” is a wider term looking beyond wetlands.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Protection is also still the work of the minister. Yes, Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives?

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, having listened to the chairperson and your observation, I think we can still have Schedule 4 but we actually replace the word “wetland” with “protected area”. Protected area is wider and includes wetlands.  Wetlands, mountain tops and forest reserves are protected areas. To us, we would retain Schedule 4 but instead of having just “wetland”, we refer this to “protected areas”.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I would like to improve on what hon. Werikhe has brought, Madam Chairperson, that we say “regulation of wetlands and other protected areas”, then we go ahead to define the protected areas. This is so that wetlands remain there for emphasis. That is better English – (Interjections) – no, that is better English because wetlands are very significant in this case. Let us say “wetlands and other protected areas”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, do you want to amend the heading and also the marginal notes, honourable minister?

DR KITUTU: Madam Chairperson, clause 52 talks about protection of river banks, lakeshores and natural beaches so we separated them. What we allow in the river banks may not necessarily be allowed in the wetlands. Clause 53 now talks specifically about the wetlands.

On the protected areas, I think that is where I was requesting that we remove it because we do not have it within the main law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Don’t you need it?

DR KITUTU: We have already taken care of it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where?

DR KITUTU: In clause 52 –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, that one deals with river banks and lakes. Where are the mountains?

DR KITUTU: On the mountains, in clause 50, there are special conservation areas. That is what we refer to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is it defined?

DR KITUTU: That is from clause 50 onwards. They are called “special conservation areas” on page 56. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t you want to be comprehensive? You have got loopholes.

DR KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, the idea had been to provide for what is permitted but I think it is raising several other questions. In the circumstances, the best option would be to stand over it and then we come back to it later, after we have harmonised on what will be the best way forward. I beg that we stand over it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us stand over Schedule 12. Let us now go back to the body. Let us go to Clause 31.

Clause 31

DR KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, on Clause 31, the issue had been just one. The question was what is plastic? That is what somebody who was in your Chair asked. We did not have that definition at that particular point in time but now we have it. Can I proceed?

The only thing, Madam Chairperson, is that we are including it under clause 2, which is on interpretation. It was not there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, honourable chairperson, clause 31 has to do with the funds of the National Environmental Fund. That is what it is talking about; the sources of funding, disbursement and levies. 

DR KIWANUKA:  Madam Chairperson, probably this will make it clearer and easier for us to proceed. In sub-clause (2), the recommendation of the committee had been to insert substitute paragraph (d) with the following; “plastic levy”. The justification for that had been to introduce plastic levy and further discourage investment of monies in the Fund. 

However, Madam Chairperson, I would like to withdraw that amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, are you going back to the old proposal of the minister?

DR KIWANUKA: Yes, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 31 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 75

DR KIWANUKA: On clause 75, Madam Chairperson, the committee recommends replacing the entire provision as follows: 

“
    1. The import, export, local manufacture, use or re-use of categories of plastic carrier bags or plastic products made of polymers of ETHYLENE (polythene) and propylene (polypropylene) is prohibited, except for plastic carrier bags or plastic products made of polymers of ETHYLENE and propylene of above thirty microns and those listed under Schedule 11.

    2. Subject to subsection (1), the minister shall, in consultation with the authority, lead agencies and relevant stakeholders, establish criteria for the documentation handling, storage, recycling, re-use and disposal of plastics and plastic products.

    3. Any person who manufactures or imports plastics or plastic products shall, as a precondition for continued operation-

    a) ensure that recycling is part of that person's active operations;
    b) label the plastics or plastic products; and
    c) put in place a mechanism that is satisfactory to the minister to buy back or remove from the environment plastic and plastic products.

    4. The Uganda National Bureau of Standards, established under the Uganda National Bureau of Standards Act, is hereby mandated to enforce the provisions of sub-section (1).

    5. A person to whom subsection (3) applies shall annually report to the authority on the person's compliance with this section.

    6. The authority shall certify whether the person in sub-section (5) has complied with the provisions of this section.”

Schedule 11 under sub section (1) is about exemptions. Categories of permitted plastics or plastic products made of polymers of ETHYLENE, polypropylene. There are those for industrial (A), agricultural (B), medical use (C), research and science (D), (E) is sanitation and then construction (F). 

The justification is;

    1) to provide for the list of categories of plastics or plastic products made of polymers of ETHYLENE or polypropylene polythene that are restricted.
    2) to impose an obligation on a manufacturers or a person who imports plastics or plastic products to operate a recycling machine.
    3) to require a person who manufactures or imports plastics or plastic products to put in place mechanisms for the removal of plastics and plastic products from the environment and where they do not, to pay a sum equivalent to the quantity they are entitled to remove.
    4) to allow the minister to impose – the idea had been to allow the minister to impose a plastic levy; that can be imposed but under environmental levy.
    5) Also to define the word “polythene.”
    6) To ensure that the levy collected is used for plastic waste management.

Just to add that in processing the Bill, the committee observed that there is increasing proliferation of plastics and plastic waste, which is a threat to the environment. However, the country cannot do without plastic products in the short run.

The committee also observed that laws passed should not be passed in vain and that when laws are made they should bear in mind the practical realities in societies and it is not just about the intention. 

Whatever is passed should be a law that can be implemented and they should be in line with the living experience of the society. We had an extended discussion on this until we reached a consensus on one hand by NEMA who was leading those who were for a total ban and on the other hand, by those involved in the plastic manufacturing industry. (Interruption)

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Clarification, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t you allow him to finish?

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: He has finished.

DR KIWANUKA: So, on one hand we had NEMA and the environmental activists were of the view that we should have a total ban. However, it got to a point when they realised that is was not practical.

On the other hand, we also had those involved like Ministry of Trade and Industry, which is represented here, Operation Wealth Creation and the Generals, Uganda Manufacturers Association, KACITA and all those involved in either importing or distribution of plastics.

It was difficult but we finally agreed that we ban 30 microns and below and allow 30 microns and above. I must mention that this report was signed by the 23 members of the committee, which shows there was consensus.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the mover of the Bill.

DR KITUTU: Madam Chairperson, this has been a highly debated issue in this Bill and as a ministry we have agreed not to include a threshold of about 30 microns in the law but allow the minister to regulate it –(Interjections)– Yes. Madam Chairperson, I need to be protected. The most problematic plastics are the polythenes, which go under the category of films, which range between 0 to 100 microns –(Interruption) (Mr James Kakooza rose_)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, allow the minister to speak and then you respond later.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: It is very important - it can solve the problem.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let her finish and then you come in.

DR KITUTU: Madam Chairperson, we are saying you need to give us a chance, you make a framework law but allow us to regulate. Otherwise, these issues are also very pertinent in the globe. (Interjections) Please, it is me making the law. Much as they are saying – (Interjections) - honourable members, if I brought here a polythene bag of 30 microns and the one of 31, there is no difference. If I make the one of 31 microns, I am still within the law.

However, we are insisting on this because we can be sued. We are regulating over these issues but with time –(Interjections) - why should we put 30 microns? Supposing on the globe, they phase this out, shall we come back again? We have agreed with my colleagues in the - (Interjections) - Ministry of Trade –(Interjections)– please, do not begin saying - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, Parliament is about listening to one another. You may not like what she is saying but listen and say what you want later.
 
DR KITUTU: I am the one who represents the country out there and they even want to go for a total ban. If there is a total ban, then we shall come back here. (Interruption) 

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, the minister brought this particular Bill in issue. She had time to present it to the committee with her technocrats. The committee has taken time to come up with one of the best reports we can have in this House. (Applause) The committee considered the Bill at length and came up with a report, which is forming the basis of our enactment of the law now.

When the minister comes up to say that she represents the country and her views should be superior to the views of this House, is the minister in order to impute that the committee report, which has been brought before this House should be subjected to the minister’s views?

Is she in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the minister is the mover of this Bill and she is giving the rationale for her proposals. You may not agree with them but she is telling you why she made them.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, when you look at the references on the page, they are telling you that it is in Article 14 of the Finance Act, 2009. That means any material imported in this country or any item you want to deal with must be classified under a certain standard. When it comes in the country, the implementing agencies first, Customs Department deals with it under HS code classified. That is why this law in the reference is telling you that when you import microns of such a nature, because they are classified, they put a percentage or they are prohibited. The moment you tell NEMA to define, it will not have the capacity because the people who are implementing it are financers. (Applause)

Therefore, you cannot put it here and start classifying it because there are people dealing with the classification and they are found in Customs Department. The standard, which you deal with, is internationally recognised and it is under a specific law. So, it cannot come in the NEMA law. If I am a businessman and I import polythene bags of 20 microns and the Custom’s law says I am prohibited to import those polythene bags or I pay a percentage, how would you deal with it? 

That is why in the law here, they are putting a reference saying it is already there in the Finance Act, which deals with the standard of importation of everything. Leave that provision; do not put it in this law. That is why the references are there. You do not need to put it in this law because the standard to guide anybody who is going to import plastics is dealt with in the Finance Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Kakooza, supposing I smuggle my goods into the market and Customs is not there, what happens?

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Where would you pass – because you are importing from another country?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Through Lwakhakha border point.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: You are importing the goods from another country. Smuggling is another matter but prohibition being - We passed a law in 2009 and we said nobody is allowed to import Kaveera polythene bags here. Those which are in the market are smuggled but it is not the law to blame; it is the implementers to blame. Already, what you are trying to work on is in the law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what will NEMA take action on - for those which are already on the market? Forget the import. 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: They get them. This is what is being applied in Rwanda and Tanzania. NEMA has no capacity to classify an item coming from another country. You will get it wrong.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My colleague is oblivious to what is taking place in the market. Without mentioning companies, there are companies here and the minister is aware – that is why I had issues with her - which are manufacturing these polythene bags. Even in my constituency, they are there. The Indians are abusing these loopholes. 

Therefore, when we talk about classifying it in the law, we are even going to propose a sanction so that it is an offence of strict liability in nature. This would mean whenever you are found with polythene bags of those microns – what is happening is that the politicians do not mind about the environment. I do not know which direction the country is taking. People are just minding about making money out of this business. 

Hon. Kakooza is talking about importation but when you go to Jinja today, there are factories, which were set up hurriedly to defeat this law. If you go to Namanve now – I have been there and this is what they are doing. I wondered how this took place because the ministry has not done the supervision. On that note, I would like to propose a sanction – we are still debating. Okay, not yet there. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to study this matter further. Let us go to other areas. 

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think we seem to be losing the debate.  We must deal with the basics first. Is banning a product a matter of substantive law or procedure? In my view, it is substantive law. For that reason alone, we cannot allow the minister to ban by regulation. It is Parliament to ban. 

In implementation, the minister makes the procedural and subsidiary guidelines. For that reason, therefore, it can only be the wisdom of this Parliament to pronounce itself on the microns and then, the minister can come in at the level of implementation. With immense respect for the minister, that is where I disagree. 

The only reason she made and brought this Bill to Parliament is because she noticed that administratively, she cannot place this ban. So, let us help her place the ban. Secondly, we should pronounce ourselves on what we are banning. At that level, she will begin her implementation. 

Customs may not even come in because in this particular Bill, we have provided for the National Bureau of Standards to be able to discern which one is 30 microns and which one is 31 microns. It is true I may not be able to distinguish between the two.

If I place the ban together with her technical staff, they would be able to know the 30 microns or the 31 microns. However, for us, we should pronounce ourselves. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let me study this matter further. Let us leave it for now. We can complete tomorrow.
 
MR NIWAGABA: The only information I wanted to give is that the same area of dispute on this particular point is one; what plastics are recyclable and which ones are non-recyclable. The information I have is that we have over 60 factories involved in plastics, which are non-recyclable. Most of those factories are owned by politicians and they know that once this law comes into place, for them to keep in business, they must bring equipment to recycle the plastics. That is why the minister wants to continue hiding under that law. So, the only thing we need to do is to make the law so that those who cannot recycle get out of business. (Interruption) 

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, we are here to legislate on this important matter and the minister is making an argument why the provision should remain the way it is. On the other side, the committee and other Members are also making their provisions in a very civil way. 

Is it in order for hon. Niwagaba to come and insinuate that 60 factories are manufacturing these plastics without giving details of the politicians and how they are influencing this law? Is he really in order to come here and insinuate that politicians are stopping this clause from passing the way Members want it when actually we have not talked about it?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the politicians are on all sides of the House including the Chairperson. Can you substantiate which politicians are involved in this? - Please, substantiate your statement or withdraw it.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, tomorrow, I could come up with a list of all the companies involved in the plastic industry, showing those that are recycling and those that are not recycling and the shareholders of those companies. Most obliged.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Now, honourable members, as I also study, before we close, I will name a small body to help flush it out further, then we can look at it tomorrow. However, in the meantime let us- I will give you the names later but let us go to clause 96. Let us stand over clause 75 for now.

Clause 96

DR KIWANUKA: Okay. Clause 96 is about prohibition of littering. The committee is recommending replacing the entire clause as follows; “96, prohibition of littering;

    (1) Littering is prohibited.
    (2) A person who owns or occupies any dwelling or commercial premise is responsible for waste generated at those premises until it is collected by the authorised person.
    (3) A person driving a vehicle is responsible for the sanitary condition of the vehicle and for the waste generated in the vehicle.
    (4) A person shall not place, deposit or allow any waste to be placed or deposited on his or her premises or on private property, on a public street, roadside or in a ditch, river, stream, lake, pond, canal, channel, park, gulf, graven, excavation or other place where it may be or become a public house nuisance.
    (5) Sub section (4) shall not be construed to prevent the approved replacement of waste for collection purposes in accordance with this Act.
    (6) The minister shall by Statutory Instrument or by regulation, prescribe additional provisions relating to littering.
    (7) The regulation shall, among others -
    (a) provide for specific functions of local leaders to manage waste. 
    (b) stipulate responsibilities for owners or occupants of any premise or vehicle
    (c) categories of waste
    (d) containment of waste
    (e) storage of waste
    (f) transportation of waste
    (g) collection of waste
    (h) disposal of waste”

For purposes of this Act, “littering” means disposing waste in a place not designated as a disposal area or waste collection point.”

Madam Chairperson, we stood over this clause and your chair asked us to harmonise it and I believe we have now harmonised it.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chairperson, incidentally no. We have not harmonised this clause. When I requested Parliament to stand over this matter, I informed the chairperson and Members that we needed to create the most stringent offence. 
“Littering” as defined is not enough. One, there is a prohibition as read by the Chairman. However, the prohibition alone does not create an offence. Therefore, no offence of littering is created by merely prohibiting.

Secondly, I raised the issue of aggravated littering as defined in this Bill; aggravated in a sense that you are not going to look at a man who is throwing a bottle through a taxi window and compare him with a person who in the evening disposes off sewage into a public river, stream, road or channel.   

That is where I suggested the creation of something called “aggravated littering” with the penalty - going by the definition here, with a heavier penalty than ordinary littering.

For example, we have had the offence of defilement in this country. We noticed that defilement also takes different forms and gravity. We created aggravated defilement. We had robbery but because again of gravity, we created something called aggravated robbery.

Therefore, my view is to distinguish this. The argument was that a magistrate whom a person is presented would be in a position to exercise discretion in terms of penalty depending on the gravity. 

However, this has been abused and it is because of this that Parliament exercised the wisdom of creating something called aggravated. When you drive across industrial zones in this country, you will understand what I am talking about. I had pleaded with the chairman that the technical staff would help us draft separate offences along those lines other than leaving it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairman, had you seen the amendments. I think sub clause 11 tackles aggravated littering.

MR SSEGGONA: No, I had not. Sorry. If we had, then maybe he was continuing to take us through. But he -

THE CHAIRPERSON:  I think he stopped on the front page.

MR SSEGGONA: He should have continued so that we could move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, you did not complete your proposal because he is revealing something, which you have at the back of the page. I think they harmonised. What you wanted was aggravated littering and also we have had to address clause (2) which explains that aggravated-

DR KIWANUKA: My Apology to hon. Sseggona. We harmonised this with him. It was just an omission, Madam Chairperson. When I read, I went up to - , let me do it again.

For purposes of clarity, I beg that I go through it again. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Start from what you have not read.

DR KIWANUKA:  Okay;
    (i) A person who contravenes sub section (1) commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 550 currency points.
    (j) In addition to the penalty classified in sub section (Members rose.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let him first finish the proposal then we shall come-

DR KIWANUKA: In addition to penalty prescribed in sub section (9) and (11) the person may be required to remove the substance littered and to properly dispose it off or be subjected to an express penalty prescribed under sub section (193).

    (k) A person who deposits hazardous waste in, on his or her premises or on private property, on a public street, roadside, or in a ditch, river, stream, lake, pond, canal, channel, park, gulf, graven, excavation or other place commits the offence of aggravated littering and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 5000 currency points.
    (l) In this section, vehicle includes a machine or implement of any kind drawn or propelled along roads whether by animal, mechanical, electrical or any other motive power.

Hopefully, this now captures honourable member’s-

MR SSEGGONA: with that, Madam Chairperson, my concerns are thoroughly addressed.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am inquiring to know on what would happen to any person who will dispose waste on an open place because there is no facility provided. Where there are no facilities provided for dumping places, what happens?

MS ABABIKU: Thank you. For example, I am from Yumbe, I have arrived at Arua Park and I do not see a dumping bucket being placed somewhere and I have decided to drop waste, what will happen?

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is littering, honourable members. 

MS ABABIKU: You have not provided.

MR AGABA: I would like to seek a further clarification. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: On clause 96?

MR AGABA: Yes.  You create the offence of aggravated littering and therefore, you capture hazardous waste, meaning there is classification within the waste. Does it mean that there is friendly waste and then, hazardous waste? I think we should go further to define what we mean by “hazardous waste” to differentiate it from what we call the “normal waste.” To whom is it hazardous? We need to define “hazardous waste” in this context. Thank you.

MR OCHEN: Madam Chairperson, I am trying to find out under Clause 96 how we can look at a situation of waste that was dumped some time back and the effect of that waste, which continues to affect the community by the time this law comes into place. For instance, the companies dealing with oil exploration in Bunyoro Region had expired chemicals. They took trouble to ferry them with the trailers up to Teso where they dug ten holes of 10 metres radius. They dumped them in that place between Karamoja and Teso, which was not occupied. (Interjections)– I have facts and I can take you there. 

We are now scared as the community of Teso that with rain, there is a likelihood that this chemical will continue to flow with its effects into the western part of the region. I am concerned as to whether this law is capturing that because we are living with a suspicion over that dumping. I see this law not capturing that kind of challenge.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you cannot make laws in retrospect. You can go forward such that once we make this law, you can take action. Tell us the place and we send the minister there quickly.

MR OCHEN: Madam Chairperson, if you have ever been to Katakwi District, along Moroto Road where the current police training school is, which was relocated from Masindi is; it was taken near the security. The people that were used to excavate the holes where they dumped were all sent away and the security cordoned the place. This is similar to what happened in Amuru where the people there went to court over the dumping. It happened in Teso. 

I have been struggling with this matter and now, I think it is better for a committee of Parliament to intervene so that we unearth it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not want to send the committee on a fishing expedition. Tell me the village and the sub-county; I will send the committee.

MR OCHEN: In the newly created Palam sub-county. I would be in position to bring the document that we carried to get the details because security could not allow us to go there. Therefore, we had to do it in a clandestine manner for us to access the information. I would be able to update Parliament with this information so that we address the problem. 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose an amendment; a rider on clause 11 to read at the end as, “...not exceeding 5,000 currency points or imprisonment for 10 years.” The whole statement will read as; 

“A person who deposits hazardous waste in his or her premises or on private property or on a public street, road side or in ditch, river, stream, lake, pond, canal, channel, park, ranch, raven, excavation or any other place commits an offence of aggravated littering and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 5,000 currency points or to imprisonment not exceeding 10 years.” 

The justification is - I will give an example of Jinja. We had issues where there would be discharge of pollutants in the water. We kept on telling them that we need to create lagoons so that we do not discharge these pollutants in the water. They would not do it; we kept on fighting for a long time, yet these pollutants go and destroy the breeding areas for fish in the water bodies. 

Therefore, we have this situation; even now, there are some factories, which have refused to build lagoons so that they do not discharge the pollutants within the water. They might find it very easy to be paying this money when they discharge but when we put a custodial sentence as well, maybe this will do.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, do you have any objection to the addition? This was only a currency point but he is talking about a custodial sentence. 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I made a justification maybe when the minister was not paying attention. Let me say it again. The littering I am talking about is that – I would like to repeat it for you so that we are on the same page. 

DR KITUTU: I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Mwiru, can you restate your proposal; the sentence and the charges. Just restate for the record; we would like to take your vote.

MR MWIRU: “A person who deposits hazardous waste in his or her premises or on private property or on a public street, roadside, or in a ditch, river, stream or lake, pond, canal, channel, path, gulch, ravine, excavation or other place commits the offence of aggregated littering and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 5,000 currency points or imprisonment for a period not exceeding ten years.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that-

MR AGABA: Just a little more amendment on the proposal by hon. Mwiru. At this level, we are not dealing with small people. We are dealing with manufacturers who do not take disposal of waste seriously. They deposit waste into rivers, lakes or in the air that we breathe. 

I would like propose that we maintain the 5,000 currency point or a sentence not exceeding ten years or both –(Interjections)– wait, let me substantiate. The judge or the magistrate would be at liberty to choose based on the case but should have leeway to impose both because if we give these rich people the alternative to pay money; that is about Shs 100,000,000. The company may pay and they go away. However, if there is an option of both, it will be more impeaching. Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to seek another clarification. We are trying to put a deterrent penalty here. Now, when we say “not exceeding ten years”, the judge can actually give this person two weeks. Wouldn’t it be better we say a minimum of these years to make it stronger - ? because we are saying “Shs 100,000,000 or not exceeding ten years” which can be one month, one week or two days. It would be stronger if we provide for a minimum for a number of years –

MR SSEGGONA: I think legally, we are having a challenge. The Supreme Court in the case of Susan Kiguli and others versus the Attorney General held that Parliament, by an Act of Parliament, cannot restrict their discretion, which is granted and guaranteed under the Constitution. I agree with the expression of hon. Baryomunsi to an extent that in a country like ours, where we are susceptible to some challenges, a person who is prone to those challenges may impose a small penalty. However, that would not stop Parliament from expressing itself by pronouncing the heaviest penalty within our minds without antagonising with that constitutional discretion of the judge. That is why for us we are saying not exceeding these currency point or ten years. If the magistrate or judge on looking at the facts and they justify a heavy penalty, so be it.

Now, the beauty with that is that the Director of Public Prosecution, if not satisfied with the penalty, can appeal against the sentence alone and get the appropriate one. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is hon. Agaba’s addition of fine, sentence or both okay? 

COL MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Colleagues have rightly submitted that in the whole business, there are people who are involved with factories and industries discharging these hazardous materials but we have not mentioned the period of closure of those factories. We have just mentioned imprisonment and so on but what do we do with those factories, which are discharging those hazardous materials into our rivers, swamps and lakes? That is the clarification I need.

I said, there are factories, which are owned by individuals they are discharging hazardous materials into our rivers, swamps and lakes. However, we have not mentioned the measures we should put – Do we close these factories apart from imprisoning them for ten years or 5,000 currency points? That is not enough.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want the magistrate to carry that burden? 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I think what is happening is that when these factories are going to open, they are supposed to do an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA). The EIA must specify in case you are going to discharge – for instance, when you look at those water banks, it is the water table. What they have been doing is that they even encroach on the wetlands and discharge.

So, what I think the colleague is saying is that one of the remedial issues is that they are supposed build a lagoon. That is actually in the Act. They are normally indicated as a measure. I think what we needed to do is fix these currency points – it can be discretionary on sentencing. However, when it comes to currency points, we will know that if you commit aggregated littering, it is that amount.

Maybe, the other proposal would be we can elevate the currency point in this Act to move from the 20,000 which –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, a currency point is a currency point. 

COL MWESIGYE: Leave alone – you just go and see what is happening in Nakivubo channel right now. These small factories in industrial area, where do they build their lagoons? They have no space for lagoons but they are discharging all hazardous materials into Nakivubo channel which goes to Lake Victoria. What do we do with those factories?

THE CHAIRPERSON: What are you proposing?

COL MWESIGYE: We should close them. (Laughter) They are dangerous. You go there and see what is happening. Those factories are dangerous and there is no remedy other than closing them down or they shift to the industrial park.

MR KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. A factory may even do EIA and promise that they are either going to build a lagoon or put in place measures for appropriate disposal of waste but they go ahead and not follow this. The effects may be so adverse that even imprisoning someone for ten years or paying this amount of money is not enough.

So, I support what Col Mwesigye is proposing a further penalty of closing this factory if they do not adhere to the –(Interruption) 

MS AGABA: Thank you for giving way. We are simply legislating around the environment but there are other laws that are sufficient to deal with almost the same issues. Municipal law, for example, is sufficient. Occupational Safety and Health is sufficient. In a municipality, for example, if a factory became a nuisance by emitting gases into the air, the law is clear. They close it. 

Therefore, administratively, there are other laws that are sufficient to deal with the extreme circumstances. However, in this case, we want to make provision that this Act we are passing can be punitive enough to prevent these people from taking everything for granted. Thank you.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you for the information. So, in that regard, if we would like to make the law punitive enough, does it offend any law if we provide that if the factory will not adhere to the agreement that has been signed, it should be closed. We should empower the minister to have that authority to close the factories if it becomes necessary.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, look at Clause 194, which we have passed on cancellation of approval granted under this Act. “The Authority may cancel or suspend the certificate, licence or other approval granted under this Act for contravention of any provision of this Act.” 

The Authority may cancel or suspend a certificate, license or other approval granted under this act for contravention of any provision of this act. 

MS KAMATEEKA: I am satisfied. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chair, may I seek your indulgence. I think the point that hon. Mwiru was raising on the currency point is valid because what defines a currency point is the stipulation by Parliament. In practise, for example, we have the 50,000 note. My view is that we would not offend any principle or law by fixing a currency point. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is already settled by law. The quantum is already settled by law. 

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 96 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 96, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 105

DR KIWANUKA: Madam Chair, clause 105 is about standards for control of effects of vibration and pollution caused by noise. Under sub clause 1, the committee recommends that we insert a new paragraph as follows; 
“(d) take measurement of the levels of noise emanating from all sources, details of which measurement shall be given to the owner or occupier of the premises from which the measurement was taken for their action. 
(e) The Authority may on request run temporary permits not exceeding three months allowing emission of noise in excess of established standards for such activities as fireworks, demolitions, firing ranges and specific heavy industry on such terms and conditions as the Authority may determine. 
(f)  Where an exemption has been granted under subsection 1(e), workers exposed to excessive levels of noise shall be adequately protected, in accordance with guidelines issued by the authority.” 

The justification is to establish measurement of noise levels, which results should be disclosed to the owner of premises for their action and for the safety of the workers in noisy environments. 

Madam Chair, I believe there was no disagreement on this but the point of contention and why we stood over this clause was sub clause 1, which reads, “The Authority shall, in consultation with relevant lead agency -” The contention was whether we should not instead substitute the word “Authority” with “minister.” After consultation, it is clear that these are standard issues within the mandate of the Authority. Therefore, there is no need to substitute it with minister.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, does it stand as it was? 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chair, I really have no substantive issues but for purposes of consistency with other laws, the protection should generally go to people. When you say, “workers exposed to excessive levels of noise”, there are other people who may not necessarily be workers that are likely to be affected. Therefore, my suggestion is that on top of the word “workers”, we add “workers and other people.” 

DR KIWANUKA: We accept the amendment, Madam Chairperson.

MR ABALA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I need clarification from the chairman. When he talked about noise, it triggered a couple of questions;

    1. How many staff in the Authority can help us to detect the type of noise countrywide? 
    2. Do we have the capacity to handle the issue of noise in the country, in terms of the staffing in the Authority?
    3.  Do we have gadgets and how many are they - for us to know the exact group that has been making noise? At the end of the day, we might make some mistake that will cause problems. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I believe the Department of Occupational Safety and Health has both the manpower and the knowledge to handle these issues. There are legal officers in the - 

DR KITUTU: Madam Chair, we have the police and environment inspectors, who are trained to do that. We use noise metres to measure noise in units called decibels. Therefore, the police have been trained, NEMA has inspectors and even districts have environment officers so they are all prepared. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 105 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 105, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 171

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chair, the reason we stood over clause 171 was for clarity. Clause 171 reads, “..Offence committed by a body corporate under this Act is proved to have been committed with the consent or connivance of, or to be attributable to any neglect…” The logic was that we do not deal with this thing called corporate bodies because at the end, there are persons behind them committing these offences. Therefore, we stood over it to clarify on whether we deal with individuals or corporate bodies. I think that is the position. We wanted to deal with individuals. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, suppose there are people at KCCA; they drive the KCCA truck and knock people. Imagine I would like to sue the driver. Would I sue the driver as well as KCCA?

MR SSEGGONA: Normally, what happens in that case is that the civil suit stands against the corporate body under vicarious liability. However, you go for the criminal and convict the particular driver, then that one gives you a starting point to prosecute a civil claim against the corporate body. Here, we were dealing with offences from the criminal law perspective. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Give me an offence that you would want us to discuss. 

MR SSEGGONA: No, generally clause 171 talks about offences committed by a body corporate under the act. I stand to be reminded that – when you look at clause 2, it brings it out properly. That is clause 171(2) “A person who commits an offence under subsection (1) is liable, on conviction, to a fine or imprisonment prescribed by the relevant section.” How do you imprison a company?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, my officer is telling me that it was stood over because we are dealing with the littering by a body corporate; that is why we said okay. Let us also hold on, on this one. Apparently, there is no problem. 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chairperson, there is; I think as you were conferring and she has given us useful information. When you look at clause 171(2) is where the problem will be. That “a person who commits an offence under this subsection (1) is liable,..” - and you are talking about the corporate body –“..on conviction to a fine or imprisonment prescribed by the relevant section.” Where would you get a corporate body for imprisonment? Maybe, we delete the imprisonment bit. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is talking about committing with the connivance of the director, secretary or somebody. 
 
MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chairperson, the problem will be inbuilt within subsection (1). First, the short title is “offences committed by body corporate.” It means that it is the body corporate to commit. 

When you say, “…. proved to have been committed with the consent or connivance of, or to be attributable to any neglect on the part of the director, manager or secretary or other similar officer of the body corporate or any person who was purporting to act in any such capacity, he or she as well as the body corporate, commits that offence.” In that case, it is still the individual. (Interruption)

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to inform and remind hon. Sseggona that on that day, you were the one who brought it up when we were trying to debate the penalties. You asked that what about if this littering or the offence is committed by a person but this person is an agent of the unseen. You meant a corporate body. You proposed and the Chairperson ruled that we stand over it. 

In view of the above, subsection (2) answers - because even subsection (1) mentions of the body corporate and it caters for the connivance between the individuals and the persons who maybe the body corporate. It comes out to provide for the two.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We should not take so much time on this. It will be a question of evidence. Was it with connivance or consent?

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chairperson, it only creates a problem and this is how the problem is created. The section creating the offence is fixing the offence on the body corporate. The second element, which comes in is connivance. If the offence is committed by the body corporate and you are pronouncing the penalty; the penalty can only go to the body corporate.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, if you read the last part of clause 171(1), it says “…or other similar officer or body corporate or any person who was purporting to act in any such capacity, he or she, as well as the body corporate commits an offence.”

MR SSEGGONA: I concede.

MR SONGA: Madam Chairperson, I would treat that under clause 189, which is a general penalty. Can we look at clause 189?

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are not doing anything to it. We are just going to –

MR SONGA: Yes but that is where you see individual and body corporate.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 171 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 171 agreed to.

Clause 181

DR KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, under clause 181 the committee recommends that we:
    1. Renumber the current clause as sub clause (1) 
    2. Insert a new sub clauses (2) and (3) as follows: 
    3. 
“(2) In addition to any sentence that the court may impose upon a polluter under subsection (1), court may direct that person to: (a) pay the full cost of cleaning up the polluted environment and of removing the pollution; 
(b) Clean up the polluted environment and remove the effects of pollution to the satisfaction of the Authority. 
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2), court may direct the polluter to meet the cost of the pollution to any third parties through adequate compensation restoration or restitution.”

Madam Chairperson, there was an agreement on the content of the clause. The only contention was whether where we are saying for instance, in sub-section(2) now, which we have recommended, in addition, to any sentence that the court may impose instead of saying “may”, we should instead say “shall”. 

After consultation, we now understand that it is at the discretion of court to decide on the sanction to a polluter. A good expression that has been given here is that, we cannot direct, for instance, because somebody has committed murder, that that the person should also be killed. That is at the discretion of the court to decide.

Therefore, the committee recommends that we maintain it as it is. However, the contention was those amendments, which Members wanted to bring in.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Should we go back to the original?

DR KIWANUKA: No, we should keep it as we are recommending here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, the question is that clause 181 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 181, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 189

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Sseggona, I understand you had issue on clause 189.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chairperson, the reason for standing over this on general penalties was consequential. We had not clearly defined the preceding offences and the definitions. However, I have no substantive question.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 189 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 189, agreed to.

Clause 193

DR KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, we have harmonised on this and we can adapt it as it is. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 193 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 193, agreed to.

Clause 199

DR KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, as we have stood over clause 75, we are unable to proceed with this one. I, therefore, request that we stand over this.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we cannot proceed to the interpretation because there are areas we would like to redefine before we complete it.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chairperson, with your guidance, I would like to make a small re-committal on clause 75, in particular.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we stood over it.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Dr Mary Kitutu): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports there to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House report there to.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENVIRONMENT (Dr Mary Kitutu): I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The National Environment Bill, 2017” and stood over clause 2 and clause 75 and passed all the other clauses with amendments. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you ready to proceed on investment?

7.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, the chairperson has already left. Therefore, we are a bit handicapped to proceed. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall proceed with The Investment (Amendment) Bill tomorrow. Thank you very much for the work done. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.03 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 14 November 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 
