

Wednesday, 28 November 2018

Parliament met at 2.11 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I will cause some alteration in the Order Paper. What is item six now will be the first one to be handled after my communication as it is on the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment (SAGE) scheme. That will come first immediately after my communication.

Then I will also alter the Order Paper to accommodate a statement from the Minister of State for Ethics and Integrity concerning the International Anti-Corruption Day. That will be accommodated immediately also. Honourable members, those are the alterations I am making.

There will be two events, one happening on 30 November 2018, for which the minister is going to make a statement and there is another one happening on 10 December. We have received communication from the Inspector General of Government (IGG) addressed to the Speaker and for the attention of all of us.

The public is invited to the President’s engagement with the public and Anti-Corruption Agency on International Anti-Corruption Day 2018.  The United Nations General Assembly by resolution 58/4 of 31 October 2003 designated 9 December 2018 annually as the International Anti-Corruption Day.

The day was designated for global observance to promote awareness about corruption, its dangers and how to combat and prevent it. It is a time when Government and political leaders interact with interest groups and other partners against corruption by reflecting on this evil and keeping on strong measures to fight it.

Within the framework above, the IGG in partnership with the Office of the Auditor General, Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions and the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Authority supported by the Federal Republic of Germany through GIZ technical assistance have organised the commemoration of the International Anti-Corruption Day on 10 December 2018 under the theme: “Citizens Participation in the Fight Against Corruption: A Sustainable Path to Uganda’s transformation.”

The event will take place at Kololo Independence Ground and participants will be drawn from all Government entities, departments, agencies and local government and the general public. The event will give insight into the efforts the Anti-Corruption Agencies have taken in the launch of the National Development Plan (NDP)II, Presidential Manifesto and 23 Presidential Directives of 2016 in the fight against corruption.

It is important to note that His Excellency the President, will on that day address the nation on the state of war against corruption and how corruption affects service delivery in the country. Taking into account of the theme stated above, the public will be mobilised to participate and will be given an opportunity to share their views on the theme.

The purpose of this letter is to inform you but I wish to invite members of the following committees; PAC, COSASE, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and the Public Account Committee –Local Government to attend this Anti-Corruption Day proceedings.

This is the information that I need to pass to you and please, the committees concerned should attend. All Members, this matter affects all of us to find time to come and join the President and the rest of the country in making a declaration of never again shall we be involved in practices of this nature. 

Also remembering that the people we call the corrupt are our mothers, fathers, sisters, brothers, wives, husbands. Those are the people we call corrupt. Therefore, the fight against corruption must begin with you and I.

When you do that, if we have something that is happening in the House that is not right, that is your frontline to start the war against corruption. Therefore, it affects all of us and we must all rise up and fight. Let us be with the President on that day. The minister will make a statement on activities that will take place on the Friday, 30 November 2018.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT ON THE SOCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANT FOR EMPOWERMENT SCHEME

2.19
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT ON THE SOCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANT FOR EMPOWERMENT SCHEME (Mr Alex Ndeezi): Mr Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment (SAGE) scheme.

The report has already been sent to Members’ iPads. Therefore, I am sure we are moving together. Secondly, this subject is not new. Therefore, I am not going to read verbatim. I will be pointing out only the main recommendations.

Mr Speaker, on 17 July, 2Ol8 you instructed the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to generate proposals for SAGE national roll-out. I am pleased to report that the committee has successfully completed the task. On page one and two, I would like to remind Members that the major component of SAGE are senior citizens grant, which is targeting elderly persons of 6o years and above in Karamoja and 65 years and above in other regions. Right now the SAGE is covering more than 123,000 elderly persons.

On page three, we point out the magnitude of the problem. According to the 20I4 National Population and Housing Census, the projected mid-year population of Uganda for 2O18 is 38.8 million of which an estimated 1.6 million persons are aged 60 years and above. This accounts for 4.1 per cent of the total population of Uganda.

On page 4, we point out the methodology we used to arrive at the recommendations.

The Committee held meetings with the following entities:

    1. Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 
    2. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development 
    3. Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Social Protection, among others.

Page 14 is for information. I will proceed to some of the recommendations which originated from the field.

The committee noted that the programme is heavily staffed but the personnel do not reach out to the elderly persons at the grassroots. The officers usually interface with the beneficiaries on payday.

The committee recommends that the Community Development Officers should work with the Local Council officials to be able to reach out to the elderly persons at the grassroots.

The committee observed that NIRA was not satisfactory in carrying out the mandate regarding registration of beneficiaries.

The committee recommends that the death reporting mechanism should be strengthened by involving grassroot structures right from the LC1 level to the sub-county level so that records are updated accordingly.

There should be automatic replacement of those who die by those who have been waiting to be enrolled.

On page 9, we highlight the justification of our work.

On page 10, we point out that it is a constitutional duty of the State to provide for elderly persons in this country.

We also point out that under the National Social Protection Policy, the State is required to make provisions appropriate for provision for elderly persons.

We also note that the National Policy for elderly Persons require that the programme of this nature should be implemented in all the districts of Uganda. The same applies to NDP, which supports the implementation of programmes of this nature for elderly persons.

Uganda has signed the Sustainable Development Goals and these goals are in line with the programmes of this nature. Page 13 to 18 is about the justification of the programme.

Let me turn to our main area of concern on page 18.

We considered options for national roll out. The options identified are seven. We considered many factors including availability of funds and the number of people we would be able to reach out. 

After carrying out consultation with the Ministry Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and other stakeholders, we agreed by consensus that we go by option number 3, which requires that the programme be rolled out in districts using the formula of 80+. 

The committee strongly recommends a national rollout of the programme with effect from the Financial Year 2019/2020 subject to the following conditions:

    i) The new beneficiaries in the new districts should be 80 years and above.
    ii) Current beneficiaries who are 65 years and above and those who are 60 and above in the Karamoja region in the 58 beneficiary districts will continue receiving the grant.
    iii) The Government should come up with a roadmap for reducing the eligibility age from 80 years to 60 and 65 years within three years from the year of the national rollout. The roadmap should be presented to Parliament in the first quarter of the next financial year after rollout.
    iv) There should be a review of the national roll out after every two years.
    v) The rollout plan should take into account committee recommendations on the current SAGE Programme.
    vi) In addition to rolling out the SAGE programme, the Government should initiate policy reforms to address the challenges faced by elderly persons, including those highlighted in this report. 

In the long run, the reforms should include setting up regional homes for elderly persons who are homeless, destitute or have no one to look after them. 

The homes should be operated as one-stop centre for all programmes and activities of elderly persons. 

The committee concludes by strongly recommending a sustainable national rollout of SAGE with effect from the Financial Year 20I9/2020.

The committee appeals to the Executive to ensure that the rollout plan is reflected in the next Budget Framework Paper as already promised. 

Attached to this report as Annex 6 and Annex 7 are letters from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development respectively committing to implement the national rollout.

Mr Speaker, I beg to Lay at the Table, the following documents:

    i) Annex 1 indicating projecting population of elderly persons per district.
    ii) Annex 2 population of the poor by district in SAGE districts and non-SAGE districts
    iii) Annex 3 the Report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social
    iv) Development on a field visit to North Eastern Uganda
    v) Annex 4 Report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on a field visit to Central and Western Uganda
    vi) Annex 5 Report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the oversight visit to Northern Uganda

    vii) Annex 6, letter from the Ministry of Finance dated 10 October promising to support the national rollout.

    viii)  Annex 7 letter from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development dated 08 the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development dated 8 November 2018 giving support to the national rollout programme.

    ix) Annex 8 has the number of SAGE beneficiaries per district. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to report and I hope you consider and adopt this report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson. Honourable members, you know that the matter on the decision of rolling out this programme has been on the Floor of this House for a long time. 

On the issue of financing, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development usually has money issues. There is also the issue of our partners. 

Honourable members, the committee has reached some level of agreement on these issues that are supposed to support this programme and they have presented this report.  I propose the question for debate for adoption of the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, which starts now. 

2.33
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman of the committee for he has given us a very good report. I would like to seek clarification on a few areas he has highlighted. 

About the interface by the officials with the elderly persons in the villages, it is true that officials normally meet the elderly persons only during payment time. There is no way they could have moved and visited the elderly persons, interacted with them, got their needs and wants. Therefore, it should be improved. Let the ministry design a programme whereby the officials get time to interact with the elderly persons in the villages. 

Secondly, I would like to thank the ministry. I feel that the modes of payment, especially in my District, Amuru, are quite convincing. I normally hear announcements on radio programmes mentioning Sub County by Sub County and sometimes, they move village by village to pay them. I feel that this is very good and encouraging because the elderly persons cannot move more than 20 kilometres to go and receive that little money. Hence, I would like to applaud you for that good initiative. 

I would also like to thank the Post Bank management for moving to those places. 

The committee also pointed out that there are well-to-do elderly persons that are also benefiting from this programme. I wonder how you gauge the well-to-do persons. I thought this money is supposed benefit a specific age bracket. If you are saying from 60 years and above, everyone of that age is supposed to benefit from that particular money.  However, according to the committee, it seems they are categorising that there are other well-to-do elderly persons. I feel that they should be very clear on that because each and every elderly person should benefit equally. 

On record keeping, we need to keep our records very well. It is true that there are very many elderly persons that are dying and the records are not captured. At the same time, you do not know where the money disappears because time again, they go distributing money and sometimes about 20 per cent are not there. Where do you put the money for someone who has died? 

On the pensioners, according to the committee, those who are receiving pension are not supposed to benefit from this, yet the record keeping is very poor. You have to critically specify those ones that are receiving pension and those that are not. Nevertheless, I would like to appreciate the chairperson of the committee because the report is very good and I pray you roll out to all the districts in this country. 
Thank you very much. 

2.36
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Packwach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for the report. I would like to agree with my colleague, hon. Olanya, that the record may not be right and not updated.

Recently, I was in my constituency bonding with electorates. One of the issues that they raised about SAGE is that they are grateful to Government. However, it looks like this programme is only intended for certain people, who reach 65 at a certain time. However, it seems like those that are reaching 65 after those that were recruited are not supposed to be considered. Therefore, they asked me to ask the Government whether they will be considered in due course. Thank you. 

2.38
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the ministry and Government for finally extending the programme to Kasese. They have started registering people of that age bracket and I would like to thank Government for that. 

The elderly are not of the same economic status. There are those who are within the age bracket but have serious investments. Some have buses, taxis, rentals and so the money should go to the very needy and not those ones who have investments, even if when they fall within the age bracket. 

People who are on a pension scheme get more than Shs 25,000 and some of the men or women who are 70 or 75 find it hard to even get Shs 1,000 in a month. Therefore, I strongly support the recommendations by the committee that those on a pension scheme must not get that money because they will be benefiting twice. 

There are those districts, which actually have high poverty levels and even when you go to a place, you can smell, see and feel poverty. I would pray to this House that for expansion of the programme, let the districts that have massive poverty take precedence because that is where the money is going to make an impact. 

I know that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has a number of programmes, including the Youth Livelihood Programme. I do not know how the committee looked at this. There are those families where the youths are benefiting from that programme and there are also those families where they also do not have youths who have benefited from that programme. I do not know how the committee looked at that. 

For example, in the event that they want a specific number in a particular Sub County, then they should also look at those considerations. The families who have people who have benefited from other programmes could come second but take those families who do not have youths or women as a priority who have not benefited from the programmes of Government. I thank you.

2.42
MR SAMUEL OKWIR (Independent, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the report. 
The report is well articulated, although I have one or two issues. When the first enrolments were done in the districts that started, it was 80 years being considered. Now, the districts that are coming on board are coming to 60 and 65 years for Karamoja. 

My problem is that the stress and trauma that people in northern region went through; somebody might look 60 years old but in reality, the person is already 80 years old. 
I am wondering –(interjections)– yes, this is the truth. There should be consideration that at least from 60 years, we should get considerations and our people are enrolled for this programme. I thank you very much.

2.43
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the committee for the excellent report. Koboko District has been one of the districts benefiting from the SAGE. I would like to be on record on behalf of the elderly people from Koboko to express our deep appreciation for this programme.

The elderly have found this programme extremely beneficial. Hon. Nzoghu said Shs 25,000 but that is a lot of money for the elderly in the village. It helps them to buy food. For the case of Koboko, they can buy cassava and beans and at least, be assured of a meal even if once a day instead of nothing. The elderly people have really appreciated this SAGE programme.

My appeal to Government is that given the example of Koboko District, this programme should be extended throughout the country so that every district is covered because it is really helping the elderly people who are 65 years and above.

Mr Speaker, my second appeal is that those who are already on the programme - every other year, there are people who graduate to qualify for that programme. However, the process of bringing them on board takes time and it causes conflict among the elders in the villages. 

They say: “I am now 65 years old, why are I am not getting and he is getting?” Let us avoid some conflicts in the rural areas. Let us have a process of bringing those who come on stream immediately the following year and this should follow the budget cycle. During the budgeting process for the next financial year, you bring on board all those who qualify to be 65 years old. 

Otherwise, my most serious appeal is that please, find the necessary resources and extend SAGE to every district and every elderly person in this country for this wonderful programme. I thank you.

2.46
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate the comprehensive work done by the committee. I also want to appreciate the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development and Government. 
I would further like to agree with hon. Nzoghu to appreciate what the NRM Government has done by bringing this very good programme. For the first time, since I joined Parliament, I have seen him openly appreciating.

This programme will greatly help our elderly people in this country. I believe if the Shs 25,000 is given to our elderly people in Busia District, it will help them to do a lot of cross border trade because this is capital on the border. I would like to agree with my colleagues that let this programme be rolled out throughout the country so that very many elderly people can benefit.

In addition, this programme will help our Government to be popular. For instance, if the people of Kasese are appreciating, other districts will appreciate and it will make NRM a very popular Government. (Applause)

2.47
MR PETER OKOT (DP, Tochi County, Omoro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, which came up with very good recommendations but I know in the process of them moving throughout the country, probably they did not go to all the districts but sampled some.

However, I would like to draw your attention to Omoro District - during registration, in every Sub County, the programme was to benefit 100 elderly persons. I think there was a problem during registration with the NIRA whereby during data capturing, there were some elderly persons whose data was captured incorrectly. For example, people aged 80 old were registration as 30 years old.

This has created problems in all the Sub Counties in Omoro District. They have failed to raise the 100 elderly persons that is required to be benefiting in each Sub County yet on the ground, there are many elderly persons. 

NIRA should get back and clean up the data so that the rightful elderly persons are indicated into this programme. 

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Peter Okot for giving me this opportunity to give this information. The information about NIRA data, during the time of registration, most of old people were unable to have their data captured using the fingerprints; the machines failed to detect some of them. When the machines would try to take their photos, it would say this is an animal not a human being. (Interjections) Yes, these were realities. I hope in the fresh registration, this will be sorted out. 

MR PETER OKOT: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, I would like to now urge the committee to consider that as part of their recommendation. Otherwise, I support their proposal that the programme be rolled out throughout the country. Thank you very much.

2.50
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to make an appeal. I know that the registration depends purely on having a National ID. There are cases where some elderly persons could have either misplaced or totally lost their National IDs. We know the process of getting a replacement, which has made a number of them to miss that opportunity. 

My appeal is that if – good enough we now have new LC1s. If the LC1s can confirm such elderly persons, I would appeal that they should be included on the beneficiary list. Thank you. 

2.52
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): I thank the committee for this report. I contribute with a heart of stone and I cannot understand the mood I see in this House. After 35 years of NRM governance and steady progress, each elderly person will get $7 per month to live on. It cannot sadden me any further that this is so far what we can afford. It is $6.7 to be exact if you go by the current market rate. That is part of the story. We are even still struggling. 

Secondly, what is not covered in the report is the cost of administration of this programme. The last time I looked at the figures, the cost of administration of this programme was far outstripping the benefits associated with it. 

However, the sad story also concerns NIRA. On the official data of NIRA, two million Ugandans have not yet been issued with IDs. Those people registered and NIRA gave a reason that they gave out insufficient documentation. As a result, NIRA has 1.2 million cards not issued out. Therefore, all these three million Ugandans, if they are part of this programme, cannot benefit from it. 

I do not think this money helps much. However, I am a representative of a poor county and I know $7 may mean something to the poorest of the poor. Also, what would $7 do in hospitals? These $7 people are suffering from all kinds of diseases and there are no such kinds of services in the countryside. Therefore, if we were not politicians in this House, we would have debated this programme with a different outlook. Given that we are politicians, we have our limitation to appear popular. We should reconsider this programme and say for someone to live on $7 may tantamount to an insult. Who on earth can live on $7 for a month? I would like to challenge any of you if you, can you live on $7 for a month – (Interruption)

MR MACHO: Mr Speaker, whereas the NRM Government has been in power for the years mentioned by my colleague, look at our neighbouring countries like Tanzania that has been stable but does not have such a programme. Is he in order to begin belittling a very good report that will benefit our people? 
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What has he belittled?

MR MACHO: He has belittled the report by saying the $7 given to every elderly person in Uganda is too little. How can it be too little moreover a normal Ugandan lives on less than that money per day?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is just debating. That is what the amount is. It is not a report of the committee. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of information. While I agree that, if the resources permit, our elderly people should receive more, I would like to inform you that at one point, the life expectancy in Uganda in the early 1990s had dropped to 43 years. One of the fundamental achievements of NRM over the last 30 years has been increase in the life expectancy. Life expectancy at birth has risen to 63.3 years. (Interjections) It is a technical word that some of you may not understand. What it means is that people are able to live longer. 

So, even at 60 years, you are able to still live many more years. At 70 years, you are also able to live many more years. The challenge there is that the elderly persons are surviving for a longer period. That is what brought the amount. It is very positive that the quality of life has improved. People are living for longer years. When you look at the report of the committee, those above 70 years are significant in number and that is very positive because we have achieved improvement in the quality of life.

MR KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, much as I appreciate the information, I do not know whether the minister is fully informed though. Looking at the current figures, the Ugandans who are above 55 years are only 2 million. That is the official figure from NIRA. Looking at the figures in the table, the people who are 90 and above are a little over 80 and the people above 85 are 102. The people who are in 70s are over 270. Then, what are you talking about? 

Let us be honest and say we have a despicable situation in the country. Let us debate it with the largest heart and recommend a solution that could be beneficial to the people of Uganda.

This amount is merely a beer. None of our parents who are above 70 can live on $7. My mother cannot live on $6.7 –(Interruption) 

MR MBABAALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Kivumbi for giving way. If you go back to the GDP, the income per capita of Uganda is about $700. If you go down to the calculations on $700 and see that the elders are given $7, it is justifiable when you compare it with the income per capita. These are people who are retired and are down at home. Receiving $7 is a great amount for the time being for an elderly Ugandan compared to the income per capita.

MR KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I would take his information if he was an economist like me. You know, that is why in modern economic theory, - (Interruption)

MR MBABAALI: Mr Speaker, I would like to tell hon. Kivumbi that I am a practical living economist who has stood the test of time as far as the economics of this country is concerned. I come out with data. I do not come out to just give a loud speech to my comrades here. Therefore, hon. Kivumbi is not in order to stand up and say he is an economist when he is not a practical one. 

Is he in order? (Laughter)   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, the challenge we have at the moment is that we are dealing with two types of economists: a practical economist and a theoretical economist. (Laughter) All that the Member was saying is that “if you are a theoretical economist like him…” However, you happen to be a practical one. Therefore, there is no problem. (Laughter)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I cannot add more. I know the challenge the honourable goes through in life as a practical economist. 

The point I am making is that, that is why in modern economics we have moved away from those statistics to go for the physical index because they never lie. If Government is offering $70, that is a quantum, clear and speaks for itself. It is absurd in this era and age for Parliament to sit here and paint a rosy picture. It is despicable. 

Therefore, this is a very good programme but we must, as Parliament, recommend policies that improve the standards of living of our people. Hon. Baba was saying “people afford posho and cassava…” The elderly want milk and real care not cassava and posho. Let us go for figures. If we are going for $90, let us give it to the people. If Government wants to help, it must offer real help.

MS SANTA ALUM: Mr Speaker, in Uganda now, under the leadership of the NRM Government, there are very many districts, which are not benefitting from this SAGE programme. Is it, therefore, in order for my colleague to begin advocating for additional money when some of us have not benefitted as districts found in Uganda?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was hoping the energy you were going to use in this debate was going to be towards a roll out programme to cover the whole country. In fact, from now on, I want the debate along those lines only. The issues of whether it is small or big when the rest of the country is not covered does not make sense. Even if it was $3 but covering the whole country, it would make more sense to debate the amount. However, when it is not yet covering the whole country, it does not make sense to start debating the amount.

3.04
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for these recommendations. Parliament from the inception of this SAGE programme – when the development partners gave some donation – was of the view that it is unconstitutional and segregative to give something to some elders of Uganda and none to others without clear criteria for who qualifies for the pilot project. I am, therefore, happy that we now seem to agree that this programme should have been rolled out from the start. 

As leaders who are responsible for policy and appropriation, we should lift the debate beyond the old development partners’ proposal. SAGE is just a component of social protection. It is just a component of the safety net. As Parliament and policy makers responsible for the budget, we should be discussing the bigger picture. We are talking about SAGE because most of our elderly people have not graduated from being workers to become pensioners. Therefore, we should look at the push-pull factors; what brings those elders?

Mr Speaker, ideally, if these senior citizens had graduated from the working class, they would be covered by either a Government pension or a provident fund like National Social Security Fund (NSSF) and other schemes that we have. Therefore, we need a deliberate structural effort to have citizens of Uganda to belong to that category if the roll out is going to be sustainable. 

If it has taken us five years to roll out that small amount of Shs 25,000 and if we do not make plans to deal with the sustainability problem, we shall roll out and get stuck. Therefore, whereas I support the roll out, I would like us not to look at the pressure, which came with that approach, which was fire-fighting. Can we have it as a policy and agree on how to finance it? 

I am aware of some efforts by the NSSF saying even if you have three workers, you should also be able to register for pensions. Pension should be contributory, not just gratitude all the time from Government when we know civil servants do not make five percent of this population. That is the bigger debate we should go for and if we take that line, Cabinet can give us the lead by presenting how this country intends to deal with safety nets and social protection as a bigger picture. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.08
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When this project started in 2010, we were told that this was going to be a pilot project for five years. After five years, Government would determine whether the project is successful or not. It is now over 10 years and Government has not come out to tell us whether or not the programme is successful. What we see on the ground is that it is not successful because it has not been rolled out.

Mr Speaker, the yardstick with age is not whether you are from a rich family, from Mbarara, Kitgum or anywhere because once you are old, it means you can no longer provide for yourself. You would have lost energy and even those who made the Constitution had it in mind that once you are old, the State should look after you.

Therefore, without wasting time, I would urge Government that if the programme has been successful and it can be managed, let it be rolled out such that every district can access this programme. Mr Speaker, this programme is causing us political problems. You cannot have a neighbouring community where the old people are getting Government grants yet, the elderly in your area are not getting. It is as if you are not doing anything here. (Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. This programme started in three districts of Kiboga, Kyenjojo and Kaberamaido –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: In 2010. It has been a successful story. We the people of Kiboga have received delegations after delegations getting testimonies from the old people who have been able to buy exercise books, salt and sugar on a monthly basis. One of the examples I can give is that in 2010, in one of the Sub Counties in Kiboga called Kibiga, every Saturday, they used to slaughter one cow and divide its meat into four to send to other Sub Counties. However, on the day the elders receive their SAGE money the number of districts from three to 26 since people were yearning for the programme to be rolled out. You cannot roll out something that has failed; you would rather stop the programme. For sure, the SAGE programme has really assisted. Like you have said, what we have to do is to find counterpart funding since it started as a donation. What the Government has to do is to find money so that we can roll out the programme to the remaining districts. Thank you.

MR YAGUMA: Thank you, honourable colleague. You did not get me well. What I said was that the objective of the SAGE programme and piloting it for five years was to decide whether it would be manageable or successful. Now that you have said that it has been successful, why isn’t it rolled out? Why can’t it cover every aged person? Unless we are suggesting that we should create different districts for the old and the young people; otherwise, it defeats my understanding. 

Mr Speaker, since we are in the budgeting process for the financial year 2019/2020, Parliament should consider the programme in the budget so that it is rolled out. I thank you.

MR OYET: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order. The Rules of Procedure clearly spell out the sitting arrangement of this House. It is a practice that the Front Bench on the right hand side of the Speaker is reserved for the Cabinet ministers and the Front Bench on the left hand side is reserved for the shadow ministers. 

Mr Speaker, is it in order for a stranger to occupy a position meant for the Cabinet ministers when the ministers are seated behind. To be specific, I am referring to the third person on your right hand side. At least this side, we know ourselves. Is it in order not only for the stranger but even a backbencher to sit and occupy the space of the Cabinet ministers? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, usually, when chairpersons of committees are about to present a report, they occupy those positions. If you look at the Order Paper, the next item is the National Bio-Technology and Bio-Safety Bill, 2012. The honourable member who is being referred to is the chairperson of that committee. Probably, he is taking position  to be able to engage. (Laughter)

However, I think before the matter is called, he would have sat where he normally sits and only come down when the matter has been called. Therefore, for the purposes of proceeding properly without disrupting business, the Member can sit where he has been sitting. When that business is called, you have the prerogative. However, the honourable member should not attempt to force the hand of the Speaker to make some –(Laughter)

3.16	
MR MAURICE KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to concur with the chairperson that we are very late - 
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you keep your submission brief so that more Members can speak? Otherwise, the time allocated to debate this matter is already up; it ended about seven minutes ago.

MR KIBALYA: As the Government of Uganda, we are very late to have this programme rolled out to the entire country.

Mr Speaker, I come from a district where the senior citizens are beneficiaries of this programme but they are complaining. If there are complaints from a district where the programme exists, what do you think is happening in those districts where the programme has not yet been rolled out?

The Tenth Parliament is on record for fighting discrimination; let us stop discrimination and help our senior citizens from the districts that have not yet received this benefit so that they can get this money, like those who are already benefiting from the programme in Kamuli.

Recently, in Kamuli, I buried a person. This senior citizen received his money for two months, which was about Shs 50,000. He was very excited and he bought everything. However, amidst that excitement, he was knocked dead by a bicycle. Mr Speaker, that is the kind of excitement I would like to see in Moyo, Kapelebyong, Tororo, among others. 

As the Tenth Parliament, we should not waste time on this matter but we should ensure that we roll out the programme to all the districts and then additions will come later. Thank you.

3.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Mr Speaker for the opportunity. I also thank the committee for the report.

I have been to a number of local governments in this country and the request from the senior citizens has been the SAGE programme. I would like to recommend that it should be rolled out to all the districts in this country.

Mr Speaker, old age comes with a lot of health challenges. There are sicknesses such diabetes, hypertension and cancer, among others. When you go to our –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, the tradition in this House is that the Front Bench members come in to give information or to wind up the debate. However, the Member, who is a member of the Cabinet, has all the opportunities where this is being done - She is just repeating what we recommended to them, which actually should have been implemented by the Cabinet. I know she is a Member of Parliament but the tradition here is well-known.

Mr Speaker, you are more senior than me in this House and you know the tradition very well. Therefore, is the Member proceeding well by jumping the queue before her time comes to speak as a Cabinet member?
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are Members of Parliament and this is the only place where there is no queue because we are all equal.

MS NAMUYANGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was hoping that she was going to support the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development when this matter comes in Cabinet. I hope she is going to say that - (Laughter) 

MS NAMUYANGU: Mr Speaker, the only point of contention is the committee’s recommendation that the SAGE programme should cater for citizens of 80 years and above. Those senior citizens who reach 80 years are those that are looked after very well - the parents of members of Parliament and maybe civil servants. However, majority of the poor die before attaining this age. 

Therefore, I would like to recommend that we maintain the 65 years. It will be very unfortunate, for example, for the local governments that are already benefitting to tell the new entrants that they have to wait until they are 80 years. I would like to strongly recommend that we maintain the 65 years. After all, majority of these senior citizens are the ones looking after the orphans. Like hon. Nankabirwa mentioned, they are normally excited to get this money and buy books for their grandchildren. 

Therefore, it is a programme that we must support because it is a programme that is really beneficial to our people. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.22
MR JACOB OPOLOT (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join the rest of my colleagues to commend the committee for the wonderful report. I am happy that whenever we debate this matter, we seem to be generally in agreement that older persons are all the same. Wherever they are, their needs are the same and therefore, they should all be reached.

We also agree that the money is Shs 25,000 and even if someone somewhere will think it is peanuts, there is someone elsewhere who thinks it is something worthy to get. Therefore, as we debate, let us not make the older persons live our lives. Let us facilitate them to live their lives.

For those who eat fish or meat, many times you throw the bones but you will find those black ants struggling to pull that bone which has nothing because they have something to get out of it. - (Laughter) - so, do not say that the bone is useless to that black ant. It is useless to you; so, throw it and let that ant pick it.

Mr Speaker, we have engaged a number of times and we have debated and made resolutions for a national roll out. I really think that as we get further into the budgeting process, our discussions here should translate into concrete actions and decisions that lead to the national roll out. We have taken very long debating this. 

I would like to believe that because we have been waiting for the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, we are going to conclude the debate and wait to see real figures in terms of financial allocations to this programme being passed in this House so that those desperate older persons are saved. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank colleagues for this debate. Once more, I thank the committee for a wonderful job.

3.25
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I reluctantly support the idea of institutionalising distribution of money but the argument in the report and from a majority of Members is that even if that were the case, at least it needs to be done democratically so that everybody gets it.

There are two figures in the report on the amount of money we need to cover Ugandans who are above 65 years. There is Shs 373 billion and Shs 480 billion, going by the contribution by the Irish and UK Governments. That is the money we need to distribute to people who are elderly.

One of the recommendations that the committee made is that we need to build homes at a regional basis for people who are vulnerable and are homeless. I got the point from hon. Mukitale that this is one form of social protection. If you look at the figures from the National Social Security Fund of Ugandans who are on social protection schemes, NSSF has about 1.6 million people. 

Those who work in public service are, I think, about half a million. In total, you only have about two million people who have social protection; either when old or no longer working. This is less than 10 per cent. Kenya is now at 25 per cent. If you went to the Asian Tigers like Malaysia and others, some are at 78 per cent and Hong Kong is at 100 per cent. That is why I said I am reluctant to support the institutionalisation of distribution of money.

What this Government must be speaking about in this century is how to get everybody some form of social protection. I do not know whether it will be asking for too much. I think if you got most of the older people a health insurance scheme, it would be better than the policy that we have. However, that is what we currently have.

Mr Speaker, I have two points before I wind up. The reason Europeans are different is that they work to expand the little that they have but Africans fight to share the little that is available. That is the difference between us and them. They work to expand the little that they have while we are fighting to control the little that is available.

The proposals I would like to hear from Government and the minister - if the target for this Government was to have everybody push us into the middle income status by a certain age - whether the demand by this Parliament to make sure this programme reaches everybody will even be relevant, if by 2020, we are a middle income country and people can afford their own lives? I would like Government to tell me the contradiction of these policies. You are working so hard to make sure we are a middle income country such that everybody can take care of himself but at the same time, you are saying no, now this can no longer be a pilot programme; everybody will need to be given money. 

We have pensioners and I guess those who are on NSSF; the trouble is that we do not have reliable data and it is a point that hon. Nzoghu made. Must this scheme be for everybody, including those who are pensioners and those on NSSF and others? Doesn’t Government have figures - if they do not give them to us – for you to be able to exclude those who are benefitting from other schemes such that even when you roll out, it does not become a bonanza that money has fallen so everybody must go running to get it, including those to whom it does not make sense.

Finally, the policy of this Government on age seems to be shifting. The moment you say people at 65 years are vulnerable; it means we must even encourage those who are still working in public offices to retire. In fact, I am waiting for a day when we will compute SAGE, for example, for the President and give him arrears because he is 75 years now. If we start at 65 years to calculate all his arrears, we can then go and give it to him, just like these other elderly people are getting. I do not want to mention other names because people will be offended. (Laughter)

Therefore, if the policy is that at 65 years you are vulnerable yet you have brought here a motion to say that at 65 years, you are no longer vulnerable; which policy are you people in Government pushing for – (Interruption)

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With due respect to the acting Leader of the Opposition, who was advising Government in his submission that people who are in Public Service and who are fairly well-off should not receive this money such that it is not like a bonanza; he then includes the name of the President who is working and is entitled to pension, is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member was just dramatising his point because whoever clocks the age of 65 is entitled to this programme and we should leave it at that.

Honourable members, you recall that the challenge with this roll out programme has always been the financing and I was hoping that the debate was going to focus there. Honourable minister, are we prepared to deal with this issue of donor counterpart funding now?

3.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I would like to thank the chairperson for the report. Indeed we interacted with the committee members and agreed that this programme must be rolled out to the entire country in a phased manner.

If we are to maintain the age of 65 years, the resources available, given other competing priorities, might not be implemented in one single financial year. The logical strategy is to fast-track the implementation and roll out to everybody who is above 65 years in a phased manner.

The Leader of the Opposition questioned why Government is pushing the policy to ensure that we reach the middle income status by a certain period and at the same time you are also looking at helping the elderly. There is no contradiction because it is the responsibility of Government to ensure that the welfare of the citizens is guaranteed; whether it is through empowerment through the private sector or support through initiatives like SAGE.

Mr Speaker, I would like to confirm that in the next financial year, we will again come with an improved budget allocation to this programme so that –(Interjections)– We will come with proposals in the Budget Framework Paper and also in the budget that we shall present here. Then if in our wisdom we think that this should be done in one single year - given the competing priorities - then we will make a decision together in this House because at the end of the day, it is Parliament that appropriates resources of the country. (Interruption)

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you, for giving me the opportunity to raise this clarification. The committee raised a very key recommendation - that is for a national rollout of 85 years plus starting in the next financial year and then come out after three years with a road map to reduce from 80-plus to 65 years old. 

Honourable minister, can we get your word on this because it is the recommendation from the committee and yet all Members are saying that we need a national roll out. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the recommendation of the committee, I believe, was based on the assessment of the resources available. Given the resources available, the 80 years and above can be accommodated within one single year but if Parliament talks about 65 years and above, then we have got to make proposals and make a conclusive decision at a time of budget appropriation together, as Parliament.

If it is 85 years and above, that can be rolled out in a single year but if Parliament insists on 65 years and above, it has to be done in a phased manner.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, if the minister can listen to me; the committee makes a specific recommendation that we need to cover the whole country starting with this specific age and the minister has outlined the limitations.

Honourable minister, the coverage that you have is not even half of the districts almost 10 years later; how many more years do you need to cover the whole country going by the proposal of 65 years?

MR JAMES BABA: Honourable minister, if you moved the age to 85 years and above, what is going to happen to those already on the payroll; are you going to eliminate them?

There is a Public Service rule that states that once you are on the payroll you have to access it until you expire. What will happen to those people?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, let us wind up this debate. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, given what hon. James Baba has pointed out, the logical way is to maintain the 65 years but roll it out in a phased manner. However, if we come here with that proposal and together decide - because you must take on one priority against the other – so, if we decide that our priority should be to sort out this issue vis-à-vis other priorities, then that decision will be taken at the budgeting time. However, in principle, we agree to roll out and fast-track it given the age limit that Parliament is talking about. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have had these discussions here and I hoped that somebody was going to help us. I attended one of the meetings where the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development came out with this proposal. I hoped that somebody was going to alert the House on what the discussion and conclusion was and part of the discussion that happened in the last budget did not realise any gains for this particular proposal that came from the committee.

Can somebody clarify on that and what were the proposals because that is where this proposal of the committee is coming from?

The first option was to stop it altogether because if the rest of the country cannot benefit, why should part of the country benefit; if you cannot afford, stop it. 

Then the second one was rolling it out but what would be the implication of rolling out? It would affect the age. I think the age was proposed then and the transition provision that was in the programme at that time was that those who are already benefitting should continue until later. That is why the discussion raised by hon. James Baba would not arise because those were the options which were presented.

Therefore, what the committee is proposing is a hybrid of the two; they are proposing to roll it out nationally while taking care of those who are already benefitting. Then, after a period of time, we will review the years again because we will have done the assessment to know the total number of people benefitting and come to an age that can be supported. 

The reason is that there are people who are not benefitting even when they are 66 years or 68 years; that will not affect them. In some districts, there are people of 70 years old who are not benefitting and that will not affect them. Do you get the point?

So, you cannot say we make a roll out of people at 65 years countrywide. That is what the discussions were about. It has to be something implementable and sustainable. 

For now, we have the report of the committee to adopt. I will now put the question for the adoption of the report of the committee and then we will see how to take it from there. 

Honourable members, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment scheme be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, on 26 September 2017, on this Floor, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development presented, in response to our request, the Government preparedness report for first oil 2020. The report was lacking in numbers, commitment of local content but more so, the role of the different Government departments like NEMA, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development; Ministry of Works and Transport; Ministry of Security (Office of the President); Uganda Police Force; Uganda People’s Defence Forces; Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development; Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities; Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and Ministry of Local Government to support the joint venture partnership to make oil delivered by the Chinese company.

The Speaker directed that the ministry should bring a matrix, which informs each department on what they will do and also update Parliament on – and I have the Hansard here – on the progress of the front end engineering design. Yesterday, in the New Vision pullout, the Petroleum Authority told us that the final finance investment decision can only be done next year and not now. This already indicates that the first oil 2020 is not possible.

In the last two weeks, Mr Speaker, in Nwoya and Buliisa Districts –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you rose on a procedural matter?

MR MUKITALE: Yes, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to raise the procedural point?

MR MUKITALE: Last week, NEMA with the Petroleum Authority, presented a public hearing in the districts of Nwoya and Buliisa of a project amounting to close to $15 billion, the first of its kind in Uganda. One of the concerns was that Parliament was not made a depository like other places to debate this information and for that, another public hearing was required.

Can I request for, in line with the earlier Speaker’s ruling, the preparedness matrix which shows the responsibilities of different ministries and their activities? Since we are in the budgeting process, the matrix should show the money for the Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development so that we deliver the first oil not beyond 2021.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the procedural point?

MR MUKITALE: Are we proceeding properly for a $15 billion project to be implemented without the leading ministry and Government coming back to Parliament to tell us their level of preparedness and how each department is going to be financed? 

My prayer is that –(Laughter)– that is the procedural matter for your indulgence, Mr Speaker.
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is true that this request was made. It is also true that the minister responsible made an undertaking. What was raised at that time was that there is a major activity that is going to take place in the economy and yet the specific roles of the institutions are not known. The timeline for the different institutions and what they will do was not given. The minister then undertook to present to Parliament the matrix of activities and what different agencies are expected to be doing at a particular time so that when the actual moment comes for harvest, we are prepared.

This happens everywhere where institutions are functional. For example, the United Kingdom, three years ago, budgeted for Brexit - whether it would happen or not. They set aside money to handle all issues to do with Brexit. Right now, for the last two years, they are running what they call “mock trials”. If something happens upon Brexit, what is the level of preparedness of the different institutions to respond immediately to deal with the implications that could arise as a result of Brexit? They are trying these things out; that the day they announced Brexit, they were ready to go, without hiccup. 

I think this is the point that was made. In other words, when oil comes, we do not want institutions to start fumbling on what they need to do to fit in the equation of what must be done. That level of preparedness is what Parliament expected at that time. 
	
Therefore, can we have this sooner or later because the undertaking was done in February? Rt Hon. Prime Minister, are we on course on this matter?

3.49
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I agree with you and the House. As Government, we are also working very hard. We have different fora. We have a procedure that what comes to Parliament should actually go through Cabinet first. At the moment, we are working in Cabinet on what is being said; not very long from now, this matter will come to the House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have an idea of the timeframe?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: After Christmas, we shall come here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: After Christmas could mean the 26th of December. That means next year. Honourable members, let us wait and receive this matrix and see how it can guide us to do monitoring of what we need to. This will enable the different sectoral committees to get involved, especially where there are issues that affect them.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE COMMEMORATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL ANTI-CORRUPTION DAY, 2018

3.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ETHICS AND INTEGRITY) (Rev. Fr Simon Lokodo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to present this statement. 

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I rise to make a statement in regard to the forthcoming commemoration of the International Anti-Corruption Day for the year 2018.

By Resolution 58/4 of 31 October 2003, the United Nations General Assembly designated 9 December as the International Anti-Corruption Day. The day was designated for global observance to promote awareness about corruption, its dangers and how to combat it. Uganda signed the convention on 9 December 2003 and ratified it on 9 September 2004; and is one of the member states that annually undertake activities to commemorate it.

The anti-corruption agencies in Uganda, in partnership with their stakeholders, annually commemorate the Anti-Corruption Day through a series of weeklong activities, which are referred to as the "Anti-Corruption Week". During this week, the stakeholders reflect on the progress made in the fight against corruption and seek to raise awareness on the importance of public participation to eradicate the vice. 

The climax of the activities is the Anti-Corruption Day, annually designated on 9th December, which is commemorated by various activities scheduled for each year. This year, the theme of the Anti-Corruption Week is “Citizens' participation in the fight against corruption: A sustainable path to Uganda's transformation.”

Mr Speaker, the Anti-Corruption Week will be launched on Friday, 30 November, 2O18 at the Constitutional Square, Kampala. His Excellency, the President of Uganda, is expected to be the Chief Guest. The launch will begin at 8.30 a.m. With a procession through selected streets of Kampala; precisely, we shall go through Kampala Road, Jinja Road, come up to Speke Road and go back to the Constitutional Square where the speeches will be delivered.

Since the International Anti-Corruption Day, 9th December falls on a Sunday this year, its commemoration has been scheduled for Monday, 10 December 2018. On that day, His Excellency, the President, will commission the Coordination Liaison Office for dealing with corruption complaints sent to State House which he announced with its members this year, during the State of the Nation Address. 

On the same day, His Excellency, the President, will address the nation at Kololo Independence Grounds on the corruption scourge and the anti-corruption efforts made by Government so far.

The purpose of this communication is to invite the entire Parliament and the communities to join us in demonstrating our condemnation and denouncement of corruption in this country. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, these are the information papers that are giving notice to us of the events that will take place during the one week of commemoration, starting on 30th of November and terminating on the actual day the UN designated - extended by one day to 10 December 2018 at Kololo and the invitation to all of you.

If there is a comment, I will allow one or two but if there is no comment, let us proceed with the next item.

3.56
DR NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, thank you for the opportunity to say something about the subject that is absolutely essential for our nation’s ability to qualify as a nation of civilised people and a nation that is secure. It is that essential.

Corruption, more than any other subjects so far, has the potential to cause this nation to be enslaved, dominated, and exploited by interests that have nothing to do with the future of this country. Therefore, it is a hugely important subject.

Unfortunately, the country is not aware that it is that important more than any other subjects. It is the one that has the potential to change the face of this nation to a degree we have not seen before. Therefore, I welcome the minister’s statement but wish to say that first of all, the focus of citizen participation is spot on. What I wish to see is the prolonged campaign that liberates our people from the kind of ignorance that is so much deep on our side. 

That really, if they do not come out to fight against this situation, we are going to be in more trouble than we think. Therefore, I do see citizens’ participation as a very important strategy and I welcome the minister’s approach. What is required is that we have a sustained campaign that liberates our people from knowing that they are the losers.

When we give them hand-outs, it is their money we are giving them and they need to know and come out and be more watchful and assertive. We need to liberate them - and the minister’s programme does not pay attention to that. 

I wish Government spends more time, in a more systematic way, on radio stations and other media to ensure that people are made to know that they have the last say if we are to defeat this pandemic, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. This is information and an invitation. Do you want to discuss how you will be invited? Do you have a word? The Leader of the Opposition will speak last. 

3.59
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, PWD, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the Minister for Ethics and Integrity for presenting this report and also to thank the United Nations for setting aside this day to fight corruption globally. 

Mr Speaker, corruption has become a chronic disease in our country. I suggest that Parliament, as a legislative body, on that day or beginning of that week, would be re-examining the present laws we have in fighting corruption. We would be re-examining the status of the bodies that we have, including the IGG and others, on how far they have gone in fighting corruption.

Parliament would ensure that if need be - we need some amendments to ensure that we strengthen the fight against corruption through legislation and then we would embark on that, Mr Speaker.

I, therefore, implore the Minister for Ethics and Integrity that we look at the serious amendments which Government should bring on the Floor of the House, including, among others, confiscation of property that has been acquired through corruption. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.01
MR HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Mr Speaker, I rise to seek clarification from the honourable minister in charge of ethics. According to the 2017 Corruption Perception Index reported by Transparency International, Uganda was ranked 151 out of 175 countries in terms of being the least corrupt nations.

As we commemorate the Anti-corruption Day 2018 and 2018 is coming to an end; may I know from the honourable minister whether our rating has improved?

4.03
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When the lawyers have their legal year, you find all the lawyers dressed in their gowns and wigs in front of the High Court to celebrate that time. 

When farmers have their day, they bring all their produce from the farms - cattle or bananas - to display. When Uganda manufacturers have their day at UMA Grounds, all the manufacturers are there with their products. 

On this Anti-Corruption Day honourable, what are we expecting? Are we bringing the corrupt for display? Can we have a demonstration of our seriousness to fight corruption? Thank you.

4.04
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, His Excellency the President, vowed to fight corruption on very many occasions. He started talking about fighting corruption many years ago and up to now, we see the situation still moving on normally.

I would like to find out, after the launch that day, what other activities will follow to make sure that the campaign moves on for the next three or four years to come.

Secondly, do you have short messages that can be put across, for example, fliers for Ugandans to carry that day? It would be good to have messages printed and distributed to all Ugandans, especially to those who will be going to Kololo Grounds for the launch. That would send a very good message to the corrupt people. Thank you.

4.04
MS JOY ONGOM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this step towards a prosperous nation. If we are to achieve this, I feel that we should walk the talk. Just talking about ending corruption and not acting on it will never help this nation.

Mr Speaker, people think things like kick-backs are the norm when actually it is corruption which is so bad for us. In other countries, if you act that way, you are fired or sometimes put on firing squad. I wish this country did something.

In most cases, we have offices of the IGG in the districts but the population has lost confidence in the IGG. You report to them but they do not take action or if they are to take action, they come to pick kickbacks. I think the person in the Office of the IGG should see from this that the President himself has also lost confidence in her that is why he is now getting a report direct to State House and this is not good for her.

However, we also appeal to the minister and if anything, let this House come up with a resolution that if they find you and you are convicted of corruption, your property - in addition to being jailed - has to be confiscated but we never see this at all. 

Therefore, let us show examples to the population that the moment you are corrupt, you will be handled harshly and then an example is shown to the rest of the population. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Didn’t we pass the Private Members Bill from the former Member for Makindye? We passed it and it takes care of what she is saying.

4.06
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. This ‘disease’ called corruption – some call it a vice, others call it “a friend to some people” because they are surviving on it and yet at the end of the day, everybody is suffering because of the vice.

I would like to request the Minister of Ethics and Integrity that when we talk about ethics - Ugandans don’t understand what we call ethics. I wish the minister would actually come out clearly and let ethics be taught right from primary school - maybe something can be done.

I would like to request all of us that let us have the will to fight this vice because as we talk, the entire country is suffering because of the element of corruption.

Mr Speaker, before I seek clarification, we must examine ourselves as far as the fight against corruption is concerned right from the police, the Judiciary to this Parliament. Everywhere, we must examine ourselves because that is where the problem originates.

Finally, are we all going to commemorate the International Anti-Corruption Day here in Kololo or is it going to be countrywide? Thank you.

4.08
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. An international day like this, I would expect that this is where the country and the Government would take stock and make accountability on how far we have gone in fighting corruption.

I thank the Government because many institutions have started fighting corruption. However, honourable minister, I am disappointed in your statement. You have not told us how far we have gone in fighting corruption and what the future is. Actually, the statement looks like you have given up. Therefore, how far are we?

4.09
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I get perturbed as a national leader, sitting in this House, hearing the statement of the minister. He is not a minister for corruption but a minister for ethics. Ethics is about behaviour and behaviour is about our way of life.

I would have loved to hear from his statement, like colleagues have said, what Government is doing to fight corruption? Before the week that will commemorate the International Anti-Corruption Day, what has been done prior to that to fight corruption especially to change the way of life of Ugandans?

Mr Speaker, if you go upcountry - especially for us politicians - you will get perturbed to see children asking you for money to go and campaign or for money as you address people and leave. What is the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity doing to change the attitude of these young Ugandans so that they do not grow from that begging aspect to becoming corrupt? 

What is the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity doing about reckless drivers who just come and overtake or do a U-turn? That is corruption to me. It is not just about taking huge sums of money from the different government departments or ministries. It all starts from our behaviour. What is this ministry doing to change the attitude of these Ugandans that think that until they are given something is when they can do something positive for this country? I have not seen it anywhere. All we hear of is the Anti-Corruption Week. 

What is it that the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity is doing in the course of this week in the West Nile region, in northern Uganda, in western Uganda and in eastern Uganda so that the people of Uganda are alert that we do not have to do this- How are they co-operating with other Government departments to fight corruption? 

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. 

4.12
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, you have been a minister for a long time and I am also very happy that you are a priest. A lot of corruption takes place right before your eyes; for example, when people are distributing public resources like money. 

Honourable minister, you are a priest so your conscious should actually question that. We know also that corruption is big in State House, where they sometimes deceive people. For example, there are State House Scholarships. They are public resources which should be used transparently, but corruption is deeply rooted in there. How are you going to dig deeper to ensure that this culture of corruption is completely uprooted? There are scenarios where a child of primary two or three goes to the mother or father and says, “Give me Shs 1,000 and I go and buy sweets to give to my friends so that they elect me as a prefect.” That is how deeply corruption is rooted. 

It is corruption for us to go and buy voters. Then, when we do so, we come here and put our coats on our seats while we are probably not doing parliamentary work. When we are doing parliamentary work and some people are not available, is that okay? When we refuse to do parliamentary work, then we are simply being corrupt. It means that we are actually misusing public resources. 

When I was in primary and secondary school, at least education was valued. Why should education now be so different? A person who is deep down in the rural areas does not get the same opportunity with a person who is blessed to be in town. Why do we have those differences? It is due to corruption. 

We find that public resources do not do what they are supposed to do. If our public resources were to do the right thing, social services would not be a big problem like how our education and health systems are suffering. 

We are supposed to be servant leaders. Let us not think about this IGG that is here but the IGG up there, who will judge us. 

Therefore, honourable minister, you are digging deeper and you are going to tell us what constitutes corruption because it is not only about money. At the same time, it is also about how you handle your public office. Sometimes, it is how you handle people. It also involves requesting for “Kitu Kidogo.” 

I know that in developed countries, they sometimes talk about tips, which I think are corrupt tendencies. We probably need to legalise this, if we are to run away from corruption. Let us legalise tips but if we give them from under the table, without receipts or evidence like the way some money is received here in Parliament, then it is corruption. 

Honourable minister, tell me if money did not exchange hands during the removal of the age limit. If I am a liar, then God should punish me. If I am not a liar, you must know that people received money, not on the table, but under the table. Shame! Thank you. 

4.17
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before this paper came here, we discussed it extensively in Cabinet.

Nevertheless, should we come with a rule for example and dictate that this topic should only be discussed by non-corrupted people to say for those who will talk about this paper should be those who are not corrupt. If this rule is accepted, then how do we find out who is corrupt? Do we bring people from Mulago to test our blood for corruption? Or do we see it by appearance? Is the figure there? How many are we in the House? We are now 132; so where are the rest? Are we going to be paid according to our attendance? No, we are not. Aren’t we corrupt ourselves? You do not attend the House and then receive money that you have not worked for. Isn’t it corruption? We must be sympathetic towards Fr Lokodo.

Corruption is not only money exchanging hands. It includes abusing freedom. Beating police is also corruption; through teargas, they are controlling corruption. Giving unnecessary orders is also corruption. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, indeed, corruption is deep-rooted. We must fight corruption together. We must probably define what corruption is to understand it better. The fact that you abuse freedom is corruption. The freedom is probably too much for you so you abuse it -(Interjection)- I am 80 years old and I am here to guide the young people. It is not corruption. Yes, I am here because I was voted. (Laughter)
 
Therefore, you must be careful. As a House, it must start with us –(Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I have realised that the First Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business in Parliament, is giving us a very broad and holistic definition of corruption; which apparently the substantive Minister of Ethics and Integrity did not provide.

Procedurally, I would like to ask through you, Mr Speaker, whether the Minister of Ethics and Integrity could provide us with a comprehensive list of what constitutes corruption because today, the age has become corruption. At what age do I become corrupt? Teargas has become corruption and beating your children is being called corruption. There are so many categories of corruption and the class is increasing. 

Secondly, this Anti-Corruption Week is a reflection of where we were last year, two years ago and five years ago in terms of corruption? How much have we spent in terms of budgetary location on fighting corruption? How far have we gone in terms of eliminating corruption from our system?

Mr Speaker, the minister should be honest to us. Corruption has become institutionalised. The procedural matter, I am raising is that the report the minister has provided is porous. We expected a more holistic and solid presentation to make us take stock of how far we have gone in the fight against corruption and the challenges we are facing and how much budgetary expenditure has gone towards fighting corruption. 

Those are the procedural matters I would like him to put on the Floor. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you might have to response to that. Gen. (Rtd) Ali, have you finished?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join colleagues to sympathise with Uganda. Whether we like it or not - whether you are in the Opposition or Government, the country is corrupt. Who is going to say from that side about any of them being corrupt? All problems are dumped on Government. Everything is dumped on Government. There is procedure to come in Government.

Therefore, let us not divert issues. Corruption is a serious problem to everybody. We must find a way of solving it. We must not just say Government, okay, we are put in charge. In charge of you, yes - (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I was reluctant to raise a point to order against my elder and former Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development under Idi Amin’s Government. (Laughter)

However, the reason, I have picked courage to do so is because he is now a First Deputy Prime Minister in another Government; responsible for the finances not only collecting but also keeping. 

Is the First Deputy Prime Minister who also served as Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development under Idi Amin, in order to absolve himself of the responsibility of Government over the many years he has served and now blames the people he is serving that they are also responsible for corruption and, therefore, we cannot do anything because everybody is corrupt? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the First Deputy Prime Minister was clear. He said: ”This country is corrupt.” The entire country is corrupt including everybody who is in this country. (Laughter) 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Sir. Now that I am reminded to talk about the 1970s, indeed, I cannot deny; I was a Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. In the 1970s, you would not hear the word corruption. If you wanted to know about it, you would just look for it in the dictionary. You could not find it anywhere. 

Therefore, that does not mean that I should not work after 1970s. This is what God has destined me for. I am not corrupt and I can talk about myself and God knows. 

However, I cannot stop somebody from being corrupt. If I know that you are corrupt, I would tell you. If I do not know then there is no way I can stop you. When I say that this country is corrupt, you must all be sorry and I really mean it. 

Altogether, we must find a way of fighting corruption –(Interjections)- If you think like that, your mind is corrupt. (Laughter) Yes, you are corrupted in the mind and you want to simplify things.

In the beginning, I said who is corrupt among us here? We cannot tell by appearance or by putting on this “thing” and that red cap that somebody is corrupt. No, it depends on how we also think. If you are attacking a minister, so what, is it a crime to be in Government? That is a corrupt mind also –(Laughter)- why do you think it is important? Am I the only one in Government? No.

I would like to conclude by shedding tears internally. I would like to pray to God to help this country and bring good thinking people to fight corruption. When there is freedom in the country, do not abuse it. When there is a law, do not abuse it. When the police on the street stop you, do not fight them because all that is corruption. There is too much freedom and people are abusing it. When teargas is brought it is to control –(Interjection)– yes, that is why we are now talking here –(Laughter)– and you are abusing this freedom. We sacrificed but you are now abusing the freedom we brought. Thank you, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On the specific issues about this event, honourable minister.

4.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ETHICS AND INTEGRITY) (Rev. Fr Simon Lokodo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the colleagues for their contributions and lively debate. You have showed consciousness and sensitivity on the matter.

Mr Speaker, there were a number of questions that needed a lot of clarification but in the interest of time, I would like to seek your indulgence: If it is possible, you give me time, to go back and come up with a clear definition of “corruption” the drivers of corruption, the extent and the level at which we are as a country; to be able to show and give to this Parliament the efforts of Government in the fight against corruption. The institutions that are there, the legal framework that is there and how far we have managed this graft.

I would lay at the Table here achievements of Inspectorate of Government, Auditor-General, Office of DPP, PPDA, URA all the institutions that fight against corruption on behalf of Government.

However, now, it is very important for me to respond to this. That this statement was to inform Parliament that the Anti-Corruption Week which is an international event is due and it happens every year. This year, it lands on the 9th December as it had happened the other years. For this year, we are going to start with a preparatory week for this event from the 30th November and I would like to invite all my colleagues to join us in matching on the streets of Kampala showing that we shun and condemn this graft.

Then join H.E the President on the 10th December at Kololo where he is going to pronounce himself on the subject and then the inter agency forum- the anti-corruption agency-each one of them will give their position in the fight against corruption so far. How far have they gone? How many people have they apprehended and how many have they punished and how much money have they recovered? All those things related to the fight against corruption.

I will also give what the functions of the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity is. Ethics and Integrity has two pillars in its mission – rebuild ethics and integrity in society and coordinate Government efforts in the fight against corruption. 

When I come back, I will be able to provide this information to my colleagues and probably a good debate can ensue from that. 

For now, I would like to invite my colleagues to join us –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Thank you, for giving way. I am seeking clarification. You said the climax of this Anti-Corruption Week is on the 10th December and it is a very important event because that is when you will unveil that package that you are working on. 

However, at the same time, our calendar tells us that on that day, we also celebrate Human Rights Day and that particular day should be called the December Dark Day. That was the day the military force invaded Makerere and shot innocent students; killed and injured some - some of those who survived are even in this House. Therefore, is it right to mix the two days?

We are celebrating anti-corruption at the same time we should also be celebrating Human Rights Day. Is the Government uncoordinated? What is going on? I am seeking clarification.

REV. FR LOKODO: Thank you very much colleague for that clarification. The International Anti-Corruption Day falls on the 9th December but because 9th December again lands on a Sunday, H.E the President preferred to put it on a working day. 

In addition, knowing that there is that event of Human Rights- the two can be merged. Therefore, I know that it is with that knowledge that he has chosen to address the nation on this subject on that day probably. Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you and colleagues. I look forward to coming back here with that statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Honourable minister, you do not need the permission of the House to bring a statement; just prepare a ministerial statement on this important subject and when you are ready, alert us, we will put you on the Order Paper and have a full debate on the subject.

Honourable members, there was a young man many years back who instructed us on how to deal with situations of this nature. He was about 30 years old. People who were judging others confronted him and then he came in the meeting and told them “Let he who has not sinned cast the first stone”. 

As an institution, when we come to have this debate and as we eloquently talk and assess these serious matters, let us pose that same question ourselves, “Let he who has not sinned cast the first stone”. If you have not sinned, cast the first stone but if you have doubts shut up because this era of saying, “Do as I say but not as I do” should end.

Accountability must start with us if we are going to hold other people accountable. Then he also said, “Do not talk about the little stone in your friend’s eye when you have a log in yours”. Members, this is an institution, the highest legal forum, nothing becomes law until we say so, nothing becomes policy until we say so, it will not be called a budget until we pass it, we should show that level where we would be the first to throw the first stone. If stones are required, we must be the first to cast because we still count ourselves clean so let us be clean, honourable members.

Therefore, as we wait for the minister’s statement, how I wish I would be seated on the other side so that I can also have a bite as we debate on this serious matter. However, factual things now deny me some of these privileges. So, next item.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CONSIDERATION OF THE NATIONAL BIOTECHNOLOGY AND BIOSAFETY BILL 2012, AS RETURNED BY H.E THE PRESIDENT

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, Mr Chairman, you can now properly sit on the front bench. My brief was that this matter was discussed but a contention arose on the definition or understanding of a particular phrase, which the committee chairperson will brief us about. It was stood over for purposes of harmonisation of what our understanding of that phrase should be and what our agreement should be as Parliament to adopt it. Once that is done, we would be done with this Bill that was referred to us by the President, under provisions of the law. Let us hear from the committee chairperson.

4.42
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Mr Fred Bwino): Mr Chairperson, the committee proposes an amendment on clause 35 by replacing as follows: “35(1) A person who owns a patent in in a GEM” –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is a “GEM”?

MR BWINO: “GEM” is defined as “Genetically Engineered Material”. “35(1) A person who owns a patent in a GEM is strictly liable for any harm, injury or loss caused directly or indirectly by such a GEM to the community livelihood, indigenous knowledge systems or technologies, environment, biodiversity, ecosystems, species of fauna and flora, human or animal health.

(2) For purposes of this provision, a ‘patent’ means ‘The exclusive right granted by Government to any person in respect of a GEM to manufacture, use or sell the GEM.’”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this particular proposal does not need any justification. The justification comes from what the President referred to this House. That is the proposed amendment. Can I put the question to the amendment?

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have not heard from the committee chairperson about the aspect of “strict liability” which we hinted on clearly and for a long time. The reason why we did not pass that clause is the issue of strict liability. In the absence of that – the reason even the President had to return the Bill – we may not achieve that -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I thought he read that in the first line where he said – “A person who owns a patent in a GEM is strictly liable for any harm…” “Strictly liable” is “strict liability”. Unless you want the words “strict liability” to be used, “strictly liable”, it would take care of that concern.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, the reason I am saying so is that the person who was in the Chair then directed that the committee chairperson would have to explain to Members what it actually means. That is what I would like to bring out.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, you agree that it is there but you need the explanation.

MR NZOGHU: Yes, so that Members can understand and know why it is there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We are going to share this responsibility – the minister or committee chairperson can handle. Whoever can, explain “strict liability”.

MR BWINO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. “Strict liability” means a standard of liability where a person that is responsible for an activity that causes adverse effects is held liable whether that person carried out that activity intentionally or not. In other words, the onus is on that person to explain his or her innocence about that action. Thank you.

DR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE: “Strict liability” is a standard of liability under which a person is legally responsible for the consequences flowing from the activity even in the absence of fault or intent to cause harm on the part of that person. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it clear, honourable members? Can I put the question to the amendment as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is there any new definition under clause 3?

MR BWINO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. The committee proposes to insert the following new definitions:

    1. “Benefit sharing” means the sharing of financial or other benefits that accrue from the utilisation of indigenous genetic resources developed by any individual, group or community. 
    2. "Genetic engineering" means the application of-
    a) in vitro nucleic acid techniques, including recombinant deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and direct injection of nucleic acid into cells or organelles;
    b) fusion of cells beyond the taxonomic family that overcome natural physiological reproductive or recombination barriers and that are not techniques used in traditional breeding or selection. 
    3. “Inspector” means any person appointed as an inspector under this Act.
    4. “Minister” means the minister responsible for genetic engineering. This is to address the concerns by the President that the genetic engineering function should not be domiciled in the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation. 
    5. “Person” includes any individual, company, association or body of persons corporate or unincorporated.
    6. “Safety and risk assessment” means an evaluation of any direct or indirect, short, medium and long-term risk to human or animal health, the environment, biological diversity and to the socioeconomic conditions or ethical values of the people of Uganda arising from the import, transit, contained use, release or placing on the market of a genetically engineered materials.

The justification is to give clear interpretation of key terms used in the Bill. The above definitions are intangible and simple for the public for whom Parliament legislates.

“Ministry” means the ministry responsible for genetic engineering. Later in clause 6, we shall delete the words “responsible for technology, engineering and innovation”

Mr Chairman, the second amendment in this clause is to substitute the words “Genetically engineered Organisms” with the words “Genetically Engineered Materials”. 

“Genetically Engineered Materials” means an organism or material produced through genetic engineering.
We propose to replace the abbreviation “GMO” which stands for “Genetically Modified Organism” with the abbreviation “GEM” “Genetically Engineered Materials”, wherever it appears in the Bill.

The justification is that Genetically Engineered Materials include both the organisms and products of genetic engineering. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much, Chair. I only have one issue with your proposed amendment on the definition of persons. I do not know whether you would like to repeat the definition. Otherwise, that definition is already in the Interpretation Act. Usually, when we draft definitions that are already clear in the Interpretation Act – unless they go beyond what is defined in the Interpretation Act. 

Honourable chairperson, if you look at the Interpretation Act (C) of our laws of Uganda in part (2) in the definition and   paragraph (uu) defines person as “…includes any company or association or body of persons corporate or unincorporated”. 

MR BWINO: Thank you, Mr Chairman, for the guidance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is also an issue on benefit sharing. Is it used in the Bill?

MR BWINO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. There are some issues that were raised by the President but they were not covered by the clauses that he proposed should be amended. One of those issues is about benefit sharing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The reason you are defining is to clarify something which is in the law. So, what is that you are clarifying in the law, which you referred to as “benefit sharing”? Definitions are never redundant; they are a provision in the law and they must serve the purpose.

MR BWINO: Mr Chairman, maybe we should have handled my proposal before we provide for genetics resource sharing as proposed by the President before we come to the interpretation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But you have not proposed any other amendment.

MR BWINO: I have.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which clause is that?

MR BWINO: It is among those proposals that we stood over.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We stood over clauses 35, 3 and the Title. 

MR BWINO: Mr Chairman, it is true that we stood over three clauses. However, as I explained before, there are three issues that were raised by the President and these issues were not addressed by the clauses that the President had proposed should be amended; they were not addressed by clauses 3, 15, 16, 25 and 26, of which one of them is about “benefit sharing” and the other is about the “home of genetic engineering”. I think it may be necessary that this House considers making provisions for them.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the reason the President mentions clauses specifically is because they are constitutional matters and so he must be specific about what clause he returns to Parliament and his letter was direct.

If you look at the last paragraph of the President’s letter, it says “Finally and therefore, I am requesting the Parliament to consider the point I have noted above, and “- What we are doing is a review of a law which we have already passed. The President’s letter continued as “…review the following clauses of the bio-safety law: Title of the law, sections 3, 15, 16, 25, 26, 35, 36. He did put very clear instructions and so, we cannot review what we did not pass. The President is asking us to review what we passed. Therefore, if we did not pass it, how do we review it?

Mr Chairman, come back and propose an amendment to deal with that. We should respect our mandate. 

MR BWINO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to beg for your indulgence particularly about a provision in clause 6 (1) which says “They will be established within the ministry responsible for science, technology and innovation and the directory responsible for bio-safety for purposes of implementing this Act.”

Mr Chairman, we have provided for a definition of minister and the ministry, which means that the ministry will be the home for genetic engineering. So, it is important that we delete the words “science, technology and innovation”. The legal people cannot delete those three words as they clean up the law.

Similarly, there is another word in the same sub clause, which needs to be replaced with the words “genetic engineering” but the clean-up cannot handle those deletions. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If what we have passed has implications to capture the principle that has been passed by a particular amendment, the rest become a consequence to that amendment. The drafters would clean that up ordinarily because you have already changed the housing of the activity. 

It is no longer that thing of whatever. It is now the ministry responsible for genetic engineering. So, if there is a provision that is consequential, that has to be removed so that there is consistency with what the law says.  

MR BWINO: Thank you, Mr Chairperson, and for that matter, I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I put the question to the proposed amendment, minus the issue of “benefit sharing”? Do we deal with benefit sharing? What of the definition clause?

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairperson, I am particularly concerned about the definition which has created the minister. He has defined it as “Minister responsible for genetic engineering”. I have a fear there that this chairperson could be creating a permanent ministry under this law. It would mean that at whatever point in time, we must have a minister of genetic engineering. What is your interpretation of that? What do you mean?

You have already defined the ministry. There are two ministries. There is a ministry and a minister. I agree with the definition of the ministry but I am not comfortable with the one of the minister because he has not given a thorough explanation of what he means. What do you mean when you say, “Minister” means a person responsible for genetic engineering?

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much. The words “genetic engineering”, was a proposal by His Excellency the President but it is not part and parcel of Parliament. We would like to know from the minister; when the President proposed the words “genetic engineering”, what was in his mind, other than biosafety and biotechnology? Why do we go by his proposal? What is your other proposal that could be better than “genetic engineering”? We would like to know that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I will give you an example of the Hotel and Tourism Training Institute Act; that is Cap 128. They define who a minister is. Under (e), minister means the minister responsible for tourism. In other words, the minister responsible for tourism could even be the Attorney-General, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs or even the Minister of Public Service. 

For as long as that person is responsible, that is what it is. In other words, it is a responsibility. You are not defining the title of the minister. You are defining the responsibility that that person will execute. For as long as the sector is given to a particular minister, that minister will be responsible for it. 

If you decide that the President should decide that the minister who will be in charge of genetic engineering should be the Minister of Defence, it will be the Minister of Defence to be the sector minister. So, you are defining responsibilities attached to the sector. That makes it wider and that was one of the issues that were raised by the President. He said we should not restrict him in his deployments. Some of these things are administrative. I will adjust my people and give them the responsibilities as I please and he has the prerogative and the powers to be able to do that.

Unless there are any substantial amendments proposed by the chairperson, I will put the question. Are we dealing with “benefit sharing” in the definition? Is it one of those things that is defined? No, it is not. We have taken away “person”. We also said it is not necessary to define “person” in this law but the rest of the definition as proposed by the chairperson.

I now put the question to those proposals.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

The Title

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the title of the Bill stand as title – Yes, title change?

MR BWINO: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. The committee proposes to amend the title as follows:

It reads, “The Genetic Engineering Regulatory Bill”. The justification is that the proposed short title captures the content of the Bill and is in line with the concerns of the President.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is the proposal from the chairperson, based on the return that was done by the President. Can I put the question to this new title? I put the question to this amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.08
THE MINISTER OF SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.09
THE MINISTER OF SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Mr Speaker, the Committee of the whole House has considered clauses 35, 3 and the Title and were passed with amendments. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
5.09
THE MINISTER OF SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.
(Question put and agreed to.)
Report adopted

BILLS 
THIRD READING 

THE GENETIC ENGINEERING REGULATORY BILL, 2018

5.10
THE MINISTER OF SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill be read for a third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Genetic Engineering Regulatory Bill” be read the third time and do pass. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED: “THE GENETIC ENGINEERING REGULATORY ACT, 2018”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister. It has been a long haul, but we have been able to finish it. Chairperson, thank you very much. It has changed hands from one chairperson. We thank that chairperson as well and thank you.  

I would like to thank hon. Nsaba Buturo who took very keen interest in this particular Bill and for delivering the purposes for which and all of you, honourable members, for the keen interest on this matter because this is a matter that directly actually affects us and our people. 

It should be a matter that we take with seriousness. The seriousness we have exhibited on this Bill shows the resilience we have developed over time to defend our people.

As we recall it is a much negotiated Bill. Initially the attitude was to crowd the whole thing altogether. You have made the progress that this sector has to be regulated one way or the other and that is how we came to this agreement. Thank you, very much.

Honourable members, we need to make some consultations on some issues and on how to proceed with the business of the day. This House is adjourned to tomorrow 2 o’clock.

(House rose at 5.12 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, 29 November 2018 at 2.00 p.m.)
 


