Thursday, 8 November 2012

Parliament met at 2.46 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are welcome to this sitting. There is substantial work to be done and today we should try and move on time so that we can make progress on this.

In the gallery this afternoon we have staff from the British High Commission in Uganda. They are here on an orientation visit to learn how the institution of Parliament operates. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them to this Parliament. (Applause)

Arising from statements that were made in this House yesterday by one of the members regarding the conduct of a Clerk Assistant of the House, I have received communication from the Clerk. There is need for the Member of Parliament to substantiate the allegations made on this Floor of Parliament against this particular officer of this Parliament in this House, because the statements were also made in this House. 

The member is not here, but I will be asking him at an appropriate time to substantiate so that the Parliamentary Commission can commence its investigations in the conduct of this particular officer and take necessary decisions on matters of discipline. However, should it be that there is no substantiation, the honourable member will then be required to do what decent people do - to withdraw formally in this House those statements that were made in respect to this particular officer. So, at an appropriate time when the Member is in the House, I will be making this request for the statements to be confirmed with some kind of evidence.

We stood over many clauses yesterday.

MR MICHAEL MAWANDA: Mr Speaker, we have many times risen on this Floor of Parliament to raise issues of national importance and ministers respond and say that they will come and make substantial statements in respect to these issues. Unfortunately, they do not usually come back to answer the issues we raise. 

I would like to seek guidance from the Chair as to what else we can do if ministers do not get back to us and answer the issues we raise. One of the issues in question is taking place on 30th and nothing has been done. We would like to know whether the Government is interested or not. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this is important; we have a candidate for that office and we need to pay up our subscription. I raised this issue with Government yesterday and I am sure they are going to do something about it. Finance, do you have something?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and colleagues, this issue is with my senior colleague, the Minister of Finance, so we expect a communication from her directly. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is some action being taken or not?

MR OMACH: Yes, Mr Speaker.

MR KASIRIVU: I seek guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is no business yet and you are seeking guidance already!

MR KASIRIVU: Last week, you directed the minister responsible for trade to come with a statement today regarding tobacco trade and the company that has fleeced members of our community. Since it is not on the Order Paper, could you guide us - I see the minister responsible for trade around. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I did receive this afternoon a statement from the minister but the Order Paper was already published and the business today is also urgent. I am, therefore, going to ask the minister to make this statement on Tuesday next week. Honourable minister, be here at 2 O’clock.

PRESENTATION OF PETITIONS ON CHILDREN LIVING WITH SPINA BIFIDA

2.51
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Parents of children living with spina bifida and hydrocephalus are faced with challenges of accessing treatment and other necessities of life. Children living with disabilities have their rights violated. 

Your petitioners are children of Uganda who gathered at Protea Hotel on the 25th of October 2012 in commemoration of the World Spina Bifida Day on behalf of all the children with spina bifida and hydrocephalus. 

The petitioners lack enough accessories/aids for mobility like wheel chairs, walking sticks, crutches, special shoes; and learning aids such as larger print texts including exam papers and photocopies of notes, where note taking while listening is a challenge.

Some of your petitioners have been denied access to schools by the heads of the schools, and the opportunity to go to school by their parents, considering them useless and a waste of resources.

Most public facilities like schools, hospitals, public institutions and toilets are inaccessible to children with disabilities. The facilities that are in place are inadequate, poorly placed and do not conform to the required approved standards.

Some of your petitioners are at risk of acquiring HIV because of sexual abuse meted on them by their parents, members of their community and relatives who have gone unpunished even with numerous reports from the victims.

Your petitioners have been discriminated against and stigmatised by their parents, relatives, teachers, health service providers and fellow children who are considered normal.

Health facilities are inaccessible to most of the petitioners who stay in rural areas. Such health centres lack the necessary equipment and counselling services.

Most, if not all, Government development programmes target adult persons with disabilities and not children yet there are children with disabilities. 

Objective XIV of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy sets out the state duties to ensure that all Ugandans enjoy access to health services; and objective XX of the same Constitution also enjoins the state to take all practical measures to ensure the provision of basic medical services to the population.

Under Article 34 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, your humble petitioners have a right to be protected and given all the basics of life by both the state and their parents.

The petitioners’ constitutional right is internationally recognised under Article 2 (2) (1) of the Convention of the Rights of Children of 1989, to which Uganda is a party, which imposes a duty on state parties to respect and ensure observance of the rights of each child within their jurisdiction without discrimination of any kind.

Therefore, your petitioners pray that Parliament urges Government to:
a) Ensure that all schools are equipped with the necessary facilities for better learning of the children with spina bifida and hydrocephalous.

b) Strengthen sensitisation programmes among the teachers, parents and the community about their role in protecting the rights of the children living with spina bifida and hydrocephalous.

c) Bring to justice those who defile, abuse, and mistreat children with disabilities.

d) Mobilise more funds to support civil society organisations and programmes that provide care and support for the disabled children.

e) Implement mandatory food fortifications for foods in Uganda and improve care for pregnant women and children to prevent other children from being born with spina bifida and hydrocephalous. 

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray. Hereto your humble petitioners have appended their signatures.

I beg to present this petition on behalf of the mentioned community.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to lay a copy on the Table?

MR MUWUMA: Mr Speaker, I lay a copy on the Table for the consumption of the entire House. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. That is a petition under our rules and it should go to a committee. In this case it will go to the Committee on Health. The committee should handle this within the timeframe provided in the rules, and that is 45 days. The time starts ticking now. Therefore, in 45 days, we should have these matters resolved.

PETITION ON OUTBREAK OF HEPATITIS B IN ADJUMANI AND MOYO DISTRICTS

2.59
MS JESSICA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I hereby present a petition on the outbreak of Hepatitis B in Madi sub region which has affected the districts of Adjumani and Moyo.

Hepatitis B outbreak in the region started 10 years ago and it has claimed many lives of our people. This year, the outbreak started in April and as of now, 121 cases have been registered in Adjumani District Referral Hospital minus the cases in the lower health units registered. Twenty-six people have been admitted in the referral hospital and nine have died.

In Moyo District, many cases have been registered and others have also died. Therefore, the situation is very alarming.

The following are the prayers of your humble petitioners:

1. 	The Government should vaccinate the entire population of the two districts;

2. 	Government should provide special health education on the importance of vaccination in these districts;

3. Testing kits should be provided in the two districts;

4. 	Government should provide special support to the affected people;

Lastly, time should be pegged to the management of the outbreak; otherwise, the region is highly affected.

I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the petition submitted by the petitioners. I also beg to lay on the Table the list of those who signed on behalf of the people of Madi sub region. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: let the records capture that. It stands committed to Committee on Health and they should report within the same timeframe.

MR MATHIAS MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday in this House, you wisely guided us on an issue that was brought on the Floor by the hon. Latif Ssebagala regarding the Umeme IPO. You instructed the Ministry of Finance to come to the House today with ready answers on the issue that was raised by Members and to bring information not known to the Members but which is important.

I thought that we would have the minister give this clarification, aware that the offer expired yesterday and that the offer has not yet constituted a contract between Umeme and the buyers of the shares. Wouldn’t it be wise that the public gets clarification before the entire arrangement constitutes a binding contract? I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker, especially since the Minister of Finance is around, although his body language does not seem to be that of a ready man. If he is ready, I pray he gives this information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Yes this matter was raised and I guided that this matter should be addressed to the Ministry of Finance. I directed that a report should be brought here based on their interface with the Capital Markets Authority. This afternoon, just before we came here, the minister informed the Speaker that the document is not complete; they do not have all the information they need. They, therefore, would not be able to give Parliament the comprehensive statement they need. Honourable minister, would you like to state it to the House yourself?

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that good ruling. In the circumstances that the documentation is not ready, would the minister advise us on the interim measures considering the importance and urgency of the subject?

MR MPUUGA: If that is the position of the minister, then I am again deeply concerned because if the minister is still scratching for documentation, then was he aware that this was taking place or he was being informed in piecemeal and he acted on word of mouth. This is a very big undertaking. If the minister comes and says he is scratching for documentation - if he is looking for a stapling machine to put them together, I have one here, he could put them together and we get the information. Otherwise, I am personally scared about the whole arrangement.

The minister says he has no information and he is in charge of this docket, a very critical sector of the economy. A private company is collecting money from the public and the minister is scratching for information.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the issue was: how did Umeme, an independent body but under the supervision of the minister, come to issue an IPO? I asked the minister to pick information and bring it to this House. The minister says he has not obtained all the information that will give this Parliament a proper brief. Please, honourable minister_

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I understand the importance and urgency of this request, and we would like to give a comprehensive statement that handles all the issues that Members of Parliament raised yesterday. So, Mr Speaker, this afternoon, we prayed that you give us time until Tuesday to be able to bring this comprehensive report. We rang you up in the afternoon because in the morning, we were trying to make sure that this report was ready but it was not ready and it is not ready up to now. So, that is the position, Mr Speaker.

		
CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORTS ON THE PETITIONS BY STAFF OF KYAMBOGO UNIVERSITY ON THE ALLEGED MISMANAGEMENT OF UNIVERSITY AFFAIRS BY THE VICE-CHANCELLOR AND STUDENTS OF KYAMBOGO UNIVERSITY ON THE RE-OPENING, STUDENTS’ WELFARE AND MISMANAGEMENT OF KYAMBOGO UNIVERSITY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we agreed that we would start allocating specific times for our discussions on specific subjects. So, the time allotted for debate on this particular motion will be 45 minutes. We will need to take a decision on it after the 45 minutes and thereafter, we will deal with other business.

Before we do that, in the VIP gallery, we have lecturers of Kyambogo University led by Prof. Isaiah Ndiege, the Vice-Chancellor of Kyambogo University. They are here to listen to the debate on the report on Kyambogo University. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have students from Mbarara University of Science and Technology, Mountains of the Moon University, Fort Portal, and Uganda Martyrs University, Nkozi. They have come to observe the proceedings of Parliament. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

Members, the chairperson of this committee presented two reports on the same subject - one petition by the workers and the other petition by students. They were received at the same time, so we will conduct the debate jointly and see how we take decisions on this. Debate is now open. We will take three minutes each.

3.06
MS BEATRICE ATIM ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I thank the committee for the report they have presented to the House. I would like to make a submission. 

Arising from the petition from the staff and the students of Kyambogo University, I draw these cases: What was presented by the staff of Kyambogo was majorly two issues, their allowances, the top-up, and the removal or forced leave of the Vice-Chancellor among others. However, the students were mindful of their academic welfare as students and their welfare as far as their stay in Kyambogo is concerned. As a result, there was a strike. 

As I read the report of the committee, the following issues are eminent: the very lecturers who petitioned Parliament are also facing disciplinary action at the university and this has not been resolved. There was selling of examination papers and leakages. That is from the report of the committee. There was evidence of wrong admissions going on in Kyambogo University. We were informed also that the university was graduating students who still have retakes and some without even having IDs in place. I am drawing this from the students’ petition too. We were told that the working environment in Kyambogo is around cliques and hence the administration and management has almost stalled resulting into the strike which went on. 

The committee has highlighted that all this is because of the management style and lack of coordination among the different levels of managers. I think Parliament can now suggest a way forward. I have also seen from the students’ submission and recommendation that most of these lecturers who are actually petitioning are not performing; they do not want to work. (Member timed out)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, for once I seem to be getting lost with respect to this debate. We are looking at a report by the committee and debating here but it seems to have been even overturned. As we speak, the information we receive is that the Vice-Chancellor in issue has actually been sacked. So, I need your guidance as to whether we need to discuss this or to look at it from a different angle or to summon some authorities for disciplinary action. 

First of all, under the law, that is, the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act, there are clear procedures of dismissing an officer or staff of the university. We are debating a motion on a committee report with a view to either adopt, or amend, or throw out the report altogether. However, the person who is a core subject of this report, from the information we receive he has been dismissed by either the university council or something else. So, I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I do not have any information that the Vice-Chancellor has been dismissed. I do not have that information. What are we relying on here? Are you giving me the evidence of dismissal? Where is the evidence of dismissal? Do you have it? 

As far as this Parliament is concerned, it received two petitions and the committee interacted with the petitioners, the Vice-Chancellor, officers from the university and the ministers. The committee is now reporting. It has its findings. That is where we are.

MR SSEGGONA: With your permission, Mr Speaker, may we then ask the Minister of Education and Sports to give us a clear position on this because we may end up wasting time flogging a dead horse.

THE VICE-PRESIDENT (Mr Edward Ssekandi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I imagine that the business on the Order Paper is to discuss a report submitted by the committee, a report as it was made then. We are not being influenced by newspapers, radios, street talk but we are dealing with the report as made on the day it was made. Should it happen that after we have discussed something else has happened, then we shall find a cure, but you cannot change the report simply because you have read something in this paper or the other paper. Let us deal with the report as made on the day it was made.

MR SSEGONA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much and I want to thank the Vice-President. I think he only fell short of telling us the position from a government perspective. May we know, now that we have the chief executive with us and who is one of us, the position of Government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On the report?

MR SSEGGONA: On the position of the Vice-Chancellor. You see, when he calls it street talk, first of all it is insulting but I could swallow that. However, as a matter of procedure, when he rose up, was he proper in not telling us the government position on this? It is a question of facts; if he has the facts, we are happy to receive them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The matter before the House is: “Motion for consideration and adoption of the reports on the petitions by staff of Kyambogo University on the alleged mismanagement of the university affairs by the Vice-Chancellor and students of Kyambogo University on the reopening, students’ welfare and mismanagement of Kyambogo University.” That is the motion which is being debated. Can we proceed with this debate?

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking your guidance whether we can proceed because I do not seem to recognise - maybe I missed out - the present Minister of Education. Is it procedurally okay that we discuss very serious matters where we have-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the minister going to ask us to alter the report or something like that? What is before us is the two reports from our own committee. Can we deal with them?

MR KAWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I need to be guided because the cardinal issue in the petition is the cause of mismanagement by the Vice-Chancellor. To public knowledge, the Vice-Chancellor was dismissed by the University Council. I think it sat in Hotel Africana. The issue here is the Vice-Chancellor mismanaging the institute but the decision is already taken. That is the cardinal issue in the petition. The purpose of us looking at something that was - (Interruption)

MR SSEKANDI: Can the honourable member give us the source of information that the Vice-Chancellor was dismissed or purported to be dismissed? Couldn’t it be that it was purported? Do we act like that? Do you have information? We are dealing with the subject matter as it was when it was presented to us; it is not rumour mongering.

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, this is a very contentious issue. Can the Vice-President inform this House officially about the position of Government as far as the Vice-Chancellor is concerned?

MR SSEKANDI: The Government position is that it gives you freedom to discuss your business as you deem it fit.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, we have a lot of respect for the Vice-President, a member of this House and the former Speaker of this House. The Vice-President uses the language “rumour mongering”. I consider that uncharitable. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I asked the question, is there anybody with any evidence of the dismissal of the Vice-Chancellor? Can we have it to guide us if it can? No information was supplied to that effect. So, the submissions therefore being made are based on whatever has been picked from somewhere, which to the best of the English language can be called “rumours”. Anybody who moves one rumour to the next person is called a rumour monger because you are dealing in rumours. So, I do not think his Excellency the Vice-President is really out of order. 

Honourable members, do we want to debate this motion or not? Can we debate.

3.19
MR BENJAMIN CADET (Independent, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to, first of all thank the committee for bringing out a very good report and for highlighting the problems we have in our public universities.

According to the committee, at Kyambogo we only have 30 per cent of the teaching staff. One of the departments, it is reported, has only one lecturer for first year, second year and third year. That is where we send our brothers, daughters and children to study. When we allow the situation described in the report to persist, where a clique of corrupt lecturers, the bursar, the registrar and heads of department are stealing money and they do not want to be followed, it will be very bad. We shall be written in the pages of history as having stood by when a clique of the corrupt people were dismissing an innocent man. 

Mr Speaker, in the committee report, the issues that were labelled against the Vice-Chancellor were all found false. So, when a council wakes up and dismisses the Vice-Chancellor even when the ad hoc committee agrees with the report on the Floor of Parliament, it will be very wrong. Corruption has moved everywhere; it will be a very bad precedent letting thieves go free in the hands of an institution called a university. It means our children will not be able to learn what they are supposed to learn and yet a university is a place for generation of knowledge. 

The committee actually came short of saying that all unqualified teaching staff at Kyambogo should be relieved of their duties. Somebody wants to become a head of a faculty when he has no qualifications, and yet they were given time when the merger took place to study and get qualifications. That would be very wrong. Actually, I even move that those lecturers without qualifications should be relieved of their duties and the Vice-Chancellor, if possible, should be retained. I do not need to be a friend of a teaching staff to work with a teaching staff. I do not have to be a friend of somebody to work with him. There are rules and procedures that we have to follow.

When you look at the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act, a vice-chancellor is in charge of academic affairs and administration and finance. When he follows people who have stolen furniture and computers of a university, they say they are being witch-hunted; that is wrong! You then find them celebrating that the Vice-Chancellor is going. 

The Parliament should investigate the council’s decision, which they read out at a hotel, that the Vice-Chancellor should go. That is not how public universities should be run in Uganda. I call upon the Ministry of Education to curtail the activities of the teaching staff in Kyambogo and also to improve the welfare of the students. (Member timed out.)

3.23
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate the good work done by the Committee on Education and Sports. As a teacher, we should realise that the quality of any nation lies in education. To know that that a particular nation is strong, they will look at the quality of education being provided to the citizens. Therefore, when we are dealing with education, we should not take it lightly. We need to go in-depth and investigate what is going on especially in the universities.

Right now, we need to ask ourselves what is going wrong with the public universities in Uganda. All public universities will not go through two consecutive semesters without students or lecturers going on strike. We need to ask ourselves what is wrong and what is going on. 

Looking at Kyambogo University, as Members of Parliament we were given very many documents exposing all kinds of rot that is going on in that particular university. We have petitions by both students and staff. If you look at the names of the staff who presented the petitions, you find that it is majorly staff who either have disciplinary problems or problems with the university. 

It has been alleged, for example, that some staff members employ their wives to lecture at the university and yet they are not qualified to teach. Some of them are employing their children who have just completed bachelor’s degrees and it is these children who are leaking examinations to the students. So, we should not take the case of Kyambogo University lightly. We have Dr Ochan, for example; it has been alleged that he allowed his son to teach undergraduate students and yet he was a holder of a mere bachelor’s degree. Dr Ochan is among those accusing the Vice-Chancellor of mismanagement. We need to investigate all the 29 staff that are accusing the Vice-Chancellor. There must be a very serious problem at Kyambogo University. (Member timed out.)

3.26
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. The key observation I see about the two reports is that the petition by the students is a result of the petition that was presented by the staff. The reason behind it is that there has been a lot of in-fighting at Kyambogo University.

When you go through the main petition by the Kyambogo staff, it is full of accusations; the Vice-Chancellor is mentioned repeatedly right from the first to the last page. If the council had played its part and the Vice-Chancellor had played his part, the students would not be complaining because all that they are asking for would have been in place. 

I salute the committee for the report. The committee was told that there was an ad hoc committee set up to investigate the actions of the Vice-Chancellor. On page 18, they say that this committee was set up by the University Council but surprisingly, I note that the chairperson of the council also became a member of the ad hoc committee, which was supposed to report to him, thereby taking part in the deliberations of the ad hoc committee that was supposed to report to him. How can you be a judge, accuser and  prosecutor? I think there is a lot of conflict of interest in this matter. 

As far as the Leadership Code is concerned, Article 8 says, in part, “...and the extent of his or her personal interest.” I can see that the council, especially the leadership, has a lot of interest in a particular individual. We are promoting the integration process of the East African Community but there is a page on which they were accusing the Vice-Chancellor for not being a Ugandan national. I think this is going overboard. If the integration is to take root - (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. When you are entering Tanzania, they stamp your passport that you are not allowed to do anything in Tanzania. So, that is the information I wanted to give you in regard to the East African Co-operation. (Laughter)

MR MUWUMA: Thank you my brother, hon. Semujju, for the information, but a law should not work retrospectively. If the council went ahead and approved the Vice-Chancellor as an employee of Kyambogo University, it is again unfortunate and unfair to begin turning around and saying that because one is a Kenyan national, they should cease being vice-chancellor. 

I am told – even according to the findings - that he has tried to be tough on some of the people who are stealing resources. It is the reason that some people have turned against him to fight him. (Member timed out.)

3.30
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I happen to have taught in one of the universities in Uganda for 11 years where I was teaching medicine. So, I am a former lecturer of an institution of higher learning. 

When you read the report by the Committee on Education, there are so many problems in Kyambogo as far as staff grievances are concerned, and most of them have been caused by lack of money in this institution. This means that if Kyambogo University is not very highly financed, it is not a problem of this Vice-Chancellor but a general problem in all universities in this country. For that matter, I would not stand here and condemn this man to be crucified just because his institution has been underfunded. 

Secondly, there are many people in Kyambogo University who are not yet qualified to teach in institutions of higher learning. These are the same people who want this wonderful man from Kenya to be sacked. Ugandans love going to work abroad. In Naalya, where I stay, there is a company that is exporting Ugandans to go to work in Iraq. I have seen many people who want to go and work in Dubai. This Vice-Chancellor of Kyambogo did not come to Uganda as a guest. He came as an employee and he sat an interview and passed because he has the qualifications. If anybody wants to tell me that this man must be sent back to Nairobi just because he is from Kenya, then the issue of the regional integration does not make sense to us. Here we are as a Parliament, how do we sit down and say, “Let this man go” when he is a brother of ours just from the neighbourhood? 

For us in academia, we believe in intelligence. If somebody is clever enough, he has the qualifications, he can deliver. I think this man can remain in charge of Kyambogo University as the Vice-Chancellor. I do not believe in sectarianism because I am not a beneficiary of sectarianism. I was born in Rukungiri but I represent the people of Mbarara Municipality because I shifted very many years ago – 26 years ago. I was in Mbarara and I have been there ever since. Now, you tell me that somebody from Kisumu here should not be teaching here when he has all the qualifications! When you look at the CV of the Vice-Chancellor of Kyambogo, I can tell you this gentleman is highly learned. Possibly, if he has not learnt sufficient management, that one can be improved. 

If you look at the recommendations of the committee, it does not say that the Vice-Chancellor should be dismissed. Ideally, the council can be dismissed but the Chancellor of the University is the one who writes a dismissal letter. If it has happened in rumours and the Chancellor has not written to him, to me, as a former lecturer at a university, the Vice-Chancellor of Kyambogo is still the Vice Chancellor by law. Anybody - (Member timed out.)

3.34
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As a product of Kyambogo University, I am really at pains when I hear issues surrounding the university. I am also a parent at Kyambogo University where I have 10 students from my constituency who I pay tuition fees for; on average, about Shs 10 million. 
The issues regarding Kyambogo University are serious and they stem from nepotism not only on the part of the Vice-Chancellor but even the students. There are students who come from neighbouring countries like Kenya and Tanzania who are students in Kyambogo. So, issues of tribalism and nepotism in Kyambogo are not only around the Vice-Chancellor but even the students who come from neighbouring countries.

Mr Speaker, the issues in Kyambogo stem right from when it was still UPK and ITEK. The very lecturers who fought Dr Pande and Prof. Lutalo Bbosa are the very lecturers who are fighting the current Vice-Chancellor.

Concerning missing marks, as a parent I have put a condition that before I pay tuition, you must produce your results for the first semester to get the fees for second semester and equally for the second year. However, there are students who have never got their marks for the first semester in year 1. So, are these issues regarding the Vice-Chancellor? It is on the part of the lecturers.

As a product of Kyambogo University, I would like to inform this august House that there is a lot of rot in Kyambogo University that the current Vice-Chancellor was trying to cure. I call upon the Government to act very fast if we are to save the image of this country and of this university that has been highly rated. I pray that this report be considered and adopted. Thank you very much.

3.36
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report. The problems of Kyambogo University are not new; they are endemic and historical. Before Prof. Ndiege came to that university, they had closed it about two or three times. So, it is not a new problem. I would like to thank the committee for bringing proof to that effect because the issues that are being raised now were raised five years ago and this House advised. That is why I was so passionately looking for a minister from the sector. 

Two or three years ago, our Committee on Social Services considered the proposals in the Government White Paper, proposing to review the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act in order to harmonise the problems of roles of vice-chancellors and deputy vice-chancellors and administrators. It is the inaction of Ministry of Education that is causing the chaos in our universities. They have never acted and are actually manipulating and at some point trying to bring piecemeal amendments to this House.

If Ministry of Education were to be honest, first of all, they should have gone to the committee. It took your office, Mr Speaker, to summon the minister to get to the committee and that was wrong. Today, they have dodged this sitting because they know we are talking about issues in the university. They seem to benefit from the quarrelling. 

As a people and as a country, we can get rid of this professor, he can go, but that will not solve the problems in our universities. (Applause) We need to face our universities head-on concerning issues of funding, amending the laws, corruption, attitude to work, and these are endemic. Almost all our universities have the same problem.

I think that the university council that sat and fired the Vice-Chancellor should also be advised that their sitting without the two thirds that is required in the Act was wrong. It smells funny that they should do that. They are the people who set standards in this country – (Mr Sseggona rose) - Mr Speaker, I will take the information but please, give me a second to complete.

MR SSEGONA: Thank you, hon. Alaso, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I wish to correct one thing in giving this information. I am now blessed to have a letter dated 2 November 2012 to Prof. Isaiah O. Ndiege, Vice-Chancellor, Kyambogo University. The subject is, “notice of removal from office”. It reads: 
“At a special meeting of Council held on 31 October 2012, it was resolved that you be given notice of removal from office in writing in accordance with section 55(1) of the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act as amended. The resolution of Council to recommend your removal from office is made in public interest. 

The purpose of this letter, therefore, is to inform you of the above decision of Council. You will be notified of the next steps to be taken in accordance with Section 55(1) of the Act as amended – (Interruption)

MR SSEKANDI: Mr Speaker, I have heard my learned friend and honourable Member of Parliament saying he is reading a letter. Is it a smuggled letter? Is the letter addressed to him? Is it an original copy? Aren’t there rules governing the way you use copies? Are we going to get information from copies? Is it original? Maybe it is original, maybe it is addressed or copied to him; that is the kind of information I want.

MR SSEGGONA: I am happy to give the clarification to the Vice-President who is very senior to me by far in the profession. Under our law, whatever is not prohibited is allowed. A photocopy is allowed. That is one.

The second clarification is that I read this letter and everyone who cared to listen heard that it is addressed to a particular person. I was asked, at the insistence of the Vice-President, to provide information, which is not based on rumours. I am reading this letter. In conclusion, “… this notice is also being sent to your email address…” and it is mentioned. It is signed by Sam S. Akorimor, Secretary to the Council.

For the information of the Vice-President, that is the letter. May I beg to lay it on the Table. He may wish to get to the source, looking for the original. That is the information I want to give. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you, honourable colleague, for that very useful information. So, actually, it stands that a letter was already served by the University Council to the Vice-Chancellor terminating his services.

Mr Speaker, I would like to plead to the Chancellor of this university to intervene because if they do not intervene, the uncertainty in our universities will definitely affect the learning process. (Member timed out.)

3.43
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Reading the report on the petition of the staff and reading the conclusions of the committee, this points to a deeper crisis in the university. It points to the fact that here is a deep-rooted corruption tendency in this university by the staff themselves. Reading the allegations from the staff and investigations and conclusions of the committee on almost each and every point, the committee has clearly exonerated the Vice-Chancellor. 

Let me read page 14. “On financial loss to the university, the committee was further informed that there were activities that caused financial loss that included fraudulent payment of fees, where students pay less to the university account but are receipted to have paid more and the bank slips are altered. This is done in connivance with staff in the Bursar’s office and the bank. For example, receipts for admission fees payable to the university are re-stamped and issued by a cashier in Stanbic Bank, Kyambogo Branch…”  You can see the level of corruption. (Interruption)

MS ATIM ANYWAR: Thank you, hon. Amongi, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the information I am giving to my colleague is that even in the ad hoc committee’s report – the committee which was set up by the council chairperson and which he tried to influence – 95 per cent of the allegations were quashed, finding the Vice-Chancellor innocent. That report was even laid on the Table. So, it is not only Parliament that has exonerated him of mismanagement. 

MS AMONGI: Thank you for that information. Mr Speaker, if you go to one other allegation, I see that the corrupt staff ganged up against this man. When you look at page 15, you will read that the staff made allegations that the management style of the VC has resulted into high staff turn-over due to fear, apathy and uncertainty among staff. What is the committees’ conclusion? It says, “On the contrary, staff left for greener pastures while some were fired for incompetence, fraud and indiscipline.” You can see the way corrupt people work; when you want to clean the system, they gang up to remove you. (Applause) 

I can see that this is what is happening. The man wants to clean the system by putting people to account. In the instance the laptops, for example, they went and secured iPads and computers at higher prices. When the man says, “let me go and buy myself so that I can see whether your prices are accurate, to prove that it is the procurement people who actually hiking the prices - (Member timed out.)

3.47
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for ably bringing out the issues, those endemic and chronic issues Kyambogo University is suffering from. Clearly, there is evidence that the innocent students, the Vice-Chancellor - the reformist - and Government are being held hostage by criminals. There is all evidence that those in charge of procurement of some systems are not about to let go. This is not only in Kyambogo. You have heard stories of Kazinda. Some of those who attempted to shake him are now the ones suffering. This is an occurrence where people have a syndicate. 

I want to start with the bigger picture and say that we are discussing a symptom; this country made a policy mistake of rushing into a university syndrome. I do not know why we abandoned the polytechnic arrangement. I do not know why we think all universities must be in Kampala, Kyambogo and Makerere. If we had decentralised these universities and used the satellite system, some of these challenges the students are facing - accommodation and other costs - would not be there.

At the beginning of the last Parliament, the then Committee on Social Services requested that Government comes up with a cost per unit study but it ended there. If you again check on the financing, you will find that as Government, we are not financing what would satisfy the students and the staff. Without taking this into consideration, we are dealing with the symptoms. We now expect the Vice-Chancellor to shock-absorb all these challenges and we blame him for that. 

I thank the committee for bringing out the hegemony issues. The merger challenges were not caused by Prof. Ndiege; it was an inherited problem. Those who were supposed to upscale in training, those who never even qualified to teach in a university – all this excess baggage has to be dealt with by the council. It would really be a lack of in-depth analysis of the university challenges to expect one person, even if he is from Mars, to come and deal with all these challenges. 

I would like to request that as Parliament, together with Government, we should look at structural and policy challenges if we are going to deal with the challenges not only in Kyambogo University but even in other universities. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me introduce some visitors. In the gallery this afternoon we have staff from the National Assembly of Kenya. They have come to benchmark and share experiences with our administration on the HIV policy. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

We also have pupils and teachers of Berkley Primary School, Namutumba, represented by hon. Mutyabule. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. 

We also have pupils and teachers of Namulanda Model Nursery and Primary School, Luuka, represented by hon. John Bagoole. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. 

3.51
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (NRM, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the committee for a very good job done. When you read the two reports jointly, you will realise the gravity and the extent of the problem we have, especially in the public universities, as far as Government investment in education is concerned. We need Government to come out clearly and resuscitate the physical infrastructure of the public universities if we are to cope with the increasing number of students. 

You also realise a very big problem of the quality of education our students are receiving. When I read the last page of the committee’s report, it shows that marks are awarded to unqualified students. What kind of graduates are we passing out? The good thing is that the committee tends to emphasise the need to have thorough investigations not only on corruption but also on other practices involving academic corruption. 

My only question to the Executive arm of Government is: When will this team of specialised investigators be put in place? Why should it be Parliament all the time to remind the Executive arm of Government that things are going wrong and they should act? Even when we recommend, no action is taken. Why should things continue crumbling on top of our heads when everybody is failing? I hope by the time we adopt this report, the Executive will have told us when this team of special investigators, comprising of auditors, policemen and the like, will be in place to uncover the rot which the committee could not get into and come back to Parliament and report to us.

Mr Speaker, when I read the report in respect to the students’ petition, I would want to know from the Executive – Of course, if students fail to pay tuition fees, which we pay for them anyway, it means that a big number of them come from poor families and if they cannot afford the fees and you also put surcharge upon surcharge, you are adding a nail to a coffin.  When will Government come up with the student loan scheme to help our poor students? When shall we stop politicising UPE and USE and come up with a student loan scheme to help students in higher levels of education? (Member timed out.)

3.55
MRS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report they came up with after listening to the staff and the students. 

My concern is about the academic standards of our universities. On page 11 of the petition of the staff, we are told that there was fraudulent and irregular admission of students who do not meet the minimum requirements. We are told that students graduate even before they do their retakes. There are leakages and selling of examination papers. Finally, results are altered where those who have failed are given better grades. 

If my son goes to a university, I expect excellence and when he graduates, I would like people to know that he has come from a university of excellence. If he graduates from a university of this calibre, it does not only undermine the students and we the parents but the whole country. This is not only in Kyambogo University; it is also in other universities of this country; and then after this, we get strikes. 

It is when elephants are fighting that the grass suffers. Our students miss out and we, the parents who have paid money, miss out. All we hear is that the staff “claim”, according to the exoneration I get here. The staff who feel the Vice-Chancellor was inefficient, their inefficiency is obviously displayed here glaringly. As a way forward, I would like us not only to exonerate the Vice-Chancellor but to go deeper into the standards of this university. 

We are told in this report that the intake has increased from 1,600 to 28,000 and yet the infrastructure has not changed. Why do we in this country allow an institution to run when we know it does not have the infrastructure? The onus is on us as government to say Kyambogo should not operate because they do not have enough lecture rooms, they do not have enough dining facilities and they do not have enough sleeping facilities. I see some of them have been using the adjacent secondary school for lectures instead of having their classes in a university. What are we doing? We have a right to say, “Until we have optimum standards, until we have the infrastructure, the university should not open.” 

When we see our lecturers compromising their standards - No wonder some of the shortcomings happened to the Vice-Chancellor because he and the staff are not operating in an optimum, friendly working condition. (Member timed out.)

3.58
MS BENNY NAMUGWANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to continue from where my sister has stopped, that the problems of Kyambogo are deeply rooted in the way we as Government handle the business of this country. When you look at the agitation by the students, everything the students are crying about is the responsibility of Government. Much as some people are saying the lecturers used their students to facilitate the riots which were at the university, even the students had fertile ground on which to riot. 

Mr Speaker, when you look at this report, you will discover that you cannot produce a quality graduate from Kyambogo University. These are students who do not have enough workshops, they do not have enough lecture rooms and some of the lecture rooms are leaking. So, if you want to mobilise them to strike, this is very fertile ground to begin with.  I am not blaming anybody for the mess in this university; I am blaming it on us, as Government, because we have not facilitated the people in there to do their work. 

Secondly, I want to bring it to the notice of everybody here that the Vice-Chancellor, who is looked at as a very bad man in this university, saved billions and billions of money of the university. When you look at page 25 of the report, this is a man who indicated the non availability of any Kyambogo University land for allocation to investors. (Applause) He clearly stated that the university is in advanced stages of completing its master plan and has intentions to develop the land. 

This is a forecast leader. He looks at the future of the university. Whereas some of us are looking at disposing of land at this material time, - remember he is not a Ugandan - he is thinking about the future of the children of Uganda and he cannot allow the disposing of the land. The small mistake he made, by directly procuring an iPad, does not warrant dismissing him summarily. 

Mr Speaker, I conclude by calling upon Government to make sure that we evaluate the way we are delivering education services to the children of this country because we still have a lot to put in. If we want to yield what we expect, then we have to put in something bigger than what we are putting in today. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are drawing to a close. We should begin preparing to wind up.

4.01
MS JESSICA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Having read both the reports, the removal of the VC due to public interest is an ambiguous and selfish statement because we need to know the specific aspects of the public interest. What are those interests? 

When we look at page 28, the root causes of the unrest in Kyambogo University have been listed - 14 of them; how dare you pin only one person? I believe those who are focussing on removing the VC are those who are fighting the transformation of Kyambogo University. When you relate this to the Bible, Jesus Christ was fought and now, we are going down before Jesus Christ. So, I believe we cannot fake all these allegations on the VC. 

Secondly, in this House we stood up to condemn mistreatment and nepotism against Ugandans in other countries, specifically in Sudan. Isn’t it a shame to us in this country to blame the VC because of his nationality? I think we need to be exemplary citizens and appreciate when leaders stand up to cause transformation. 

Thirdly, on the issue of land, it is on record that Government gives land but again, it is Government that interferes with management of land. Therefore, we need an explanation from Government as to why they gave land to Kyambogo University and now they are using the other hand to remove land from the same university. We need an explanation.

Lastly, on the issue of inadequate financing to Kyambogo University, State House scholarships help some of the students in Kyambogo University. Non-remittance of the fees to the students in Kyambogo University who are under State House scholarships is also one of the challenges facing the university. So, we need to know how monies of the students identified under the State House scholarships are paid and we need to know how much is left. Otherwise, there is a big challenge in Kyambogo University. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had agreed to draw this for an hour; we have exceeded it. We should really close this debate so that we can take a decision on the matter. I will allow the Shadow Minister of Education, who sits at the backbench of the Opposition usually, because of – (Laughter).

4.05
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Franca Akello): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On that note, I would request that you give me one extra minute, due to public demand. 

I want to wholeheartedly thank the chairperson and the whole committee for the very good job they have done. They have shortened our work and eased the work of Parliament, because everything, including the investigations, has been done. 

Mr Speaker, the problems of Kyambogo University have been concluded in the final remarks of the committee and I do not think we need any more arguments. It is not about who speaks well, it is not about who says what, it is not about which side of the House argues best; it is about the interest of this country and that of our children. 

Like it is said, when two elephants fight, the grass suffers. The students of Kyambogo University have suffered while management and staff of the university were fighting. Like others have said, the VC is not alone in this scandal at the university. If you read the concluding remarks, the rot in the university is cross-cutting, ranging from corruption, irregular admissions and award of marks, irregular appointments and incompetent staff, irregular procurement practices, nepotism, indiscipline, financial mismanagement, fraudulent fees payment and so on. All these tantamount to the need for this Parliament to go as far as demanding for further investigation as far as the staffing of Kyambogo University is concerned. 

Imagine, a man who wants to put things right is being penalised by dismissal just because he wanted to put things right. This is not acceptable and we are not going to allow this to happen. The recommendations of the committee are very clear; the recommendations of the ad hoc committee, which was constituted by the ministry itself, are very clear. Therefore, we request that this Parliament takes this issue a little more seriously. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One more minute for the Shadow Minister.

MS AKELLO: Mr Speaker, one of the greatest issues that came up in the committee report was about misallocation of land by the Ministry of Education. Why would the minister reallocate land that belongs to the university? That is open stealing! Why is land being reallocated? So, we want to request that– (Interruption)
			
MS NAMABIDDE: Mr Speaker, I would like to give information to put the record right about the land. It was not the Ministry of Education which allocated the land. The Ministry of Education requested the University Council for a piece of land to construct the ministry headquarters. When the council approved this, they got the land title of Kyambogo University and took it to Uganda Land Commission. However, Uganda Land Commission took off more than what had been given to the ministry. So, the ministry received its land and another potion was unexplained; but it was not the Ministry of Education that did that. Actually, the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Education and Sports wrote a letter contesting this. 

MS ATIM ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I want to give is that the investor who wants the Kyambogo land, Mega, had a meeting last Saturday in State House. They went there to appeal to the President about the same land. 

MS AKELLO: Thank you for that useful information. Like I said earlier, it is not about the arguments that we are advancing; it is about facing the reality. We cannot cover our heads in the sand and let rot continue in Kyambogo and other universities. 

As I conclude, I would like to request that Parliament confirms that the report of the Committee on Education and Sports and the ad hoc committee report that exonerated the Vice-Chancellor be adopted by the Parliament without any amendments. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I have two people from the frontbench; hon. Frank Tumwebaze might want to give his maiden speech as a minister. (Laughter)

4.12
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PRESIDENCY) (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to give my maiden speech. I want to thank the committee for the wonderful report. I felt perturbed when the wrangles over leadership were going on in Makerere. I was not impressed by the politicking for the leadership. 

I am proud to be from Mbarara University, a university that our Clerk here comes from, and she was part of the management. I think we should be proud that there are universities where these scandals are not heard of. As a former student leader, I want to tell you the trick at Mbarara University. We had a strong Vice-Chancellor, in the names of Prof. Kayanja, who did not tolerate any form of mismanagement. So, when I see attempts by staff, by certain forces, to work against hardworking vice-chancellors, I think we should penalise them. 

To me, this calls for a study or review of the law on universities and other – (Interjections) - That law.  This is not only for the Executive; these institutions have been given some autonomy. Because of that autonomy, the Ministry of Education is in a way limited in overseeing them. So, it is high time, and I wish the committee – (Interjections) – This bench is making noise. The point I am making is that we should review that law, which I cannot easily pronounce, to make sure that the line ministry has some clear powers of oversight such that they can order special audits and reviews and they can hold the university council accountable. What you see at Kyambogo is a clear lack of oversight. For this lack of oversight, you do not blame the ministry because of the law. The law limits the ministry to intervene as and when they can do so – (Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is a maiden speech.

MR TUMWEBAZE: So, the experience from Mbarara University, which I am proud of, is that the Vice-Chancellor is very strict. There are set rules and regulations of the university council. It is not about say FDC or NRM. Even you as guild president or guild speaker, you stand with your ideologies hidden behind. It is not about saying “I am a professor; I address the media; I am voted by the university council.”  

The problem is this politicisation of university administration. Next time, you will hear a student protesting so that the score grade or pass mark is lowered grade. You will hear politics defining the quality of education. So, it is really pertinent that we, leaders, must review the law and give more power to the Ministry of Education to exercise oversight. If we do not, that autonomy that we have given universities will ruin them especially the public ones where tax payers’ money is appropriated. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for the protection and for the honour to speak as a maiden speaker. 

4.16
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Justine Lumumba): I thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I also want to join our colleagues in thanking the members of this committee for the good job done. I thank you so much. (Applause)

I want to say that as the Leader of Government Business, we fully support this committee report and I request members that we do adopt this report. I thank you. 

4.16
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I stand to move a motion without notice.

“ARISING FROM the debate and the information given to this august House;

AWARE THAT the situation in Kyambogo University is tense and they are operating under confusion without a substantial Vice-Chancellor;

MINDFUL THAT as a country, Uganda, we are promoting transparency, accountability and zero tolerance to corruption in public institutions; 

AWARE THAT we are also fast tracking on the East African collaboration and spirit; 

I, therefore, move that:

1. 	The intended sacking of the Vice-Chancellor be put on hold;

2. 	The staff and lecturers who are named in that report and are facing disciplinary action, the disciplinary action be implemented and the mentioned staff and lecturers be brought to book;

3. 	The council, which has failed to ensure that the policies that are needed to run this institution are in place, has failed to remain impartial to harmonise all the conflict within the university, be dissolved and a competent council be instituted and the chairman of the council, who had conflict of interest, also be investigated;

4. 	All the lecturers and staff, because of the rough merger of the three institutions, which was not well carried out and harmonised, be reviewed and the staff and the lecturers be asked to re-apply meanwhile they seek to harmonise this situation and put to halt. 

5. The land of the university – (Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I thank you, honourable member. The motion is too long and I just wanted to know whether it would not be procedurally correct for her to circulate this motion to the members to scrutinise before we support it. I endeavoured to listen and follow and I thought that we were not moving correctly. That is my concern, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, our rules allow motions to be moved without notice under certain circumstances. One such motion is called an incidental motion – a motion that comes from a matter on the Floor of Parliament as the debates are going on. As a way of concluding, a member is free to move a motion as an incidental motion to wrap up the discussions, but that motion must be reflective of the content of the debate. That is the only qualification. It must have the content of the debate. 

I hear the issue of the dismissal of the Vice-Chancellor and yet it is not in the report and all those other things are not in the report. The issue that I have seen repeatedly in the report is the appointment of an investigative group that should go and deal with details of this matter. This is what comes out strongly on almost every recommendation made by the committee. So, if the person was moving an incidental motion, it would have been proper if it was guided in that way – a step to be taken towards the creation of what is recommended by the committee. That would be a better way of wrapping it up, so that the committee can now take those other decisions and make recommendations. Honourable member, maiden speech again? (Laughter)

MR TODWONG: No. I thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not making a speech now but I just seek further guidance and clarification on this subject. Mr Speaker, Parliament was petitioned and in the petition, the Vice-Chancellor was accused and many other people were accused and so Parliament forwarded that petition to its committee to investigate. The committee came out with a report which rightly stated what you said, that they did not mention anything about the Vice-Chancellor and any other person but recommended further investigation. Is it therefore proper that we move a motion to exonerate someone who could be under further investigation? That is the clarification that I am seeking. Would it proper at this stage?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion that is going to be moved should be by way of implementing what the committee has studied but they could not go to the full extent because of the timeframe given to them and also the obligations of other work of Parliament. So, a motion that sums it properly without drawing in specific names would be in order.

MS ANYWAR: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise guidance.  I am moving this motion in good faith and it can be subject to amendment as is being raised by colleagues. 

As I conclude on this motion, I would like to say that indeed we need a thorough investigation. As a colleague was saying, the Vice-Chancellor has been investigated by the ad hoc committee and this committee, but others who are also mentioned as part of it were not investigated and we would want that to take place. Lastly, we would strongly want to ensure that the land of the university is protected. I beg to move.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg that the House be guided. The motion should be appropriately moved but I think there is a mix up between the motion and justification of the motion. I would wish that the House comes out with a clear statement of the motion and then the mover justifies. Right now, there is mix up between the motion and the justification of the motion. Can you guide us appropriately, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The proper way of handling this, so that it is comprehensively dealt with, is for us to pronounce ourselves on the report and then give an opportunity for a proper motion to be brought at the next sitting of Parliament, so that it is debated and proper guidance given on the way forward. Would that not be the proper way to handle it? 

Let us do that, so that a motion is brought properly and debated properly without too many things going on, so that we can make a much more focused decision on the motion. For now, can we pronounce ourselves on the two reports of the committee. The honourable member would still be given permission to come with a comprehensive motion to be handled on Tuesday next week. Is that okay? You now have notice to do so. You have leave to present that motion next week. Madam Chair, should I not just put the question? Your report has been very well acclaimed. You want to thank the Members?

4.26
MS SYLVIA SSINABULYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank Parliament for giving overwhelming support to the committee report. 

I want to express my disappointment about the absence of the Ministers of Education and Sports in this House today. Mr Speaker, you are aware that even during the time when the committee was handling these petitions, we had problems with getting the Ministry of Education and Sports to interface with the committee. So, I am disappointed. Nevertheless, I am happy that the findings of the committee tally with the observations and findings of the ad hoc committee which was set up by council. 

I want to say, in conclusion, that Parliament should strongly support the request of the committee to institute an independent and in-depth investigation into the management of Kyambogo University. If we do not do this, we are subjecting the management of universities to mob justice. What we see in Kyambogo is mob justice and I do not think we can continue to move this way. Mr Speaker, I thank you very much and I thank the Parliament for supporting this report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. I will put the question. Honourable members, can we adopt these reports and then we take the next step when all other issues are incorporated in a motion and we deal with it comprehensively? 

MRS OGWAL: I want to thank the chairperson for the summary. Unfortunately, she forgot to give us the timeline to put in place the independent investigation. Within what period of time will it be put up? I think it is important that we be guided appropriately. Can the chairperson guide us on the timeline? Thank you.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you so much. Mr Speaker, for the students who sought justice in Parliament, I think we should also put a timeframe in which the Minister of Education should be able to report or give feedback to Parliament on the status or position regarding Kyambogo as of now. This is just for the sake of the students. If we wait for a probe, I think their issues will remain unresolved. So, we need to put a timeframe.
  
MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Arising from your guidance, we are going to move a motion later on, but we are aware, from the information we have already got, that there is already an intention to dismiss the Vice-Chancellor. In other words, the council which we have already pronounced ourselves on is still in the process of continuing to do what it wants to do. 

Mr Speaker, after this debate, are we allowing the council to proceed with its implementation? What guidance are we giving the Kyambogo University management while we are instituting an in-depth independent investigation? I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the matter of the status of the Vice-Chancellor is not substantially before us now. That is why I thought that a motion would solve all these problems. 

If anybody decides to take action between today and Tuesday, then that person is bringing his or herself straight in the firing line of this House, and we will not waste time with it. Notice is hereby given that a motion on this particular matter, to forge a way forward on how to comprehensively deal with this matter, will be moved and debated on Tuesday of next week. So, if any action should be taken, that action would be deemed to have been taken in light of the decision of Parliament today. Can I now put the question for the adoption of the two reports? 

Honourable members, the motion is that the report of the Committee on Education and Sports on the petition by the staff of Kyambogo University on the alleged mismanagement of the university affairs by the Vice-Chancellor of Kyambogo University be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the second motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee on Education on the petition by the students of Kyambogo University on reopening, student welfare and mismanagement of Kyambogo University. I put the question that the report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you will recall that we stood over some clauses for redrafting. If those clauses that were stood over have been properly redrafted and are ready for presentation in the House, I would ask the chairperson to deal with them. If not, we can go on from where we stopped and move forward so that we can make some progress.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Michael Werikhe): Thank you, Mr Chairman. We met with the colleagues who had submitted written proposed amendments. These are some of the amendments on clause 7, where we had stopped. I do not know whether we should proceed so that we come back to those ones later.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, the clauses that we stood over yesterday have not been handled. So we go to the last clause that we stopped on.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, we did stand over clauses  2, 3, 4, 6 and 7. We have agreed with the chairman of the committee on the interpretation clause and on clause 4. So, why can’t we handle those and then move forward? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Was the interpretation clause completed? 

MR WERIKHE: No, we stood over it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Yes, we stood over it but were you able to harmonise the definitions? 

MR WERIKHE: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMMAN: Can we then proceed with clause 3 and take a decision on it. 

Clause 3

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, we stood over the interpretation of the word “operator”. An amendment was moved by hon. Kasirivu and we agreed that he should formally move it and then we respond to it as a committee.  

MR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, “Operator means a licensee or any person who is executing the day-to-day management of petroleum activities.” The justification is: to make the licensee an operator as well because when you look at clause 83, the licensee is also an operator. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, I see two sets of reports; where is the other one coming from? 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, the one which is being circulated is from our legal officer of Parliament. We asked him to go and re-draft, since we had agreed on the principle but we could not do the re-drafting ourselves. So, this is what he has come up with. Substitute the definition of operator with the following: “Operator means any entity executing on behalf of the licensee the day-to-day management of petroleum activities or where the licensee performs the functions of the operator- – (Interjection) - the licensee.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I understood hon. Kasirivu’s amendment to mean that an operator is a licensee or any person who is executing the day-to-day management of the petroleum activities. What is being introduced now is that the operator means any entity executing on behalf of the licensee the day-to-day management of the petroleum activities or where the licensee performs the functions of the operator, the licensee. (Interjections) - It cannot be both, and you cannot force it as well; some courtesy, please. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: It is okay. Thank you. It is really to help the definition. The definition brought by hon. Kasirivu, which is the subject of discussion, tries to broaden the definition to include both the licensee and any other person. Now, my worry is how does any other person not licensed be recognised as an operator? I find trouble there. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, what I would have expected, therefore, is once you say, “any entity executing on behalf of the licensee the day-to-day management of petroleum activities or where the licensee performs the functions of the operator, the licensee.” This again twists us around and the best thing I would have proposed is “a licensee or any other person licensed who is executing the day-to-day management of petroleum activities.” 

MS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. If I could give further clarification on this issue; “Operator means a licensee or any other entity executing on behalf of one or several licensees the day-to-day management of petroleum activities.” The essence of this is to provide for the possibility of a licensee acting as an operator. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Have you listened to that, honourable members? That covers both aspects properly. 

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to agree to an extent with my sister, the Minister. The only problem that comes with it is the definition of a petroleum activity. The definition of a petroleum activity does not include “day-to-day”. I would have been comfortable if that element was captured, then it would have brought in all those other entities we are talking about. 

Yesterday at the time we broke off, one of the issues that had arisen was transportation and those other related activities. Now, if you are guided only by the definition of “operator” without harmonising with the definition of a petroleum activity, then you would have problems with the amendment as proposed. 

This one is talking about day-to-day management of a petroleum activity, which petroleum activity is defined in the same clause to mean, “...any other operations including planning, preparations, and preparations related to exploration, development or production.” This seems to leave out the other elements covered in section 6 where we were talking about the licensee and other entities, if we insist on the words “day-to-day”. This is because the operator leaves out the day-to-day element. 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, in our report, we proposed an amendment to “petroleum activity”. According to the amendment of the committee, petroleum activity means planning, preparation, installation, or execution of activities related to petroleum including reconnaissance, exploration, development, production, transportation, storage and cessation of activities or decommissioning of facilities. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, that is covered. Can we adopt this amendment proposed by the chairperson? Honourable member for Ndorwa, do you confirm that? Okay, can you restate it now for our purposes?

MR WERIKHE: “Operator means a licensee or any other entity executing on behalf of one or several licensees, the day-to-day management of petroleum activities.” The justification is: to provide for possibility of a licensee acting as an operator.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay now? I put the question to the amendment on the definition of an operator.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Was that the only matter stood over in clause 3?

MR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, in clause 3 I wanted to introduce a definition of landowner to read as follows: “A person who owns, holds or occupies land in accordance with the Land Act.” The justification is that it would cover the land tenure systems. People who own and occupy land because they are lawful or bona fide should not be dispossessed of their rights.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I have a problem with that proposed amendment from my brother, hon. Kasirivu. First, I appreciate where he is coming from. The honourable member from Kibaale is certainly bound to think on those grounds, but in terms of the law, first of all, he is now trying to engineer a new definition within the Land Act. When you look at land ownership under the Constitution, Article 237 says, “Land in Uganda shall be owned in accordance with the following land tenure systems - (a) customary; (b) freehold; (c) mailo; (d) leasehold.”

Now, clause 8 makes mention of the relationship between those holding under mailo and the tenants on mailo: “Upon the coming into force of this Constitution and until Parliament enacts an appropriate law under clause (9) of this article, the lawful or bona fide occupants of mailo land, freehold or leasehold land shall enjoy security of occupancy on the land.”

When you go to the Land Act, there are definitions of these people - the lawful and bona fide occupants. Under section 29 and under section 2, but more precisely under the definition clause in the Land Act, tenancy by occupancy means a lawful or bona fide occupant declared to be a tenant by occupancy by section 31. Therefore, to equate a tenant as owner will create a problem.

Mr Chairman, I appreciate the thinking behind hon. Kasirivu’s amendment but our land laws and our Constitution are sufficient to tell us who a landowner is, who a tenant is and how they are protected, and their rights. I so submit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Kasirivu, is there any serious danger in leaving the definition of “holds land” as it is, because what it means is known.

MR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, the unfortunate part is that the Attorney-General leaves out the spirit of that provision. He has read the letter but he leaves out the spirit of how and why the tenants he has referred to over and over again – He leaves out the spirit that actually the people, who he has called tenants or lawful and bona fide occupants, were actually the owners of this land. That is the spirit of that provision of the Constitution and that is what I am trying to do here.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I think the introduction of a seemingly new legal regime in this country confused a few things. Those people that we used to refer to specifically as tenants are actually not tenants under the Land Act he has talked about and even the Constitution.

One, those we used to refer to as kibanja holders are either lawful occupants or bona fide occupants. They are not tenants in the strictest sense that we used to refer to as tenants at sufferance, meaning that these people have entrenched rights and these rights must be read together with the rights guaranteed under Article 26 of the Constitution.

So when I hear my learned brother, the Attorney-General, comparing a tenant and land owner - No, actually both are land owners except that the land has been divided into two interests. In fact, the lawful and bona fide occupant seems to have, in a practical sense, a greater interest in the land because he occupies it and the landlord has the title, which he can remain with. (Interruption)

MR TUMWEBAZE: I would like to seek clarification from the honourable colleague. You are giving us whatever the implication is or whatever one can interpret it to be. However, legally speaking - I am not a lawyer - do you want to say that there is no difference between the meaning of a tenant and a landlord? Do you want to say that legally speaking, there is no difference?

MR SSEGGONA: I wish to clarify as follows, Mr Chairman and colleagues. Actually, you cannot even talk about the difference because the tenancy is not there in this context. The person you have is a bona fide occupant who is an owner of an interest in land. The other one is a lawful occupant who is an owner of an interest in land. This is not a tenant, and that is why I said, in the strictest of senses, we do not have the tenants we used to refer to. We have occupants and now that occupancy itself is ownership.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So can you now, honourable member, speak on the definition as it is in the Bill.

MR SSEGGONA: I want to agree with hon. Kasirivu, not from the deepest of my conviction because in the first place I opposed all these amendments, but that is the law they made for us. So, I agree with hon. Kasirivu.

MR RUHINDI: Well, we may talk about the reality or we may talk about the spirit of the law and also the law. My brother, hon. Sseggona, would best speak by proposing amendments to the Land Act because now this is a subject on land. I agree with you, and this is why the position of bona fide occupants and lawful occupants is entrenched in the Constitution. They are certainly different and I cannot submit otherwise. I cannot submit that they are tenants at sufferance; they are not. They are entrenched in the Constitution, but their interest, according to Article 237, which spells out the land tenure systems under which land is held in Uganda, is very clear. By the way, there are fundamental differences, even in the holding. We made amendments here in 2010. Do you remember that controversial law – the Land (Amendment) Act, 2010 - which you were demonstrating against?

I was trying to cite for him some basic differences, which he knows as a lawyer. If a kibanja owner, for example, intends to dispose of his interests in a kibanja, he must first get the consent of the landlord. But where the landlord wants to dispose his interests, he does not seek the consent of the kibanja owner. However, whoever buys that interest will buy with the encumbrance of the kibanja holder. (Interjection) No, the first option is there. 

Let me tell you, in the event that the land is sold, the interest of the person buying will not be void. Yes, you give the first option but the giving of the first option does not invalidate any transaction on that land. What happens is that whoever takes that interest will do it subject to the interest of the kibanja owner. In other words, whoever buys cannot evict - (Interjection) - I moved this law and I can read it for you because I have it here. Let me get where it is and then come back to the podium.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, it looks like this definition – Hon. Kasirivu, please re-state your amendment.

MR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, the definition I presented is: “A landowner means a person who owns, holds or occupies land in accordance with the Land Act.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that your definition of a landowner? The learned Attorney-General, is there a fundamental problem with this? As long as that owning, holding or occupation is within the provisions of the Land Act, that person is being defined as a landowner. (Mr Anywarach rose_) You do not seek clarification from the chair. (Interjection) You should be specific. 

MR ANYWARACH: I seek clarification on what the amendment seeks to cure. I want to agree with the learned Attorney-General when we state that, “A land owner means a person who holds land in accordance with the Land Act.” I think that is straight and clear. What defect in this statement does the amendment seek to cure? May I please get clarification on that. Thank you. 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I can appreciate the anxiety this is causing. First, so far in the existing statutes, we do not have a clear definition of a land owner. However, when you read the RTA – the Registration of Titles Act - it provides for a person who holds a certificate of title; that is conclusive proof of ownership. And in Section 2 of that Act, it provides that it is the supreme law with respect to land and can only be subjected to the Constitution. Now, subsequent to the RTA, Parliament enacted the Land Act. Now, you are moving from that conclusive proof of ownership by way of a title and you bring in a second element that actually in effect provides for co-ownership of land. First, by entrenching the right of a person who has no land title – and this is in those  forms  provided for under customary land ownership; secondly, you have lawful and bonafide. They have also become land owners of some sort; and statutory land ownership. 

Now, what the honourable member is introducing – the effect – you will find it when you read the definition here as my other colleague has pointed out: “A land owner means a person who holds land in accordance with the Land Act.” The Land Act recognises the person holding a certificate of title, in addition to the Registration of Titles Act, but also recognises people who do not have titles – that is bonafide and lawful. 

However, what the honourable member is bringing out is for the avoidance of ambiguity, to cater for people who own in the strictest of senses as well as those who occupy. So, he is adding the word “occupy” to cater for those who do not have titles. Also, remember that the Land Act makes provision for them to acquire certificates of occupancy to be provided by the landlord. So, you are providing for them in the definition of a land owner. I do not see any reason why the learned Attorney-General would have a problem with this. 

Let me also make another clarification on a question posed by -(hon. Kakooza rose_)– Let me first clarify the earlier point. I agree with the learned Attorney-General that in the principal Land Act as of 1998, a transaction by a landlord would not be rendered void. The 2010 amendment over which I have vivid - very sour and bitter memories, the provision was introduced to the extent of criminalising a sale of land by the landlord without the kibanja owner’s consent (the occupants of the land). I would be very happy if he provided that amendment.

MR RUHINDI: First of all, Mr Chairman, to come back to my submission - because I normally go armed. Yes, hon. Kasirivu is right, sections 35 up to 38 or 40, state the giving of first option to a lawful occupant or bonafide occupant. But under the amendment of 2010 - for purposes of clarity, - I wish to be  on record - clause 3 or section 3 of that amendment Act, section 35 of the Principal Act is amended, a) by inserting immediately after sub-section (1) the following: 

“1(a) subject to sub-section (7), a tenant by occupancy who purports to assign the tenancy by occupancy without giving the first option of taking the assignment of the tenancy to the owner of the land, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 96 currency points, or imprisonment not exceeding four years or both and the transaction shall be invalid and the tenant shall forfeit the right over the land, and the land shall revert to the registered owner.”

And (b), by inserting immediately after sub-section 7 the following: 

“(8) subject to this section, a change of ownership of title effected by the owner by sale, grant or succession or otherwise shall not in any way affect the existing lawful interests of bonafide occupants and the new owner shall be obliged to respect the existing interest.”

Suffice to add, finally, if you look at page 13 of the Bill; did hon. Kasirivu have any regard before he proposed his amendment? Look at the definition of land owner on page 13. It is defined there. “Land owner” means a person who holds land in accordance with the Land Act. What is the problem with that? So, what is he trying to do?

MR SSEGGONA: I think, Mr Chairman, with your permission, I waited to hear what harm it would cause by inserting hon. Kasirivu’s proposal of owner. Because, even the word “owner” may require further interpretation or meaning or a definition if you left it hanging. 

The Member proposes a person who owns, but for avoidance of doubt, in case you are not sure who owns and occupies land, because the background I gave right from the Registration of Titles Act, is that the law seems to be pegging ownership on a certificate of title, but there are people who live on land without certificates of title but in accordance with the Land Act. So, what the Member is proposing is to cater for them as owners as well because they are occupying, I think by reason of occupancy -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But what is in the Bill is not ownership. It is holding; it is not owning. Holding encompasses all those ones you are saying.  Yes, land owner is a person who holds; yes, holding; it is not owning. So, the different categories of holding are what you are elaborating now. 

MR SSEGGONNA:  Who of the two is holding land? The man holding a certificate of title or the man staying on the land?

MR NIWAGABA: The guidance I want to seek is that we know that legally speaking no one owns land. What we only own is an interest in land. Would this definition, therefore, cover all those who own the respective interests in land in accordance with the Land Act? And if in your wisdom that holds then we go by the definition as proposed in the Bill; but if the holding does not cover those who own interests in land other than registered interest then we adopt hon. Kasirivu’s proposed amendment because to me it does not cause any harm anyway since the common principle in law is that no one owns land. What you only own is an interest in land.

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Mr Chairman, Article 242, under land use, I would like to propose that we say, “Government may, under the laws made by Parliament and policies made from time to time regulate the use of land.” I would like to propose that we proceed and finalise this clause, and if any Member feels that there is need to change the land use, land ownership or tenancy, then we can move and we make necessary laws since the Constitution allows us these powers. Mr Chairman, thank you. 

THE  DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members this very small amendment has taken us a lot of time now. Learned Attorney-General, do you still have strong objections over the amendment? I propose that we stand over this clause. Let us move.

(Clause 2, stood over.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: On clause 3?

MS ALASO: Yes, Mr Chainman. Clause 3, but the section which talks about best petroleum industrial practices. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do I have a copy of your amendment? 

MS ALASO: Yes, it is a slight amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do I have a copy of your amendment honourable member? 

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, if you could hear me out; it is a very small thing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much. I am proposing to insert under the definition of “best petroleum industrial practices” the word “transparent” between “good and safe” so that it reads, “Best petroleum industrial practices means the best available practices that are generally accepted as good, transparent,      safe and efficient…” and it continues. And the reason is derived from the national oil and gas policy, where we make a commitment to the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative - something like that - and I thought that by including the word “transparent” we just uphold that commitment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIPERSON: The honourable member is proposing to insert the word “transparent” immediately after the comma after the word “good”. Insertion of the word, “transparent.” 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, according to my text I think it is indicated - I mean, “transparent” would actually be part of the –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment proposed by the honourable member.

(Question put and agreed to.)

[MRS MULONI: “No, Mr Chairman, let us stand over it.”]

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The word “transparent”, honourable minister? 

MRS MULONI: Yes, Mr Chairman; we stand over it; we have not considered it. Yesterday you requested Members to submit their amendments in writing by midday today.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The chairman has said it is in his text; and it is one word, “transparent”, which is in the spirit of “good, safe” - transparent. We have already taken a decision on it. Any other proposals on clause 3? Okay, we stand over that clause.

(Clause 3, stood over)

Clause 4

MR WERIKHE: Clause 4(1) insert the following immediately after sub clause (1), “A licensee shall ensure that the management of production, transportation, storage, treatment or disposal of waste arising out of petroleum activities is carried out in accordance with environmental principles prescribed under the National Environmental Act and other laws applicable. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We adopted that yesterday; so why should we vote on it again?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I seek your guidance. If we are on the same page, sub clause (2) was, “The management of the production, transportation, storage, treatment and disposal of waste arising out of petroleum activities, shall be carried out by the licensee or other entities as agents of the licensee”.

But now, the chairman is saying that we insert immediately after sub clause (1), yet this was a standalone sub clause (2) of clause 4. Are we reading from the same text, Mr Chairman?

MR WERIKHE: The re-numbering, I think is what is bringing the confusion. The current sub clause (2) is amended as follows: “A licensee shall contract a separate entity to manage the transportation, storage, treatment or disposal of waste arising out of petroleum activities”. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, if you legislate what a licensee is going to do - “A licensee shall sub contract”; I would rather we put it in a smarter way, what we shared with you and which you graciously read through and accepted. If it covers what you intend to do, why are you now making another introduction of sub-contracting because you are now legislating on those duties to be performed by the licensee. 

Yet, in the understanding we reached, we put a provision to read: “The management, production, transportation, storage, treatment and disposal of waste arising out of petroleum activities shall be carried out by the licensee or entities as agents of the licensee.” That covers well your new introduction. 

If we are agreeable – and this was well thought out - I imagine, for us to start legislating on the duties of the licensee that they shall sub contract; I know well that there are companies around here which are ready to engage in waste disposal. But colleagues, waste management is one of the most difficult aspects in the oil sector. It is very expensive and you are allowing oil companies to drill and leave it with your sub-contractors. 

Why are we attempting to separate the two? The ones with the requisite technology – they have the necessary technology. Once they measure underground and find there is no water table, they can drill two square miles underground –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, we do not want to go into debating this matter again. If it is not resolved, we stand over it and move forward. Because, we gave you time to harmonise this thing.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, we did and we all agreed and referred this to our legal officer of Parliament. All these have been refined by the legal officer. So, we all agree that we refer this to the legal officer of Parliament. I am not reading my own draft; we agreed on the principle; but we could not do the drafting ourselves. So, we referred it to the legal officer of Parliament and these have come out of his refined proposals. So, if it is not agreeable, we are under your guidance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause stood over. 

(Clause 4, stood over.)

Clause 6

MR WERIKHE: Amend clause 6 as follows: By deleting the words in sub clause (1), the words, “...in, on, or inland, or waters in Uganda, or subject to...” the new provision will, therefore, be as follows: “Petroleum activities under Ugandan jurisdiction shall not be conducted without an authorisation, licence, permit or approval issued in accordance with this Act. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay? It deals with yesterday’s debate. 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I want to thank my colleague the chairman for that; I think it is better drafting. When I tried to read behind the minister’s explanation yesterday, what they actually wanted was, they envisaged a situation where our wells spill into the boundaries of another country. 

My understanding of Government operations is that at that point, the government would need to negotiate with the neighbouring government and make provision in that agreement: One, how to explore the oil in another territory; and two, how to avoid a situation where the other government explores oil flowing from Uganda. 

The agreement would provide for enforcement mechanisms. First, for example, that the other partner would not licence or permit any other person to explore without licence. Two, that the other partner state would not in any way permit or allow a person to explore; or would not licence another person except in consultation with the Uganda Government. 

I want us to go beyond the provision as made now, and propose to Government, if they are interested, to make provision empowering them to enter into such negotiations. Or, if it appears obvious to them, they would just go and make those negotiations and find a way of creating enforcement mechanisms, which may include creating offenses here and there. I agree with the amendment; it is okay. I was going just a step further

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the chair of the committee? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There was the aspect of 2(b) on the currency points. Was that resolved so that we can finish with this clause?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, the proposed fine that we agreed upon reads as follows, “If a body corporate…” Let me read the whole –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, just tell us the amount.  

MR SSEGGONA: Okay, the amount is 1,000,000 currency points. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: 1,000,000 currency points. Agreed? I put the question to that. 

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that clause 6 as amended stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I thank you.

Clause 7

MR WERIKHE: For clause 7, we received the amendments from hon. Katuntu in writing, but he was not there to speak for it and so I do not know whether he abandoned it or –

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, we are trying to meet somewhere with the Government proposition and in our proposal is a small amendment to read, “The Government may, through the Authority enter into an agreement relating to petroleum activities, and consistent with this Act with any person with respect to the following matters.” And ours is just a simple addition of, “through the Authority” and the justification is –(Interjections)- that “the Authority” is defined – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Order.

MR SSEGGONA: The word, “Authority”, Mr Chairman, for the benefit of colleagues who have not had enough time, is defined in the Bill and the justification is as follows:

1.	To insulate Government from contractual obligations and, therefore, exposure of public resources through the Treasury in the event of breach or perceived breach of contractual obligations. This is because once Government has entered into these agreements, then liability is just on the door.

2.	This is a procurement process, and so, we are trying to keep Government or the mainstream Executive away from procurement proceedings. But there are many reasons:


(i)	Involving the minister in matters of licensing, etcetera is a procurement contrary to the PPDA;

(ii)	The history – because this is business for the country and it is a business that is going to make this country survive for some good time. We have a history of direct governmental involvement in business and that should give us a lesson;

(iii)	Mr Chairman and colleagues, the Authority is a body corporate and responsible or answerable to Government. It is regulatory in nature, conducts and carries out technical functions. It is under the supervision of the Government and the Executive specifically through the minister. 

We are also providing a more detailed and well aligned supervision system because the minister who is supposed to supervise will not supervise him or herself. We are providing for an authority that is full-time in terms of operation, and is also technical. I do not want to imagine a situation where the minister is out of the country and the country’s core business is at a standstill -(Interruption)

MR WERIKHE: Clarification, Mr Chairman. I do not know, but I would like my learned brother here to –(Interjection)- you are learned, but I could be a brother much as I am not learned –(Laughter)- not a colleague, but a brother.  

I do not know whether we are equating Government to “minister”. It seems, from my listening, hon. Sseggona is, in his submission, actually alluding to the functions of the minister and yet here, we are talking about agreements with Government. I do not know whether - because I also want to understand, whether “authority” is part of Government or not.  

If so, why don’t we really get the substantive clause which actually spells out the functions of the minister and functions of the authority? Perhaps, that would actually give us guidance as to how we can treat clause 7, but because we are now speaking for the clauses ahead, which may actually impact on clause 7. I do not know, but those are some of the clarifications that I would like to have. 

MR SSEGGONA: Again, with humility and respect, I will clarify. Mr Chairman, I definitely know the meaning of “Government” in this Constitution and –(Interruption)
       
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Procedure, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Procedure.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: I thank you, Mr Chairman. In line with what the chairman of the committee is stating, clause 7 is highly related to clause 9 on the functions of the minister; and clauses 10 and 11. It depends on how clauses 9, 10 and 11 were treated, which can give us proper guidance on clause 7. 

I would, therefore, propose that he would, in the meantime, stand over clause 7, and we handle clauses 9, 10 and 11 because it would give us a better understanding depending on the position that we would have agreed on for clause 7, because as per the proposal of the committee, clause 7 would stand to make meaning. But if Members treat it differently in their wisdom, still, it will have to be treated differently. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is clause 7 stood over?

HON. MEMBERS: Aye!

(Clause 7, stood over.)

Clause 8

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 8 stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 8, agreed to.)

Clause 9

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, on clause 9, the committee’s proposal is to delete paragraphs (b), (C) and (d). 

Justification: They are redundant since these are the known functional duties of the minister, besides clause 180 empowers the minister to make regulations for the sector.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The Member for Ndorwa.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, I do propose that clause 9, sub clauses (a), (e), (f) and (h) be deleted for the following reasons:

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which sub clauses?

MR NIWAGABA: Clause 9, sub clauses (a), (e), (f) and (h) be deleted for the following reasons: 

1.	These are ordinary functions of a technical nature and the minister’s powers should ordinarily be restricted to policy and regulation making.
 
2.	Licensing itself is a procurement, and under the PDDA Act, procurements are made by technical persons and not politicians.

3.	It would be in the interest of Government to be insulated from entering agreements of this nature including licenses, especially when disputes arise. And for those reasons, I would suggest that we delete those sub clauses, but transfer them when we go to consider clause 11, so that they become the functions of the Authority. I beg to move

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can I first deal with the proposal from the committee which has been agreed to by the minister; that is, (b), (c), and (d) –

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I am finding difficulty in us deleting (b), (c), and (d) because, matters of policy, whether developing, initiating or implementing the same; matters of submitting draft legislation to Parliament; and matters to do with issuing of petroleum regulations; these are well   within the purview of the minister. 

If you want to appoint the minister and you take away such critical functions - Mr Chairman, re-think deeply about this. I know you are in a hurry to create a certain legal regime in the oil sector, but desist from – you see, two wrongs do not make a right. Desist from taking such core functions and responsibilities away from the minister. You may, if you wish, pile the minister with as many responsibilities and obligations as possible; you may involve him or her in the boardrooms and in negotiations, but if you attempt to refrain and run away from this, what else are you telling us?

Mr Chairman, I want you to reconsider this – and don’t for the haste of wanting the minister now to leave his or her normal duties – after we finish this, then we can look at what your intentions are.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I think in our submission, we said, these are the known functional duties of the minister. And besides, clause 180 empowers the minister. When you look at clause 180, it empowers the minister to make regulations for the sector. For that matter we thought this is redundancy in the law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But honourable chairman, this provision is about functions of the minister; an outline of the functions of the minister. The issue of policy; issue of legislation to Parliament; and issues of issuing regulations,  whose functions would those be if you are really going to provide for functions of the minister, under clause 9?

MRS MULONI: Thank you. Mr Chairman, I think it would help if I can clarify to honourable members so that they can fully understand the essence of this clause. 

Mr Chairman, as you may have noticed or recognised since last week, there have been a lot of discussions regarding powers of the minister. And the reason why honourable members are bringing out the issue in clause 7, restricting it to an authority, is all geared to ensuring that the minister does not involve him or herself in the issue of licencing, on the issue of signing agreements, on the issue of approving field development plans, and on approving the data management systems. So, I feel it is important that I shed more light so that Members can understand where we are coming from.

Yesterday, when hon. Katuntu was speaking on this item No.7, he fully recognised that indeed oil is political. (Interjection) He did, and I am sure the Hansard captured that. (Interjection) Yes, you cannot delink oil resource management from politics because this is a resource that belongs to all of us as Ugandans and each of us has a stake and an interest vested in Government for the Republic of Uganda –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, the issue before us now is, why would you want the deletion of initiation, development, implementation of oil and gas policy –

MRS MULONI: I am not against that. I am not against (b), (c), (d).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, but why would you want it deleted from your functions and yet you are the one who has access to Parliament to present regulations; the authority is given to you; the issue of policy; the issue of submitting draft legislation to Parliament is a responsibility of the minister. Why would you want those deleted?

MRS MULONI: I have no problem with it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So; it is not time for you to speak right now.

MRS MULONI: I am moving on because –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, no, we haven’t finished with this.

MRS MULONI: We put them here as a matter of clarity. For me I have no problem with them remaining here. I am now moving to the others.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is not yet for discussion. What I had asked was for us to deal with the amendments brought by the chairperson first, and that is what we are discussing; that is, (b), (c) and (d). Those amendments were proposed by the chairperson. Let us handle those first and then we go to the other proposals.

So, the question is, as a minister why would you want (b), (c) and (d) deleted from your functions.
  
MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, after consulting with the minister, I think let us have these functions restored.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You withdraw your amendment.

MR WERIKHE: I propose that the committee’s proposed amendment is withdrawn.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You are withdrawing it, so why are you proposing it to us. Just withdraw.

MR WERIKHE: I am withdrawing it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. He has withdrawn those amendments, so we now go to the -

MR NGANDA: Mr Chairman, my understanding is that the chairperson is representing a committee of Parliament and, therefore, the proposals he is reading are proposals of the committee. But the chairperson is saying, after consulting the minister, I am now withdrawing these proposals. So, are they still proposals of the committee or of the chairperson?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This is now the Committee of the Whole House. That means they have no more proposals for the deletion of (b), (c) and (d). Now, there were proposals for deletion of (a), (e), (f) and (h). They were spoken to. That is, of granting and revoking licences; negotiation and endorsing petroleum agreements; approving field development plans; and approving data management systems; that those should not be functions of the minister.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. When I look at this Bill, it is divided into three items, that is: Investment licencing; policy regulating; and monitoring and business management. When you delete granting and revoking of a licence, there is what we call a political cost, which cannot be quantified. So, 
 to say that a minister should not take part in the companies he is licensing involving such a strategic resource for Government, it would not be in order that you just leave it to technocrats. 

I read in the New Vision of today about what has happened in Nigeria. People have gone up in arms –(Interjections)- Yes, I can ably articulate on this matter. What has happened is that the people have been manipulated; they gave out a licence and by the time they called on the technocrats, they had resigned from their jobs. But here is a political responsibility to the public that they must account and take a decision. And when you say that approving the data management system should be left to technocrats, what about the budgetary activities within the policy framework of that ministry? It should be a collective responsibility of the Executive, and they must be part of it.  

When you look at what we are discussing about negotiating and endorsing petroleum agreements, these are resources where Government must take an interest. So, the minister should stand in on behalf of Government. It should still be the minister to know when there is going to be reinvestment of huge amounts of money and to know how to prioritise this reinvestment. 

Government plans in conjunction with Parliament and other stakeholders, but the minister should be at the centre of it all. 

Petroleum is more or less 80 to 90 percent political. (Interjections) Yes, take it or leave it. Eighty to 90 percent of petroleum is political and who is at the centre of this? It is the politicians who are going to be there. 

Mr Chairman, when you say that you are leaving granting and revoking of licences to technocrats, be it seven to nine people, they can be manipulated. But if it is the Executive taking the responsibility of offering licences, it will take collective responsibility. 

MRS OGWAL: I am rising on a point of order, Mr Chairman. I don’t think that the honourable member who has been holding the Floor has understood the roles of the minister and that of the authority. My understanding is that whatever decisions the authority takes is still subject to the minister’s verification, amendment and policy guidance. So, there are no contradictions whatsoever. The decision of the authority can still be guided by the policy of the minister. They are not working in contradiction. So, why is hon. Kakooza insisting on what he is trying to say when it is actually very clear?  Is he in order, therefore, to continue confusing us when we have already understood?
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Point understood.
 
MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think, let us understand this in a context. We have two functions; the political function that goes with policy; and the technical function. Let us also learn from the other authorities we have established that conduct similar business in terms of our resources. For example, Electricity Regulatory Authority (ERA) and National Water, but specifically, I would like to deal with the electricity as a resource, which falls under the honourable colleague’s docket.
 
These authorities, which are technical in nature, handle the day-to-day technical work. They handle the procurement, including licensing. If I asked her who licences power providers in this country, Umeme etcetera, it is the authority and not her. What we should be concerned about is that these authorities operate in accordance with a policy, which the honourable minister currently has the obligation of putting in place. That is number one.
  
Two, the minister shall have the responsibility – the authority shall deal with specific things under her able guidance. And I pray she remains there for some good time.  

Three, when we talk about - even time - because, we are dealing with only simple segments in this ministry - just one small segment, which is oil and gas - she has many other things to attend to. I do not want to see a situation where we are overloading the minister with responsibilities that she is not going to handle to her best. 
 
MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, honourable member, for yielding the Floor. Mr Chairman and colleagues, the minister is a political head, agreed. But the minister presides over a ministry; and the ministry, if you follow right from the policy, the law we are making is going to help us make institutions that do not exist, like the authority and the oil company. But under the ministry, there is a technical and a policy directorate, which is not mentioned here in the law because it exists and it is assumed that it will be rationalised by the Public Service. The directorate has both the technical and policy angle, and it is not the political head - the minister - who is going to be handling a, e, f and h. It is the technical arm of the directorate in the Ministry of Energy that will be handling it.
 
So, the clarification I wanted to seek is whether you are aware that by policy directive within the ministry and under the Public Service, there exists another institution called a directorate?
 
MR SSEGGONA: Yes, I will clarify. I am aware that there exist some segments that are technical in the ministry and those ones will only help the minister in developing and formulating the policy aspects. Otherwise, why would we create an authority? We are creating an authority because -(Interruption)

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much for giving way. Mr Chairman, I would like to speak as a member of the committee, perhaps, to enrich the Members as to how we also came to agree on this position. It was through, first of all, borrowing a leaf from very many other countries, how their authorities have performed and on their success stories too. We had also been tasked by this august House on how we would provide directly for the participation of Parliament in this sector. After scrutinising the roles of Parliament; how we interlink with the ministries; and how we do the supervisions, we realised that the best thing one would do was to: One, look at the roles of the authority and borrow a leaf. Some authorities mentioned here - perhaps it would not be good to mention countries here - but there are some countries where the authority has not been given powers of licensing and regulating, fail to perform the regulation role because it was the same authority to license, monitor itself and regulate. Meaning that -(Interruption)- I can be advised by the Speaker on whether to mention names. [HON. MEMBER: “Information.”] I am still clarifying; please, with your indulgence, honourable members, I am trying to complete.

In some countries, those authorities became so powerful, that they even began to determine who comes into political leadership. Mr Chairman, we humbly felt that we should leave the the powers of licensing to the minister because even in these amendments we provided, that when the minister licenses, we gave an ultimatum as to when he or she should report to this House before the licensing comes in force. We also provided for the participation of Cabinet before the minister goes to endorse the licensing.

We provided for consultation with the authority, but I do not need to forget to mention that there shall also be a directorate. We, therefore, thought to involve the minister in licensing, Parliament will likewise have an upper hand.

Honourable members, this has to be mentioned. Let us be very critical. Whereas we want to give powers to the authority - I know hon. Sseggona is not very comfortable with the roles of regulation that are being played by other regulatory bodies we have today when they are handling the licensing. He will share with you at a later stage. I thank you very much.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, let me deal with the information I have, to drive my point home, before I get saturated with more information - I will take information from hon. Karuhanga.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Mr Chairman, it is very important that we insulate the oil sector, and that is why we are saying that the granting of the licence should be done by the authority in consultation with the minister. The reason is, we have seen before – actually, if you check all our laws that establish, for instance, the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC), the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA), the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we had agreed on this issue of accessing the microphone before you have been given the authority.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, the Member holding the Floor is misleading the House by saying that licensing with Uganda Communications Commission is left to the authority. We passed a law here recently; the Electronic Media Act, whereby we gave the powers to license to the minister. Mr Chairman, you were in the Chair. Is the honourable member in order now to insinuate that with the Uganda Communications Commission licensing is left with the authority? It is captured in the Hansard and the record is there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, indeed, the communications law was passed here recently and those licensing powers were given to the office of the minister responsible.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you very much. I welcome the interruption from my honourable member. Mr Chairman, it is so critical that we institutionalise the management of this sector as deeply as we can, so that when you have the authority making or granting a license, for instance, it is done in consultation with the minister. One, is that you have -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you are now debating. You rose on information. Please give the information.

MR KARUHANGA: Okay, thank you, Mr Chairman. The information to my honourable colleague is that it is actually not entirely new because licenses, like the Member had said, are of a procurement nature. So, why do we want to grant the entire management to one person when we can actually institutionalise this sector so that we have institutions that are responsible and that have a technical aspect? Like we debated here yesterday; that for anybody to be a minister, and with all due respect to the sitting minister, you only need a senior six certificate. (Interruption)

MR PETER LOKERIS: According to our electoral laws, Mr Chairman, it is stated that anybody who comes to this House should either hold an ‘A’ Level certificate or its equivalent. I think all of us here are members of this honourable House, and I don’t think anybody has qualifications lower than those stipulated. Is the honourable member in order to impute that those who become ministers are exempt from this stipulation? Is he in order to demean ministers of the Cabinet of Uganda?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The statement from the honourable member was that the minimum qualification you need to be a minister is ‘A’ Level. That is the law and there is not much we can do about it.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I have received that information from hon. Karuhanga with gratitude. If I may pose a question to my colleagues, if you are going to allow the minister to do the technical work, why then would you establish an authority? To do what? This is an authority we are establishing to feed on the oil money and to do work. That is number one. 

Secondly, we have these technocrats we are taking from the ministries, and we know them. They are there. Actually, hon. Nankabirwa, we are not creating any new structures in these ministries. I wish I had the liberty to explain what you said I am not comfortable with, but I will not. I am decent enough to see it -(Interruption)

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Mr Chairman, is the honourable colleague in order to misguide this House by trying to say that an authority is independent of a minister? The authority operates under a minister. Is he in order to mislead this House?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think you have given the information you wanted to give.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, decency and civility would definitely prevail on me to sit down when the hon. Col Fred Mwesigye, now retired, is speaking.

Mr Chairman, the point I am driving at is, let us agree that the authority is part of the government; we are not disputing it. And I want to borrow from what the learned Attorney-General said here yesterday, that the government operates through the mainstream executive and the technical arm. And it is in recognition of this that we agreed to establish an authority to be the technical arm assisting the political executive operating through the minister.

I want to allay the fears of my colleagues from the Executive; we are not taking away the governmental participation; we are only streamlining it in a manner that is going to help all of us. This is especially in answering the clarification sought by my colleague, hon. Ann Nankabirwa. It is true that some authorities in some countries have become very powerful and moved off the rail. But it is also true that some ministers have put their hands in the till of the national resources; both in other countries and here; we have seen it. That is why we want a strong minister like hon. Muloni to supervise the technical people and to allow the authority, as part of the government arm, in doing this technical work. (Interjection) I am told the honourable minister wants to give me information.

MR PETER LOKERIS: Thank you, hon. Sseggona, for giving way. This law is also adopted from other countries with good management practices in the oil industry. If you had looked at the ministry’s organogram, we have a directorate of the ministry, full of technical and competent people who are university graduates and have been to the same universities as those they will negotiate with have gone.

But I want to bring you to the qualifications of the members of the authority, so that you can see whether they are the type that can negotiate effectively with their counterparts vis-a-vis those employed by the directorate, the technical arm of government. 

Looking at the qualifications of the members of the board - 18(v) - we have those qualified in petroleum geosciences or engineering; health, safety and environment matter; a lawyer – like you; business administration and management; finance and economics – like some of us; and, chemical and process refining engineering. The other members, you will find, are all technical people in the oil and gas industry. 

Maybe we do not have it here now – and that is the technical arm that advises the minister. It engages in negotiations following the laid down principles of the oil and gas industry and after doing due diligence of all the companies, they bring them to the minister for consideration. After the minister licenses the companies, then the regulators come in to regulate petroleum activities. This is a big business and that is why they are separated. Thank you. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I can sympathise with my side, particularly the minister, the pre-current speaker, and the chairman. Apparently, this seems to be an exercise in futility. The issues we are raising are constitutional. We should be honest. A Member was submitting that we continue to give these powers to the minister because there is a department which is both technical and in charge of policy – of course, it does not apply – that it is to be created. But he should know that rule 71 of our Rules of Procedure prescribes anticipation.

In view of that, I wish to say that concerning the powers of the minister, they are matters of the Constitution. Article 101(2) talks about the Cabinet. It lists its functions as being: “To determine, formulate and implement the policy of Government and perform such other functions as may be conferred by this Constitution or any other law.” And that is why, in the wisdom of the drafters of this Bill - if you looked at clause 14 of our Bill, it provides thus: “Directions by the minister: The minister may give directions in writing to the authority with respect to the policy to be observed and implemented by the authority, and the authority shall comply with those directives.” 

Now, this one puts the powers and functions as provided for by the Constitution within the ambit of the minister. That is why in our initial amendments, we had wanted to delete clause 14, but we found out that it was in tandem with the Constitution. 

Mr Chairman, I would like to now turn to what the technical persons in Government do; they are represented by the permanent secretary. And when you look at Article 174, where they talk about the permanent secretary’s role: “Organisation and operation of the department or ministry; tendering advice -”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Ssekikubo, you rose on a procedural point; what is it?

MR SSEKIKUBO: The submissions by the frontbench were offending the Constitution because they are trying to crisscross the roles of Cabinet and the minister with those of the technical arm of Government. I was reading the roles of the permanent secretary which are provided for under Article 174(2)(c): “…Implementation of policies of Government of Uganda, subject to Article 164 of this Constitution and responsible for proper expenditure of public funds in connection with the department or ministry.” 

The point I am labouring to pass across is that we should not interchange the functions of the minister which are well-provided for under this Constitution with those of the technical arm of Government, which are also laid out in this Constitution. By us proceeding to interchange the two, Mr Chairman, are we procedurally right to continue in such a manner when it is clearly against this. I can understand what the chairman tried to put – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you have already posed a procedural question. The procedural point you have raised – I have tried to find it, but I have failed. Nevertheless you have made a very eloquent submission on the subject. I cannot rule on the procedural point which was not raised.  

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, as I wind up my submission, I do it on this point –(Interjection)- Well, Mr Chairman, he is senior to me.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I spoke so much yesterday on this matter, and I do not think I have much useful information to add. Suffice to say that one point we should not miss, either we agree with it or we do not, but let us actually debate it exhaustively, is that this is an important resource. Globally, it has either caused problems in countries or it has given them the benefit of better livelihood. What my colleagues are submitting, mostly from this end, that this being a strategic resource, the core functions should be placed in that part of the leadership of the government, either to sink or rise with it. That is the essence. We should not miss that side of it. Once we capture it and debate it, these other matters, say of regulation, are subsidiary to that major one. 

Now, I do not agree with hon. Ssekikubo’s submission that some of these functions stipulated for the minister in this clause 9 are unconstitutional. Let us bear in mind that ministers perform functions on behalf of the head of state. The head of state, under Article 99, has the executive authority of Uganda. What we are talking about is an executive function. The executive authority of Uganda is vested in the President and shall be exercised in accordance with this Constitution and the laws of Uganda, and so on and so forth. What the ministers do, they do on behalf of the President who has the executive authority on all Government affairs of this country. So, it is erroneous to submit otherwise as hon. Ssekikubo is doing.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to thank the learned Attorney-General for that information. I consider it important information on some other clause. 

Mr Chairman, one, the Minister of State for Energy read out the qualifications of the board. I considered that to be a plea of default. He was trying to put on a weighing scale, the technical staff they currently have in the ministry and those to be appointed to the board in terms of their qualifications. But this is their Bill, and these are the qualifications that they proposed as a ministry, and I have no problem with them. They have very good qualifications.  That is No.1

Two, is the minister disowning the authority as forming part of the ministry structure? 

Three, t I agree, that this is an important resource. Is the minister saying - and now the Attorney-General joining in - that all the other authorities that we have created and entrusted with core functions of the state, for example, ERA, URA and UNRA are not good enough? I submit that they are good enough. We are not touching the responsibility of the Executive in giving the policy directions and the lead role in this sector. We are also allowing His Excellency the President, who makes his choices of ministers to choose the best minister, like I guess he did, and that best minister supervises an authority we have established. That is why, Mr Chairman, with your permission, I had earlier talked about clause 7. Let the government do all this work, but through organised structures. Is the government saying it has no trust in institutions that it creates, including the authority? 

The Bill is good enough to the extent that it proposes men and women of great competence and this is why I want to echo what the hon. Gerald Karuhanga said, If you choose a minister, you choose one minister, and the essential qualification -[MR WERIKHE: “Information.”]- Information cannot be forced down my throat. Mr Chairman, our rules are clear. If I accept information, I say, “Yes I will take it.” I will take this information outside. (Laughter)

Mr Chairman, finally, is the government moving a vote of no confidence in all institutions that we establish?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, you wanted to say something. 

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, hon. Muzukulu. The information I would like to give hon. Sseggona is that you are talking of institutions, and I believe, the purpose of this Act as indicated in the Bill, is precisely to operationalise the National Oil and Gas Policy. This very policy on which this Bill is premised has institutions that have been created, and they have spelt out the functions in the policy among which if I may cite a few, under the ministry or the minister; undertaking licenses; negotiating, endorsing and administering the PSAs; approving plans for field development; and approving better management systems. This is within the policy and the purpose of this article is –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. May I ask the chairman to clarify whether the ministerial policy is implemented by the minister?

MR NIWAGABA: I want to know from you, Mr Chairman, whether in exercising our - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which chairman?

MR NIWAGABA: The chairman of the committee; Not the chairman of the chair. (Laughter) I am sorry. I want to know from you, whether in exercising our legislative functions we are limited to policies. And if so, whether actually policies can forestall the power of Parliament to make laws even beyond what is provided in the policy.        

MR WERIKHE: This was in respect to what the honourable member was saying about institutions created and their functions. I am not saying this should be limited to the policy, but the policy of course is implemented and supervised by the minister. And the policy is implemented under the guidance of the minister. These are clearly spelt out in this policy. Are we saying we should, therefore, go back and amend the policy in light of what you are saying?

MRS MULONI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. In building on what the chairman of the committee has just clarified, when we started the debate on the petroleum Bill, you clarified to all of us the cycle of policy-making: Policy formulation by the Executive; policy approval by Parliament; policy implementation by the Executive; and policy oversight by Parliament. So, the issues that my honourable colleagues are raising here on policy implementation are part and parcel of the role of the Executive; and the minister, the authority and the directorate are all part of the Executive. Those are institutions that have been created to support the Executive in executing its work. But responsibility remains with the overall head of the Executive. 

The petroleum resource we are talking about is a strategic resource for this country. It is of high value; it attracts very heavy investment; and also attracts heavy risks, which risks have a bearing on political responsibility. This resource is strategic to this country and so you cannot –(Interruption)- It is! I have qualified it. I am calling it strategic because of its nature. 

We have been sharing about what other regulators are doing. This Bill is putting in place an authority to serve as a regulator; a regulator who is going to monitor and supervise the operators - the licensees in the sector. So, we must delink licensing from regulation. The regulators that you mentioned, like UCC, CAA and Electricity Regulatory Authority (ERA) are services. But this one is a resource. This Bill is about resource management; we must understand it -[HON. MEMBERS: “URA.”]- Services! That is the difference –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Honourable minister, I have been a clearing agent for the last ten to 15 years. Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) has – in its statute - never given a licence on the basis of managing a resource; it is a professional service. You are talking of UCCA; we changed the law and we created a precedence that a minister must give a licence. And, if you want to be consistent with all the laws – hon. Sseggona, you are a professional lawyer – you must legislate consistently with other laws –(Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, I want to believe that we have resources like crop resources - cotton and coffee to mention but a few. We also have Uganda Coffee Development Authority that actually issues licences and even Uganda Cotton Development Authority. So, is the honourable member right to mislead the House that petroleum is a better resource than the resources which we have now, which have sustained our Government since 1926 or something like that. I want to be corrected if really he is in order.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let points of order be points of order, and points of information remain so. Let procedural points remain so. If you bring all of them in one bucket, then it does not augur well with the Rules of Procedure. If you want to give information to a Member or seek guidance, just say so, and you know how the rules operate in that area. 

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, I was emphasising the point that because of that reason - the way that Bill has been prepared, and the way Government intends to manage this resource – it has classified this in three classes: One, is for policy-making and implementation. Classification, is going to be carried out by the minister; and regulations and compliance, by the authority in the sector. When we look at the commercial aspect, the National Oil Company is going to take care of that. So, this minister heading the ministry is supported by the technical people in the directorate and the authority. But the ultimate responsibility, because of the nature of the resource - licencing, approvals and signing of agreements, these have been elevated to Cabinet level because of the nature of the resource we are talking about. The minister will not sign agreements unless approved by Cabinet. That is what it entails –(Interjections)

We have done benchmarking - we have gone to a number of countries with a good number of colleagues in this House. You have seen the best practice because of the nature of the resource. In Norway, it is the minister; in Austria, it is the minister – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we do not seem to be making any significant headway on this subject. So, that clause is accordingly stood over. 

(Clause 9, stood over.)

Clause 10

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 10 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, on clause 11, the committee proposes to substitute – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clauses 11 and 12 have the same kind of situation with the other clauses. We stand over those two; clauses 11 and 12.

(Clause 11, stood over.)

(Clause 12, stood over.)

Clause 13

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 13 stand part of the Bill.

Clause 13 agreed to.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, when you look at clause 13, which we have just approved –(Interjections)– I have received leave of the Chair. Clause 13(5) states, “Every document purporting to be an instrument or contract executed or issued by or on behalf of the board in accordance with the section shall be deemed to be executed or issued until the contrary is proved.”

From a technical angle, I am not comfortable with the use of the word, “purporting”, because we are talking about something like conclusive proof, and in our own language, we are saying inherently, it is suspicious, because the word “purporting” in legislative language is negative. Now, for colleagues who thought that they should oppose, may I propose, Mr Chairman, since our rules allow us to revisit, that we revisit the use of the word “purporting”. 

Mr Chairman, may I request that we send this particular wording back to our technical team to find an alternative and suitable word? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, that would require recommital and you know the procedure for doing that because we have pronounced ourselves on it. However, the point has been noted that there are some issues on the word “purporting” in sub-clause (5) of the clause that we have just pronounced ourselves on. Yes, the learned Attorney-General.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, those who are purporting to defile my title –(Laughter)- should stop doing so. But you know, there are certain things that sound strange in our ears but are legitimate. Now, from the elementary understanding of the word “purport”, it is simply something that appears or one claims to be what it is not. That is the simple language. What the provision is saying is that if that happens, then it should be taken to be as put in the provision. There is nothing sinister or –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Anyway, it will come at that stage when it is recommitted.

Clause 14 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, on Clause 14, the committee proposes to insert in sub-clause (1) the words, “approved government” immediately after the words, “respect to the” so as to read, “The minister may give directions in writing to the authority with respect to the approved Government policy to be observed and implemented by the authority, and the authority shall comply with those directions.” 

MR SSEGGONA: May I propose, Mr Chairman, the insertion of the words, “lawful directions” so as to read, “The minister may give lawful directions in writing….”

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, I thought that the only -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The honourable member who is speaking –

MR NIWAGABA: Yes, Mr Chairman, I seek your guidance. I thought that the directions given by the minister in writing relate to the policy and nothing more than that. I wonder whether we would really need the word “lawful” in this clause. 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I thank my colleague for posing that question. I have an experience by a reason of my parliamentary participation in an ad hoc committee, and I do not intend to state further details where directions would come under the cover of policy directions and they turned out to be unlawful. 

I do not think it does any harm to include the word “lawful”. If all the policy directions of the minister are inherently lawful, then we would still remain on the same good track.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What was the amendment from the chairperson, again? 
  
MR WERIKHE: “In respect to the approved Government policy.” That is what we had said as a committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is the meaning of “approved Government policy”?

MR WERIKHE: A policy that has been approved by Cabinet - the policy directives.

MR SSEGGONA: The word used in this clause is not “policy” alone. The words used here are “... give directions in writing ...” Now, there is a difference between policy and directives. The minister may have a policy approved by Cabinet and that would be clear on reading the policy that is approved by Cabinet. How about directives? Are you going to expect the authority to question the minister as to whether his directions: One, have been approved by Cabinet; and two, to question the minister’s directions or directives and say, “No, subject every directive of the minister to Cabinet approval.” Certainly not; and that is the reason that I am proposing that we include the word, “lawful”. It is not harmful and it is moved in utmost good faith.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let me first listen to the Member from Kiboga.

MR KYEWALABYE: I thank you, Mr Chairman. Although the proposal of adding the word “lawful” may not cause any harm, however, my question before I possibly would agree to add it there; if it is included, will that prevent the possible issuing of unlawful directives? Because, whether it is there or not, there is still a possibility of unlawful directives being given and, therefore, it is up to the person receiving the directives, if they suspect that the directive is unlawful, to go back to the authority issuing the directive and point out that there might be an issue here. Therefore, I do not see the purpose of adding the word “lawful”. 

MR SSEGGONA: I thought that he was asking me the value addition by the word “lawful”. And to my colleague, again, with respect, we are trying to make all these agencies of Government accountable and we are also trying to insulate these agencies of Government from unwarranted and unlawful political interference. 

When they receive the directives in the current form of this clause, they have no duty, but to comply; whether lawful or not. If the order or directive is unlawful, the authority will retain the power to say, “Honourable minister, thank you. In our view and in our own understanding of the law, this directive is unlawful.” And that will be a defence; otherwise, it would be insubordination.    

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But wait. The directive here is not just any directive. It is - “...give directions in writing to the authority with respect to the policy to be observed...” and that one will be published in The Gazette. Can we first process this? Because it is in respect to the policy to be observed and implemented by the authority and which has to be gazetted.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, like I said, the background to this proposal is based on an investigation of this Parliament that a minister may disguise anything as a policy directive because, remember, they are not reviewing the policy, but the directive. 

If the minister retains the liberty to interpret the policy the way he or she wants, it may contravene the law. But if the authority that is comprised of intelligent, qualified and highly experienced men and women, is of the view that this particular “directive” is unlawful, but they have no room for saying, “No, this is unlawful.” If my colleagues are operating in good faith - and I believe that they are - what is wrong with adding the word, “lawful” to insulate, first, the system; and secondly, making these organs accountable?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I agree with the submission of hon. Niwagaba. I think for once we are agreeing in the House. We normally agree outside, but when we come in the House, we disagree; but we have now merged in opinion.

The qualifying expression - the core benchmark of measurement, is a policy. You give directions within the four corners of the policy. The moment you put there “lawful” - we want this law implemented. We don’t want it put in the drawers because every time a person looks at the provision, he even gets hesitant to proceed; by first writing to the Attorney-General, “Can you give me a legal opinion on whether this part of the policy I want implemented by the authority is legally tenable.” You can easily create a bottleneck in the operations of the authority. 

As hon. Niwagaba and others have said, since the minister is giving directions in respect of the policy, if the authority thinks that the directions being given are not within the four corners of the policy, they can question that decision, and they have the powers to do that, even constitutionally. (Interjection) 

You see, this is the mistake you normally make, my colleagues. For instance, when a law states that you must comply, and the minister writes to you and says kill a person. And you say, “I have complied because you said I should comply” you will be hanged!

Whatever you must comply with must be within the four corners of the law. We talk, for instance, of independence of an organisation; that independence is not a shield against accountability. It is independence as far as the power to make a decision is concerned. But you have to account!

So, you can certainly question the powers of the ministers, even when it says you shall comply, by saying no, but we feel that such and such a law provides like this and this. And in any case, any law is superior to a policy.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you for giving way. Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification because this country has experienced some anomalies in the oil sector as a result of the minister giving instructions or directives for certain decisions to be taken, which has had a negative impact in the management of the oil sector.

While that was being done, there were the oil policies in place, which were adopted in 2008. The policies were there. What I am trying to say is that the policy may be in place, but it can be abused. For the avoidance of doubt - because of the bad experience we have had – that is why we say once bitten by a snake, even its picture will make you run. So, we are now saying that for the avoidance of doubt, can the minister’s directive or instructions be based on some specific law so that we know that that instruction will not misguide the sector. I thank you.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I thought this was an innocent insertion of the word, “lawful”. When you read this, the operable word is “shall”, “...and the authority shall comply with those directives.”

Even what is proposed under sub clause (2) - a copy of the directions given to be published - it does not show when. This could be much later when action has already been taken and harm done. 

So, if it does not do any harm, what stops us from embracing an insertion by hon. Sseggona? If that not be the case, if we are really interested in the policy - policy means a decision of what to do or not to do by Government. In the circumstances, if we say the minister may give direction in writing to the authority with respect to the policy to be observed and implemented by the authority - if it was to end there, I would have agreed that maybe we leave it out. But now that there is an addition, “…and the authority shall comply with those directions”, we are safer having it lawful.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let me just inform the House that this particular phrasing of this provision is actually standard in most of the laws that have been passed by this House. But it looks like the level of scrutiny you want to pose because of the oil sector is different. But as for the drafting, that is how it is done always. Yes, I am informing you. I happen to have dealt with many of these things. So, if you are going to make a qualification for this particular purpose –

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, based on your wise direction as ever, we are legislating based on our experience and for a strategic resource. (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Hon. Sseggona, through the Chair, the information I would like to give you is that there are scenarios actually, where there are directives from a minister, not necessarily because there is a written policy. So, if you take on that and say there is a policy, it means you are thinking that there is a national oil and gas policy word by word, and then the authority would make reference to it and follow. But there are situations where there is even no written policy, but the minister will offer general direction; and I think to the extent of implementation. That is actually a policy direction. And that is what warrants the search for the qualification, that it had better be lawful.

If you look at the Office of the Prime Minister, for instance, there is no disaster policy as of now, but does that mean that the minister does not give policy direction to technocrats? They do; they even invest money on those policy directions. 

Therefore, if honourable colleagues are arguing that the amendment is redundant, we had better leave it redundant as long as it kills nobody. But I think there is an extent to which it will provide safeguards. 

MR RUHINDI: When you talk in terms of unlawfulness, this may lead us into matters which may even be criminal; that the minister may issue directives, which may even be criminal in nature or irregular. The cardinal principle of such matters is that such criminality or irregularity be clearly defined. 

The immediate question that would come to me - the lawyer’s question - would be, we are talking about a policy; if you wanted to be helpful - if we were to sustain your argument hon. Sseggona - would be for you to stand up and tell us that these parts of the policy if you do them are unlawful. Without that you would be leading us into a problem and making this provision completely not implementable.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Isn’t that dilemma cured by the issue of the responsibilities proposed that this policy should be approved by Cabinet.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman, again for guiding. Unfortunately, my colleagues are reading and their reading is stopping at the word “policy”. However, mark the word “direction”. What is approved by Cabinet and possibly brought to Parliament is the policy. From the policy, the minister extracts directives or directions, and the minister is going to say, “Based on the policy, this is what Government wants you to do; do it this way.” The authority has no room - no manoeuvring space to say that this is outside the policy. So, the direction extracted by the minister is unlawful.

I have seen letters from ministers - and hon. Muloni is aware - where the minister says this is a policy of Government do this. Because it is coming as a direction extracted from the policy; that is number one.

Two, my colleague hon. Ssekikubo has emphasised the word “shall”. Once it comes as a directive from the minister, the authority is bound. We have seen in investigations of this Parliament many cases where these civil servants come and say, “The minister directed me” because according to him, this is the Government policy.

Now, we want to hold these authorities, agencies and servants of Government accountable, to stop hiding under our ministers and colleagues. Secondly, the ministers also, in giving these directives, to have the law at the back of their mind. I do not know of any reason on any planet, why a Government would insist against the word “lawful.”

Finally, Mr Chairman, you guided us well when you said because of the increasing scrutiny of this Parliament, owing to the situation in the oil sector, we may look at this word. But look at the others. It has been the practice to say that the minister gives directions and we leave it at that. It has never been the case to gazette directives. We have been gazetting the policy, but not directives. Why in this particular Bill are we gazetting direction? Again, because of increased transparency and scrutiny of our laws and practices. It is better in light of that, that we include the word “lawful”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Learned Attorney-General, are there any strong objections to this amendment.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I would be comfortable rather than putting the word “lawful” I would take the proposal made by hon. Ssekikubo and we stop at “authority” and we delete the word “and the authority shall comply with those directions.” If we say, “The minister may give directions in writing to the authority with respect to the policy to be observed and implemented by the authority.” If you stopped there without putting there the word “lawful” to me I think that would be okay, subject to the consultations with the minister.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, since my colleagues have strong objections to the use, implementation and application of the word “lawful” I will concede to that proposal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is for the deletion of the phrase, “...and the authority shall comply with those directions.” There was another proposal that policy approved by Cabinet -

MR WERIKHE: We can delete that one.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, the deletion of “... and shall comply with the direction” will take care of all these concerns. Will it? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”]

So, the amendment now is for the deletion of the phrase “... and the authority shall comply with those directions.” I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, under clause 18(3) the committee proposed an amendment to substitute for the word “two” immediately after the word “at least” the word “three”.
Justification: To enhance gender representation on the board. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment that the number of women representatives should be increased to three.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WERIKHE: We substitute for sub clauses (4), (5) and (6) the following: “The members of the board appointed under sub-section (2) shall be persons who are qualified in and have experience and proven capacity in any of the following:

a)	Petroleum geo-sciences or petroleum engineering;
b)	Environment;
c)	Health and safety or insurance; 
d)	Law;
e)	Business administration or management, finance or economics ;
f)	Chemical and process or refinery engineering; and
g)	Land use planning and management.”

Sub clause (5), “For the avoidance of doubt, the minister for each of the qualifications prescribed under sub-section (4) _” I think there is a problem which we harmonised between the sponsored amendment and the committee. I would beg that we stand over it because it affects -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause stood over, next.

(Clause 18, stood over.)

(Clause 19 agreed to.)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Chairman, in view of the fact that the sugar levels of many Members including myself, has gone very low, I beg to move that we adjourn at this point and we proceed tomorrow. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, if it is just a case of an individual’s sugar level, the canteen is not very far; but if you had also put the other issue of the time, it would have been more persuasive.

Honourable members, that is the motion for adjournment at this stage, and the motion is that we adjourn to tomorrow 10.00 o’clock. Can we adjourn to Monday 10.00 o’clock?

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.06
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.07
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill, 2012” and passed some clauses with amendments and stood over others.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.07
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was a motion that we adjourn to tomorrow. It will give the opportunity to the Members to look at these things that are stood over again. If we gave them tomorrow morning and knowing that afternoon - we normally do not go up to 1.00 o’clock because of our colleagues from the other faith who worship on Friday. So, Friday morning is always very limited. Can we adjourn to Monday morning? Okay.

Honourable members, this House is adjourned to Monday 10.00 o’clock.

(The House rose at 7.09 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 12 November 2012 at 10.00 a.m.) 
