
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA


Thursday, 18 November 2021


Parliament met at 2.15 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I know it was not easy for you to come but I would like to thank you, for being committed to your work and to this country, as well as for discharging your responsibilities as Members of Parliament, who are the voices of the voiceless. 

On Tuesday, 16 November 2021, two bomb explosions happened. One exploded right in front of us here; at Jubilee Insurance Centre and the other was around the Central Police Station (CPS). A number of deaths were registered and other people were hurt and they are still in hospital. 

I would like to urge the public and Members of Parliament to cooperate with the security forces to ensure that we bring these people to book. Please, provide security with information - in case you get any - in regard to these people because they are living within us. Therefore, let us work together with the security. 

As Parliament, we register our condolences to those families. We will keep praying for those who are still not well. Let us observe a moment of silence for those who lost their lives. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, our security, as the people of Uganda should be priority. No act of these cowards should deter us from doing our work. Let us be united. It is not anything political. Let us work as Ugandans. The death of one person affects Uganda as a country. Let us put politics aside and protect our citizens. 

Honourable members, I have received a communication from the First Lady, who is the Minister of Education and Sports. She is requesting to have a meeting with Members of Parliament on Wednesday next week. 

The meeting will discuss the preparation for the reopening of schools. You will be expected to take a COVID-19 test on Monday, as you prepare for the meeting on Wednesday at 10.00a.m. in Kololo. The purpose of the meeting will be to seek your guidance since you are the leaders who are on the ground. The ministry needs information on how the schools can be reopened. 

Once again, I would like to thank you for coming. I know everyone is scared but we will restrict our time of the sitting. At 6.00 p.m., we shall be out of this place because we want everyone to be safe and reach home early. (Applause) I am saying we shall conclude business at least by 6.00 p.m. Otherwise, we also need to legislate for our people. Honourable members, I wish you good deliberations today. 

2.21
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to respond to your communication. You said that security should be our priority as Parliament and indeed, I agree with you. Therefore, I urge those who own buildings along Parliamentary Avenue to be security conscious. 

My office is not far from Raja Chambers. Even in the last Parliament, I was in that building. However, I have observed that there isn’t enough security at the Raja Chambers. People move in and out. The front of the building is always overcrowded with people selling airtime and with many boda bodas; it looks like a boda boda stage. I feel we are not secure. 

Therefore, the ministry concerned should make a follow up.  Madam Speaker, within Raja Chambers, there are two banks but there is a lot of movement. On my way to the main Parliament building, I have seen a lot of people moving up and down. I do not know whether they have some security standards. I even wonder whether they check or record the people entering or not. It is important that we follow up so that we are safe.
 
Madam Speaker, I am grateful for the system that has been put in place today. We had a lot of space. The hawkers were not allowed today. I really commend the Government for that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Internal Affairs, please take note of what Members are raising. I do not want us to take very long on this because it is a security matter. These people are still being searched. Let us not debate it. 

2.23
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Condolence to Ugandans who lost their lives during these bomb attacks. 

Madam Speaker, if you could allow the Minister of Security - we may not have to dwell on it, if the minister has given us the information. I am, however, rising on another point. 

Rule 52 (1) of the Rules of Procedure states that a Minister may make a statement at the appropriate time with prior permission of the Speaker whether for the purpose of explaining Government policy or action upon any matter. 

Madam Speaker, you have said one of the ministers has summoned Parliament to Kololo. I fear that if we allow ministers to begin summoning Parliament, then there is nothing that will stop hon. Tayebwa, the Government Chief Whip, from summoning us to his home - (Laughter) – yet this is an institution of Parliament. 

I beg you to tell that minister that under this rule, she has a duty to come here and make a statement on any matter regarding her office. Otherwise, to begin summoning us to Kololo and to give orders that we must take COVID-19 tests - I do not know whether she is summoning us as the First Lady because First Lady means the wife of the President.

Therefore, I seek clarification from you, Madam Speaker, under which rule this minister is summoning MPs to Kololo because the rule requires every single minister – because the Prime Minister comes here and explains - I have not seen her summoning MPs to the her office. So, how can a minister under the Prime Minister summon us, Madam Speaker? (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I actually get amused when I see you clapping your hands because you are the same people who have been complaining about the reopening of schools. I did not say that she is summoning; I said she is requesting because we do not have space here that can take 500 people. So, choose whether to go or not. [Mr Mpuuga rose_] I am still on the Floor, sir. (Laughter) 

Honourable members, I communicated that the First Lady and honourable minister of Education and Sports, the hon. Janet Kataaha, is requesting that we go and have a discussion on how to reopen schools on Wednesday. What do we need to do and what do we do?

I am passing on a message and it is not subject to debate. Leader of the Opposition, you had something to say. (Laughter)

2.28
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Madam Speaker, thanks for your indulgence. It is as well good that on the Order Paper, we have a matter relating to the subject of security in the country. Therefore, I will offer my official message when that matter comes up. However, allow me to express my condolences to the bereaved families from the onset.

I am rising to respond to your communication, particularly on issue two. It is as well good that you are passing on an advisory, to which Members have a right of rejection or acceptance.

However, as Speaker, you are the custodian of the sanctity of this House of Parliament and this is housed in the rules to which you are a custodian. There is a whole lying danger in allowing the business of Parliament to be conducted informally. That informality endangers the manner in which we can hold people accountable. 

On this side, we have demanded for space to explain our concerns about education and it has been flip-flopping and so, it did not come through as we had wanted. 

Now that the First Lady and Minister of Education and Sports is ready to make that statement before Members of Parliament, the space where MPs are best housed to speak without fear of contradiction and with protection is the House of Parliament.

Unless the Speaker is going to go to that place and declare it as Parliament, to which the rules and privileges obtain, I invite the candour of the Speaker to advise the minister to consider making that statement here on the Floor so that Members can debate it, input and even advise. 

Otherwise, there is a whole lying danger – (Applause) – in conducting that business with the desired informality – (Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the Leader of the Opposition for yielding the Floor. The information I would like to provide to the House is that it is not uncommon for ministers to organise workshops and invite Members of Parliament to discuss matters of national importance. It will not be the first time for a minister, like the Minister of Education and Sports, to invite us to go and discuss an important matter like the reopening of schools. 

I, therefore, find it strange that you feel uncomfortable. It will not be a parliamentary sitting, from my understanding. It is a workshop organised by the Ministry of Education and Sports for us to make contribution to the plans of reopening schools.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, honourable minister. I already heard that information you have given and that is what I wanted to deliver –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition –

MR MPUUGA: No, let me conclude, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you conclude?

MR MPUUGA: Yes, by saying that the Speaker has the duty to protect this House. If the minister wants to meet the Committee on Education and Sports, it is appropriate. That will be a workshop of the committee but not the House of Parliament, Madam Speaker. I so pray.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Leader of Government Business has something to say.

2.32
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, the issue of education concerns the entire country. However, you are aware that we agreed in the House to always have a schedule for Members to attend each sitting of Parliament. Therefore, it is necessary that if all of us – (Interjection) - of course, you are aware that this Parliament Chamber cannot accommodate all of us. Going to Kololo will enable all of us to be accommodated. Thank you.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, we come here every day to transact business of Uganda. The Prime Minister makes a statement here, speaking to Uganda. Does she now want to suggest that these meetings of Parliament that sit here, where some of our colleagues – because of what we all know – do not participate, do not represent Uganda and therefore, they are not considered as sittings of Parliament? And so, that they must create one sitting where everybody must come for the wife of the President, and for all of us who come here every day, to transact business? Isn’t this a sitting of Parliament? Does a sitting of Parliament mean all of us going to Kololo where we take a COVID-19 test –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, when I communicated this information, I did not mention the wife of the President. Why do you like mentioning somebody’s wife? (Laughter) Every time, you are mentioning somebody’s wife. 

2.34
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukhooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I stand with the people who lost their lives on Tuesday and also thank you, for the action you took that day. We were supposed to sit but you called it off, and for the several things that you did as the Parliamentary Commission.

However, what is important and what I wanted to note is that on that day, I was around the area; almost outside the gate when the bomb blast occurred. There are young people who work along the Parliament Avenue. However, as I speak, the properties of these people were destroyed completely. Some of these people live from hand to mouth. For those who survived, I implore Government to compensate their property. They are special hire people who have only those cars. Some of the cars are not even theirs; they belong to their bosses. The cars got burnt and everything was destroyed. 

I implore the minister and Government to compensate these people so that they can continue earning a living amidst the challenge that happened. 

That is what I wanted to raise. I implore Members to look into this and support this because it is something that is really important. These are our people. They got this by accident; no one intended this. They really deserve to continue earning a living as Ugandans. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Members, we will expect to hear a response to that from the minister when he is giving the statement on security. 

What I would like Members to know is that the invitation for an interaction between the Legislature and the Executive is good. The invitation is in good faith. The venue where they have invited us to is an open place because the matters of education are public. So, I do not see any problem there. If you feel you are not comfortable – But we are discussing matters that concern the country in regards to education. I want you people to take it in good faith - (Interjection) - I know you do not agree.

Let us go and share the information of what the Ministry of Education and Sports has and what we think we should do. Then we will come back in the afternoon and debate on what was shared there. We can even disagree from there. 

MR LUBEGA-SSEGGONA: I agree, Madam Speaker - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now that you have switched on the microphone before you were allowed to, first sit down. Okay, you can raise your issue. (Laughter)

MR LUBEGA-SSEGGONA: I am grateful, Madam Speaker. That is the beauty of discipline; that when you tell me to sit down, I take my seat. I thank you for your guidance. First and foremost, on behalf of the people of Uganda, we are the rightful consumers of the information that every ministry provides. 

To that extent, I support 100 per cent the idea of interacting with the ministries. I plead with the minister to be humble. Being humble in this case would mean doing things neatly. Doing things neatly in this case would mean to recognise that this Parliament supervises her and not the reverse. In which case, had I been her advisor, I would simply request the Speaker of Parliament to convene a meeting. That meeting would be a meeting of Parliament. The word “request” to me is humility.

By the way, I do not see her more as a minister; I see her more as a mother. At least that is me. Do not play around with somebody who has cooked for the President for 40 years. (Laughter) To me that is dignifying enough. 

The other time, I think three years ago, they celebrated 40 years. To me, that is not a mean achievement. Of course it is unfortunate that we have a President who can appoint his wife a minister. Now that she is a minister - with our approval - my view is that she goes through you and you convene it as a meeting of Parliament. It is because you can declare Kololo as the precincts of Parliament. To me, that is neater. (Hon. Nambooze rose_) I will take her information because she is senior to me. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank my “son” hon. Medard Sseggona, for giving way. The information I want to give the House is that because of the various assurances that were made in this plenary, we sought to meet the Minister of Education and Sports so that we could satisfy ourselves – and Parliament for that matter - on what is being done in relation to pledges, promises made under the Ministry of Education and Sports. 

We wrote a letter to her on the 4th of last month. She wrote back and said, “I will have meetings up to 15th of this month. So, I request you to extend my meeting with you to the 23rd.” That was almost a month ahead and we waited patiently. 

On the promised day, she came in with another excuse that we now have the meeting on Zoom. We sat in the conference hall with the technician ready to relay the meeting but the First Lady did not even utilise the opportunity of Zoom. She instead sent her state ministers.

When we raised the issues with the state ministers, they told us that they would go back and talk to the senior minister. Finally, they have now written back to us a letter sent by an Assistant Commissioner in the Ministry of Education and Sports.

So, the information I want to give you is that it is not easy to get to meet the Minister of Education and Sports. There is absolutely no space created for the minister. Most of the time, the Minister of Education and Sports prefers to work as the First Lady. 

MR LUBEGA-SSEGGONA: Thank you for that information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just a minute. First of all, I would like to bring this to your knowledge. We have four ministers in the Ministry of Education and Sports. One of them is right here. I can see he is itching to say a word. 

Secondly, I felt offended, hon. Sseggona, when you said, “The woman has been a cook for the President for 40 years.” Did you say that? Because I am also a woman and tomorrow you are going to refer to me that that Speaker is a cook for some man. 

MR LUBEGA-SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I am the last person to say such. Just in case it was decontextualised, I meant that she has been married to the President. Among the Baganda, they call it okufumbirwa. That is my understanding. However, if the understanding is that she was understood to be a cook, I withdraw the understanding. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He has withdrawn the understanding. (Hon. Tayebwa rose_)

MR LUBEGA-SSEGGONA: I think my young brother should take a seat. 

Finally, two points: We are just raising these issues for orderliness. For me, I am not the character that would attack especially a person that I hold in very high regard. Those who know me privately know my view about the First Lady. (Interjection)

Yes, I love her - and let me mention it publically: I love hon. Mrs Museveni.  

I, however, feel a duty - (Interjection) - yes, I love her. I, however, feel a duty-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Can you conclude?

MR LUBEGA-SSEGGONA: I, however, feel a duty that we need to protect the institutional dignity and decorum. Therefore, my view is that let us not treat it as a sermon, because doing so would imply that we are subordinating ourselves. I agree that the invitation is in good faith, except it would be made better.

Finally, I would also advise her, as our colleague and peer, to listen to the sentiments of her peers. Since this term began, hon. Mrs Museveni is one of the few Members of Parliament that have not stepped in this Parliament. We do not take that so lightly. Then she calls us to go and do a COVID-19 test; when does she do hers? Because equally, we would demand that when you call us and say as an SOP, we do COVID-19 tests, when do we look at her results?

2.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Denis Obua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before the last address to the nation by His Excellency the President, where he announced that schools would open in January 2022, the Ministry of Education and Sports, under the leadership of the senior minister, has been consulting. However, when the President made the announcement in the affirmative, we thought it wise that we should widen the net of consultations. 

Madam Speaker, you could have heard that in the recent past, we had the Chief Administrative Officers at Kololo grounds, and we were consulting on the same. The senior Minister of Education and Sports identified Members of Parliament being the representatives of the people of Uganda - because we are aware that since March 2020, our children have been home with us.

This is purely a consultative meeting. We are aware that we are operating in the “new normal”. It is business unusual. We would like to widely generate issues from the people’s representatives. After all, those are generated in these consultative meetings. We will definitely come to Parliament and report to this institution.

Therefore, honourable members, just like the Speaker stated, this invitation is in good faith. You and I all have schools and we have children at home; come and we caucus, debate and we generate ideas for the betterment of our own children. This is purely a consultative meeting.

Madam Speaker, the first lady and minister has written through you, humbly requesting for Members of Parliament to come and we discuss in this consultative meeting. I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable minister. As it is said, it was a request and in good faith. If you do not feel like going, it is also your right.

2.49
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance and this is to do with the increasing fuel prices. By 17 June 2021, the price of petrol was Shs 3,900 and Diesel was Shs 3,500. As of today, the price of petrol is Shs 4,600 in Kampala and Shs 6,00O in Buvuma Islands. For diesel, it is Shs 4,200. This is an increment of 17 per cent. 
 
Madam Speaker, according to the global petrol prices, by 15th November, Uganda stands at $1.3, Burundi at $1.2 per litre, Kenya at $1.1 per litre, Rwanda at $1.13 and Sudan at $0.6 per litre. Those are some of our neighbours.

Madam Speaker, I am raising this issue because fuel is a major driver of the economy. As we speak, the cost of production has increased; the cost of transport has also increased, not only to the general population but even to Members of Parliament. I am aware that our rate is Shs 3,500. Therefore, we should be part of the complainants only that the public rarely listens to us.

Madam Speaker, my appeal and reason for bringing up this issue is that I understand that we have fuel reserves, which are located in Jinja. I would be very interested to know how much we have in our fuel reserves and two, for how long can those fuel reserves push this country?

Lastly, - (Interruption)
 
MR MACHO: Thank you, my colleague. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the august House that what my brother has submitted is true. The price of fuel is biting and it has led to the increase of commodities and majorly food. However, good enough, we, he people on the borders, are benefitting from the spirit of the East African Federation that Ugandans are now crossing to Kenya and are buying fuel cheaply.

I, therefore, would like to inform you that it is true and I request the Government of Uganda to open borders for our people to go and buy cheap fuel from Kenya so that the commodities can be cheaper. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Macho, you know, when you are a smuggler, you do not teach everybody how to smuggle. (Laughter) 

MR MIGADDE: Madam Speaker that is what I wanted to conclude with. However, I cannot encourage the country to practice smuggling because that was then. Fortunately, we still have Members of Parliament, who are smugglers and who can give us reliable information on that.

Therefore, my appeal is that the ministry responsible should update Parliament and the country - (Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, this is the august House of this country and members of this House are dignified. Hon. Migadde explicitly stated that there are smugglers in this House. Ordinarily people pay taxes and look up to the people in Parliament as their best examples.

Is it in order, therefore, for my honourable colleague, whom I know has not been behaving in such a manner, whether presenting or in action, to state that there are smugglers in this House and he does not name them? 

In that case, therefore, if he thinks that there are smugglers, let him name them and if they are not there, our prayer is that the orderly way would be to expunge that statement from the record of this Parliament. (Applause)

The Deputy Speaker: I did not hear the word “smuggling.” Honourable minister, can you respond to hon. Migadde’s issue? I did not hear hon. Migadde talk about smuggling.

Mr nsereko: Madam Speaker, I have never defied any of your orders but our colleague must withdraw that statement.

The Deputy Speaker: Did you say, “smuggling”?

Mr migadde: Madam Speaker, one of my best friends is hon. Macho and, very many times, we refer to each other as “smugglers” because of where we come from – (Interruption)

Mr macho: Madam Speaker, whereas I was born at the border of Busia – like hon. Migadde was born in the waters – we, the people of Busia and other borders of this country are not smugglers. We are “cross-border traders.” I, therefore, think that hon. Migadde is not in order to call hon. Macho a “smuggler.” (Laughter)

The Deputy Speaker: Hon Macho, thank you for providing a correction; it is “cross-border traders.”

Mr Migadde: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I congratulate my colleague, for being a cross-border trader. However, as I requested earlier, I would like the minister to respond to those issues. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, we are taking a lot of time. Can we have a response to that? Prime Minister, what plans do you have?

2.57
The prime minister and leader of Government business (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues, the issue of the fuel crisis – (Interruption)

Mr LUBEGA-SSEGGONA: I rise on a point of procedure, Madam Speaker – and I would invite my sister to take her seat as we do here – (Interjection) - no, she is not my young sister. We shall compare age later. 

Madam Speaker, I am not raising this against the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, who I highly respect, as she knows. I am getting concerned that people just get to the microphone without sanitising it. I do not think she belongs to the group of people we are ready to lose. (Laughter) Whenever I see her, she makes me very happy. Therefore, may we have smaller sanitisers to ensure we sanitise the microphones?

The Deputy Speaker: Can we have – thank you very much, honourable member.

Ms nabbanja: I am lucky it has been sanitised by a doctor. Madam Speaker, while the issue of fuel prices soaring is a concern of everybody, we must recognise the fact that it is a global phenomenon. 

Yes, we have some fuel reserves but Madam Speaker, allow that I order the line minister to come here next week and give a comprehensive report on how we are going to handle this matter.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you. We can have that report on Wednesday next week.

3.00
Mr Geofrey macho (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, Umeme (U) Ltd, an electricity selling company, sells electricity meters to our people; they are also installed by Umeme staff. However, after installation, they take 14 to 30 days and report back to communities and begin arresting them on allegations that they have installed fake meters in their houses.

I brought out this as a matter of national importance because Umeme staff have made Busia Municipality, in particular – since our people are cross-border traders – a place where they come and arrest anybody on allegations that they have installed fake meters and begin charging them money.

The 10th Parliament directed Umeme to put up a service office in Busia to help the districts of Namayingo and Bugiri because people move long distances, up to Tororo, when they have technical electricity problems. Umeme came and paid for an office a year ago and it has not been functional.
 
Madam Speaker, the people of Busia are tired of Umeme taking bribes from them whenever they feel they are broke. 
Secondly, the people of Namayingo, Bugiri and Busia are praying that Umeme should open up a service office so that when they have a problem, they stop travelling to Tororo to rectify such –(Interjection) - Information – (Member timed out.)

3.02
The prime minister and leader of government business (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have held a number of meetings with Umeme, as a regulator, and we shall continue to have them. What I can say is that extorting money from our communities is illegal. Therefore, I want to ask the communities to stop giving bribes to these people. 

However, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development will come back here with a comprehensive report on the matter.

The Deputy Speaker: We need a report on Wednesday. 

3.03
Mr medard lubega-LUBEGA-SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

Mr ssemujju: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Prime Minister says the minister will come here to explain. I also filed a question some time back about Umeme using the police in debt collection. The question was for the Government to explain whether private companies can hire police to collect debt for them.

The Deputy Speaker: So, that should be one of the things for them to explain.

Mr LUBEGA-SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance and the matter touches two ministries – the ministry for Kampala and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development – failing to resolve the dispute relating to land between the Catholic Church in Ntinda and some school. 

It started as a small matter. At some point, I saw the minister for lands going there – (Interjections) - I mean hon. Judith Nabakooba – but she, instead, made the matter worse. 

As we speak, the church has literally been blocked from accessing their church –

The Deputy Speaker: It is not the church that is blocked but the parishioners.

Mr LUBEGA-SSEGGONA: Yes, the parishioners cannot access their church. My understanding, though, is that we are actually the church. Anyway, the parishioners have been denied their constitutional rights, one, to associate and, two, to worship. 

The problem has been exacerbated by both the ministry responsible for Kampala and the one for lands failing to resolve this but instead pouring more fuel into the fire. 

Can we get an explanation from these two ministers? I am not sure they have a supervisor. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, hon. Robinah Nabbanja, “mukafiri”, you could explain this to us. Thank you. Can we get an explanation?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs?

3.05
THE MINISTER FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AND METROPOLITAN AFFAIRS (Ms Minsa Kabanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, we have sat three times and the Attorney-General has also intervened in this matter. We were supposed to sit on Wednesday to solve this problem but we did not meet because of the problems in town. However, we are working on that issue and we are going to solve it amicably.

The Attorney-General also advised that – they registered unlawful proprietors on the land in Ntinda Primary School. The church is implored to respect the proprietor rights of the school. The school is the owner of the land but right of way is supposed to be given to the church. That is what we said, when we sat with the Attorney-General.

We were supposed to meet on Wednesday but the meeting did not take place. So, we shall meet next Wednesday. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, there is a problem and it is not just what the minister is saying. St Charles Lwanga Catholic Church, Ntinda has been denied access for people to go and worship. Let us not downplay these things because these people have come to my office. The Monsignor of Kampala Archdiocese came to my office and said Ntinda Primary School is denying them access to the church. This is a Government school. The church is a public place of worship, yet they have been denied access to worship and parking.
The parents of these children are the same parishioners in that place. Minister of Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs, we need a response from you on Tuesday, on what action you have taken for us to have access. 

The problem is actually coming from the Ministry of Education and Sports. We need people to be able to access the church. It is just access; they do not want ownership.

MS MINSA KABANDA: Madam Speaker, like I said, we agreed that there should not be any demolition of the perimeter wall. We told them to allow the Catholics to access the road. If it is not yet done, I think we shall just go there and – (Interruption) 

MR LUBEGA-LUBEGA-SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I raised this question. I am an Anglican and proudly so. I would not want to see a religious war starting from such a simple solvable matter.

The Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the Minister of Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs are in charge of demarcations and plotting in this country. Even getting to this stage, where we are, in respect of this, is negligence on their part. 

First, I would like to encourage the honourable minister to be confident on the microphone. We are her peers. Honourable minister, do not fear us. However, the point I am making is that you are in charge of plotting.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you respect the Hajati? 

MR LUBEGA-LUBEGA-SSEGGONA: Yes, I do and this is why I am encouraging her.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, just like the honourable member has said, let us not bring a religious war. 

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, using the powers entrusted to me as the Rt Hon. Prime Minister of Uganda, I order the management of the school to allow people to pass, as we handle the matter. (Applause)

3.10 
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to acknowledge the pragmatism of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. However, the school she has directed is not here and neither is any of its representatives. Can the Rt Hon. Prime Minister undertake to inform this House next week on the action taken to ensure that the parishioners of St Charles Lwanga Catholic Church, Ntinda have got access to the church without any further interruption? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as the Leader of Government Business, kindly report to this House on the action taken. 

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I had seen the Minister of Education and Sports present. I believe he has taken note. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister of Education of Sports, We want feedback. We do not want these things of just using the microphone; we want action. I went to pray in that church this Sunday but I could not access it. Next item.

BILLS
FIRST READING
THE MINING AND MINERALS BILL, 2021

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Energy and Mineral Development?

3.13
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Mining and Minerals Bill, 2021” be read for the first time. Accompanying the Bill as per requirements of our rules is the Certificate of Financial Implication signed by hon. Matia Kasaija, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
I beg to lay, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. In compliance with rule 129 of the Rules of Procedure, the Bill is referred to the sectoral Committee on Natural Resources which will be required to examine the Bill in detail and report back to the House in 45 days. 

STATEMENT ON THE SECURITY SITUATION IN THE COUNTRY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have a statement on the status of security, especially on the attack that happened on Tuesday. This is going to be presented by the Leader of Government Business. Like I said before, let us limit the debate on this because these are security matters. We are still looking for these people and the moment we open up, we will have a problem. 

Prime Minister, can you give us your brief statement? It is basically information for us to know what is happening. (Interjections) Hon. Nambooze, madam teacher, I will give you time to talk. 

3.14
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, the country witnessed two other terrorist attacks; one in the vicinity of CPS and the second one along Parliamentary Avenue on the morning of l6 November 2021 at l000 hours and the other at l006 hours respectively. 

This serves to formally inform this august House and also to re-assure you and the country that this threat is not insurmountable; it will be dealt with.

His Excellency the President will brief the country about the matter on Saturday evening.

Both attacks were executed by three suicide bombers, like you already know; one attacker at CPS and two attackers riding motorbikes in the Parliamentary Avenue incident. All the three attackers died in the incidents. 

In addition, so far four lives of innocent citizens are confirmed to have been lost. Three of these namely: Police Constable Kungu Amos and civilians: Basibe Ismail and Sunday Christopher. Katana George, the fourth victim, died yesterday in hospital. 

We relay our condolences to the families of the four innocent victims. We also relay our sympathies to the scores of injured persons – 37 in number, including seven who were critically injured. We wish the injured a quick recovery

Government will organise compassionate assistance to the bereaved families as well as the injured persons.

A fourth suicide bomber was pursued by the security forces leading to his neutralisation and the successful disarmament of other electronic explosive devices that were already assembled for use at his home in Nansana, Katooke.

This threat is real but can and indeed will be dealt with. It calls for our collective will, resolve and means to decisively deal with it. We can never submit to terror. We must give our all to preserve our way of life, our common security, peace and stability. 

Therefore, we call upon the public not to panic but also not to be complacent at the same time. Be extra alert and vigilant. Look out for the unusual. Enhanced intelligence operations shall continue, like you are seeing, in order to deal with the threat. 

There are also other measures and operations that we are doing. I would like to assure our colleagues, especially hon. Nambooze, to ensure timely reporting of anything suspicious to the authorities. 

Specific SOPs will be developed and circulated to the public by the Police as already directed by the President and Commander-in-Chief. Uganda will prevail always. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. Members, I would like to tell you that it is ladylike to wait if the Speaker has not allowed you to speak. You cannot keep rising and shouting “order”, “procedure” and so forth. Let us be ladies and gentlemen. (Applause)

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have attentively listened to the Prime Minister. In her statement she says that Government will undertake various measures to deal with this situation. 

The police spokesperson said that these criminal attacks were carried out by elements of the ADF and so, the perpetrators are known. Isn’t it the right time for Government to consider engaging the ADF the way it did with the LRA?

In 1997, this country was attacked by the ADF. They did the same in 1999. We are now being told that in 2021, the ADF is attacking us. The attackers are known. When we were attacked by the LRA, Government engaged them. Why don’t we engage the ADF? Why don’t we begin discussing with these people; dialoguing with them? 

We spoke with Gen. Moses Ali of the West Nile Front. We spoke with Force Obote Back Again (FOBA); we have spoken with so many groups. These are known.

When we were attacked in 2010, the reason was known. Al-Shabaab said that we had invaded Somalia. Here, the reason is not known but at least the people are known. It is on record that Government has said it is ADF. Why don’t we speak to them? 

As we speak, the USA Government does not recognise the Taliban Government but it has appointed Qatar to engage in diplomatic and consular relations on their behalf. The Nigerian Government is considering speaking to Boko Haram. 

Where terrorist groups are known, it is only prudent that you engage them. I think that one of the measures that Government should consider very seriously is to engage these people. 

The Leader of the ADF is in prison; he has been on remand for over six years. He has not been tried but he is in your custody. You have the right to try him. You even have the right to engage him. Through engagement, perhaps we will be able to address this issue – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is on procedure. Hon. Basalirwa, I did not hear the Prime Minister saying that we know the people who attacked Ugandans. You are bringing in the ADF. If you heard it from the Government spokesperson, some of us did not hear it. That is speculation. It should not be said that Parliament of Uganda has said that it is the ADF that is attacking the country. That should not be the issue coming up – that it is from us.

There is a right forum for you to engage security on that kind of dialogue. I do not see how the leader of the ADF is coming here. Let us talk of what happened yesterday and how we should protect ourselves, not pinpointing people and speaking with speculation.

MR LUBEGA-SSEGGONA: My point of order, Madam Speaker, is that my young brother, hon. Asuman Basalirwa, is a lawyer of some sizeable standing. (Laughter) 
I know this because I led the way for him and I was intrigued when he used the words, “The Leader of the ADF is in prison for the last six years.”

You see, being a leader of a group that has been classified as committing treason is criminal. This man, Jamil Mukulu, is a suspect who has not been convicted and therefore, a finding or statement that he is the leader of the ADF is prejudicial.

Is hon. Asuman Basalirwa, therefore, in order to make such a conclusion, when somebody is appearing before a court of law? 
I do not have any problem with the rest of his statements. To me, it is civil for people to engage and it is only civil and intelligent men who engage. I encourage the civil and intelligent men and women across to engage.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, permit me to conclude -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, do you want to make a ruling for yourself? Are you making a ruling for yourself? First of all, even for you to discuss what is in court is sub judice and it is an active case. You know sub judice is regarded so when the case is active. So, it is not good for you to bring in the leader of the ADF or whatever – it is not right.

3.27
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for the statement she has made. Allow me to add my voice and that of the people of Tororo South to the condolences we extend to the families that lost their loved ones.

Madam Speaker, I had initially intended to raise a matter of national importance, concerning what happened here on Tuesday. However, allow me add to the statement that has been issued by the Prime Minister. 

It is unfortunate the country experienced twin bombs that claimed lives of our people. The bomb that occurred on Parliament Avenue was very close to Parliament. In that case, we would have been victims - you never know.

I was raising issues of concern and they were: first, that as Parliament, we do not know what the intentions of those who passed along our avenue were. However, how ready were we, as Parliament here, on our evacuation? We have never been subjected – even in our orientation – to evacuation, in case of any danger. So, we should raise our antennas and know that there should be preparedness in the unfortunate circumstances.

Another issue of concern that I was raising is we have what is referred to as an assembly point, but in this situation, we have never known under what circumstances we can assemble in such a place. So, this is a concern for us here in Parliament that we should be focused and be able to utilise available places that can take care of us in such instances.

Madam Speaker, another issue that I thought should have been of very serious concern to us is the alert - the way we alert our Members that there is a problem. 

You will recall that after the bombs exploded – most especially this one that was near us – Members of Parliament were moving towards the gate. Others were simply converging in front there. So now, do we have a bell like an amber bell - for the case of the UK Parliament – which is rung and that can create attention to the Members to know and see how to take care of the unfortunate situation?

Madam Speaker, you will recall that one car was lit and was up in flames. It took the Police Fire Brigade quite some time to arrive there. However, within the precincts of Parliament and the neighbourhood, where we have our offices on the other side and this side, we have provisions for hydrants (water points) with very long pipes - as I am made to understand - that can reach that place. Why didn’t we test those ones to see whether our hydrants here are working, for the good of our neighbours, colleagues and offices the other side?

Madam Speaker, as the country mourns, we should also raise our level of preparation, for us to be able to manage such situations in the near future. Thank you very much.

3.31
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Prime Minister for the statement she made. I know she is listening to me.

Madam Speaker, what I talked about at the beginning is what I want to repeat. The Prime Minister maybe did not get me. I implore you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister; what are we going to do for these people whose properties were destroyed, people who are stuck – (Interjections) - No, Madam Speaker, I am driving somewhere.

This is not the only bomb blast we have had. We had a bomb blast in Komamboga. We also had another one in a bus. So, I am requesting the Prime Minister to include all these areas. Honourable members, these are our voters and population - and hon. Nsereko, it happened in your constituency.

So, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I am requesting that we consider all these victims - of Komamboga, the one of the bus to Rukungiri and then the two recent ones. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Members. As I said before, we are not going to subject this to a debate - these are security matters. I am also aware His Excellency the President is scheduled to address the nation on these matters. 

We will be hearing from him. Let us not dwell so much on this. We have known what happened and at least we are sure and aware that security is in charge. However, you must also take charge of yourself. Let us avoid being in crowded places. Let the security of Parliament be beefed up.

And Commissioner, what hon. Angura raised is a very serious matter. As a Commissioner, you must take it up. Where is the assembly place? How do they evacuate people from such an area? It was not in this place but you are aware that it broke almost all the window glasses in this building. So, you need to look at that as a commission. Next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE COMMEMORATION OF THE AFRICA INDUSTRIALISATION DAY ON 20 NOVEMBER 2021

3.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving us opportunity to inform and update you and honourable members about the commemoration of the Africa Industrialisation Day. The day is observed globally on 20 November annually to mobilise commitment of the international community to the industrialisation of Africa. 

Here in Uganda, the day will be observed on Friday, 19 November 2021, which will be tomorrow. The theme for the day is: “Promotion of Inclusive and Sustainable Local Manufacturing to Bolster Uganda's Industrial Sector”.

I will also use this opportunity to highlight some of key issues regarding the industrialisation agenda in Uganda.

Industrialisation plays an important role in transforming an economy from subsistence to one based on manufacturing of goods and serves as a primary engine of economic growth, creation of jobs and wealth, technology transfer, investment flows and skills development. It is a journey from peasantry to modernity and from poverty to prosperity.

Prior to COVID-19, our Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth rate was at 6.5 per cent. Industry was the main driver of this growth, expanding at a rate of 10.8 per cent; followed by agriculture at five per cent and services at 4.9 per cent. 

Our total import bill stood at $7.3 billion in 2019. It is important to note that most of these items that we import can be manufactured domestically.

For the last two years, the COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted the supply systems for industrial inputs and markets for finished goods. Industries that have been most affected are those that largely depend on imported raw materials. 

Africa is endowed with vast resources in agriculture, mining and marine and if properly harnessed, can stimulate a resource-based industrialisation. Industrialisation is, therefore, a sine qua non to Africa's long-term development achievable through promotion of value addition to raw materials to create jobs and wealth, reduce on the trade imbalance and eradicate poverty. In this regard, the African Union and African countries have expressed a strong commitment to industrialise Africa. 

The goal of commemorating Africa Industrialisation Day is to raise awareness on the strides made to industrialise Uganda and the commitment, key interventions being implemented and the efforts to advance structural transformation in Uganda and Africa. 

Over the last three decades, the NRM Government has steadily established and built a strong foundation to increase value addition and grow the industrial sector. These include: investment in improving the business environment by increasing industrial support infrastructure, such as roads, energy, information, communication and technology networks, construction of industrial parks, strengthening of the investment climate and research, among others.

I will mention some of the key achievements in the industrial sector. Specifically, the following key achievements have been registered: 
    i. The industrial sector contribution to the GDP has increased from 3.5 per cent in 1986 to 27.4 per cent in 2020/2021. 
    ii. Our manufacturers are diversifying into many new products such as industrial refined sugar, ethanol, sanitisers, masks, casein and powdered milk, medical oxygen and steel products to mention but a few. 
    iii. Production of manufactured goods has increased. Sugar production, for example, is now at 540,000 metric tonnes, with consumption at 380,000 metric tonnes and surplus at 190,000 metric tonnes. Cement has reached eight million metric tons. Steel production recorded 219,000 metric tonnes in 2020. For example, we can now produce ceramic tiles, assemble mobile phones and produce fabrics for export.
    iv. The number of industries has increased from 81 units, in 1986 to more than 5,200 units in 2020. The manufacturing sector employs over one million direct workers. 

We passed the National Industrial Policy in 2020 and it focuses on industrial value chains which prioritise the following: 
    i. Agro-based Industries: fruits, coffee, cotton and et cetera; 
    ii. Extractive based industries: iron and steel, copper, oil and gas;
    iii. Knowledge based industries: pharmaceuticals, automobiles, electronics and et cetera. 

We have also put in place strategies for implementation of this industrial policy and the Industrial Licensing Act. As part of the implementation of the industrial policy and the Industrial Licensing Act, the ministry is focusing on the following strategies:
    i. To develop regulations for licensing all industrial operations, update the industries database and monitor compliance to regulations by the manufacturing industries. The database will provide for online registration of new industries and licensing of operations of all industries.
    ii. We want to focus on reducing the cost of doing business by building more roads and making that all manufacturers get electricity at 5 cents and building the 22 industrial parks.
    iii. We are also improving the quality and standards of our products in order to target regional and international markets, that is; the East African markets with a population of 400 million; the African Continent Free Trade Area with a population of 1.3 billion; the European Union and AGOA among others.

We intend to recapitalise the Uganda Development Cooperation. Over the medium term, we hope to put in Shs 500 billion to be able to focus on the following:
    1. Agro-processing: Under this sector, UDC plans to invest in areas but not limited to coffee, Irish Potatoes, salt, cocoa, tea, fruit, cotton, grain, sugar and cassava - processing based on the growth corridors and the 18 agro ecological zones of Uganda. Feasibility studies have been completed or are near completion for the following processing factories awaiting funding for development: 
    i. Cocoa in Bundibugyo; 
    ii. Starch in Acholi, Lango, Masaka and Teso; 
    iii. Fruit factories in Luwero and West Nile; 
    iv. Tea factories in Kisoro, Buhweju and Sheema; 
    v. A sugar factory in Luuka; 
    vi. Phosphate fertilizer plant in Sukulu, Tororo District; 
    vii. Salt processing at Lake Katwe; 
    viii. Paper industry; 
    ix. Soya beans for oil processing; and
    x. Revival of cotton ginning in Lira among others.

We also look at mineral beneficiation. Under this sector, the Uganda Development Corporation will focus on cement, lime and marble, sheet glass, copper, iron ore and steel. Some of the feasibilities done under the mineral sector and are ready for investment include: Clinker for use in cement production in Moroto and Copper in Kilembe mine among others.

The Uganda Development cooperation’s other strategic investments will include supporting infrastructure development and services and to support partnerships with the private sector.

We will also continue to capitalise the Uganda Development Bank, which will help to provide affordable and long term financing for manufacturing industries especially for Small Medium Enterprises in key strategic areas. 

We will continue to attract Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) to play a critical role in the growth of our economy especially in the industrial sector. Over the last 20 years, FDI has grown from $0.03 billion in 1984 to $1.3 billion 2019. 

The Government will continue to attract FDIs to support the industrialisation agenda of the country.

We have put a table that shows how much we are importing. For example, in petroleum products, we import $1.3 billion and we are trying to fast-track the supportive infrastructure of pipeline, refinery and oil roads to be able to replace this.

On iron and steel alone, we import $400 million and you cannot believe that for medical and pharmaceuticals products, we import $300 million. Therefore, our strategy of export promotion and import substitution will focus on replacing the items that I have listed there.

Madam Speaker, we have some planned activities for tomorrow and the following activities will be undertaken during the commemoration of the Africa Industrialisation Day. 
    i. We will have participatory and interactive sessions to engage various stakeholders on the thematic areas of industrialisation. 
    ii. We will have a media briefing.
    iii. We will have three physical meetings to dialogue on industrialisation with limited numbers, using online tools, to observe social distancing because of COVID-19.
    iv. We will have a webinar on the role of local governments to promote and support industrialisation.
    v. We will also use the opportunity tomorrow to launch the National Industrial Database and Information Portal and the Green Manufacturing Strategy.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, industrialisation is the sure way to develop Uganda from a peasantry economy to a modern one. It is a development strategy that will unlock the potential of Africa by adding value to the abundant raw materials the continent is endowed with and, in turn, create jobs, wealth and help us to banish the demons of poverty that have belittled Africans for ages by putting money in the pockets of Ugandans. 

I, therefore, invite you to attend and support the scientific commemoration of Africa Industrialisation Day on Friday tomorrow in Kampala at Golden Tulip Hotel through zoom and other means and commit Government support for the industrialisation agenda of our country. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable minister. Members, as you are aware, the United Nations has observed that industrial development is of critical importance for sustained and inclusive economic growth for all African countries. It has further been observed that industry can enhance productivity, promote employment and introduce new equipment and techniques that can be used – industrialisation, with strong linkages to domestic economies. 

As we debate this, I would like to invite you to consider how we can add value to what we have and to competitively produce what can be exported and also traded among ourselves on the African continent, which presents a market to over 1.3 billion people. Therefore, we need to ensure that industrialisation creates jobs for our people, improves our products for export and improves our GDP as a country.

The debate is open for 20 minutes or less.

3.48
MR GEOFFREY KAYEMBA (NUP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I have seen and read the minister’s statement on industrialisation. However, the problem we have here is that we have many foreigners who do not even pay taxes. For example, I know of a company that assembles phones here. They underpay workers and do not pay taxes at all because maybe the Government policy gave them a tax holiday.

This does not favour local investors or people that have established some industries. All they face is over taxation and, in the long run, they run out of the business. Therefore, the Government should favour and give incentives to local investors because they help Ugandans – the citizens. 

Secondly, I saw – also in statement – something about agriculture but people in our villages, especially Bukomansimbi where I come from, depend on coffee but they do not know how the price will be tomorrow or the next day. The prices are not regulated at all. At least we should have a minimum price for people to know that when I put in this, at least I will get this.

However, these things of going – fertilizers are very expensive, pesticides are very bad and at the end of the day, they face losses. Honourable minister, I request you to look into those issues for the good of our country. I beg to submit. (Applause) 

3.50
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement. Industrialisation is the way to go. We have many countries that were very poor but because they concentrated on industrialisation, now, they have attained the level of first-world countries. As Uganda, we need to concentrate on industries.

Madam Speaker, I would like the honourable minister to tell us the plans of the Government in balancing industries in this country. If you are to take stock in this country, you find that there are some areas that do not have even a single industry. For example, in the whole of Acholi subregion, we do not have any industry apart from the current sugar industry that was set up in Atiak, Amuru District. However, for all those many years, we did not have a single industry in Acholi.

We have many industries in northern Uganda that are no longer working. Many investors normally move out of northern Uganda simply because we do not have conducive atmosphere, especially electricity supply. Electricity in northern Uganda is totally poor – the power is very weak. A local investor will move in, set up an industry but it will never take two years before he packs his equipment and takes off. What plans do you have, as a ministry, in order to balance industries in Uganda?
 
Thirdly, Madam Speaker, in northern Uganda, we normally grow crops. Majorly, we deal in agricultural products. However, the way we preserve our crops, the values normally become extremely low and do not attract a good market. Therefore, with industrialisation and good equipment, I know we shall chase away poverty in our region. 

Honourable minister, I would like to hear your plan on how to develop industries across the country. Thank you.

3.52
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I also thank my friend, hon. David Bahati, for this statement. The goal of this day – on Page 2, under paragraph 2.5 – is to raise awareness on the strides made to industrialise Uganda and the continent and key interventions that have been made.

Madam Speaker, we need to look at the budget of the sector that hon. Bahati heads – and his aim is that this sector should be contributing at least about 30 per cent. He lists achievements here, such as roads. I do not know where he lives. You need to go to Industrial Area: from Eighth Street, Seventh Street – all those roads are impassable. Part of Namanve is in my constituency but it is dusty. If you went to Rwanda and looked at their industrial park, you would want to visit there every day.

Hon. Bahati, remember the first money that we passed for the industrial park in Namanve was “eaten” and you know who “ate” it. There are no roads in Namanve yet it is supposed to be your main industrial park in the country.

People have put up factories and very serious buildings but they are living in dust. You are only doing roads going to where you sleep. Where is the priority? Look at the supplementary budget that the Government has brought; classified expenditure for State House is Shs 100 billion. Why don’t you devote some of that money to the industrial park? 

Look at the road from Jokas Hotel, near Namboole Stadium, which goes to your industrial park but look at its condition. Maybe you want to raise awareness of the bad roads in the industrial sector.

Madam Speaker, countries decide – and I keep giving Dubai as an example. You must choose what you want to be. Dubai decided to develop their economy on the 3Ts, which are Trade, Tourism and Transport. But you are everywhere like Uganda People’s Congress (UPC); from Emyooga to Parish Development Model. You are just fishing in the lake. What is your priority that is backed by the budget proposals? This is not an academic paper. You must come to Parliament and say, you want to do the following but now look at what you have brought.

I would like to urge the minister that next time he brings a statement like this, he should tell us what they want to do, the budget proposals before seeking our support. Otherwise, awareness of industrialisation in Africa - you are talking about the NRM Government as if Uganda started in 1986 and that there were no industries in Uganda before.

Honourable minister, please, be nationalistic. Recognise all the contributions made by the others and invite them to support what you are doing. The moment you address a very serious matter in a partisan way, you are completely demobilising other people.

Finally – (Interjections) – I will take information with the permission of the Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you conclude.

MR SSEMUJJU: Recapitalisation of Uganda Development Corporation is a matter that I will support when it comes here. However, part of the problem we have had is that this corporation, which is supposed to be doing business on behalf of the Government, is doing a small project per small project. 

Hon. Bahati should bring here – at one time, the President raided our reserve and took away Shs 1.4 trillion to buy jets - with a budget of Shs 2 trillion saying “This year, we want to spend Shs 2 trillion on either capitalisation of the development corporation or the industrial sector.” Stop presenting this as an academic paper for us to enjoy, as if we are listening to music. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. In the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of officials and players of the Uganda Netball Federation. (Applause)

We were supposed to debate a motion today recognising their contribution for the success and achieving the gold and silver medals but we have pushed it to Tuesday. However, amongst the delegation are:
    1. Rt Hon. Margaret Nantongo Zziwa - former EALA Speaker. You are most welcome;
    2. Dr Don Rukare - the Chairman of the Uganda Olympics Committee;
    3. Rev. Can Duncans Mugumya - The Commissioner for Physical Education and Sports;
    4. Ms Hajarah Ddembe - Principal Education Officer;
    5. Hon. Sarah Babirye Kityo, our own;
    6. Brig. Gen. Flavia Byekwaso - We miss you. She is also our own;
    7. Hon. Sarah Nkonge - the Manager, Male Netball National Team. Where are you? Hon. Sseggona wants to see you;
    8. Ms Elizabeth Kitimbo - Team Manager;
    9. Mr Charles Kirunda- Assistant Manager;
    10. Mr Daniel Ntale - Director Marketing;
    11. Ssalongo Mugerwa;
    12. Ms Sarah Namudu;
    13. Ms Harriet Kabuye; 
    14. Ms Rosset Kaala; 
    15. Ms Harriet Apolot; 
    16. Ms Phibi Namutebi;
    17. Mr Stephen Norman;
    18. Mr Emmanuel Ssekago; and
    19. Ms Olivia Nakate. 

The players include: 
    20. Ms Stella Oyella. You should clap more for them;
    21. Ms Irene Eyaru;
    22. Ms Jesca Achan;
    23. Ms Lillian Ajio;
    24. Ms Margaret Baagala;
    25. Ms Faridah Kadondi;
    26. Ms Norah Lunkuse;
    27. Ms Shaffie Nalwanja;
    28. Ms Sadia Nasanga; 
    29. Ms Joan Nampungu;
    30. Ms Sandrah Nambirige; 
    31. Ms Hanisher Muwamad;
    32. Ms Sylvia Nanyonga;
    33. Ms Hadijah Nakabuye; and 
    34. Ms Ruth Meeme.

We also have the executive members and they include:
    1. Mr Richard Muhumuza; 
    2. Ms Mande Aminah;
    3. Mrs Aidah Kibedi Nambusi; 
    4. Mr Mutengesa; and
    5. Ms Gloria Naava.
 The staff include:
    1. Mr James Mayanja; 
    2. Mr Jackson Kayiira; 
    3. Mr Wilson Nsubuga;
    4. Mr Ben Libo; and 
    5. Ms Alice Nakigozi. 

The team participated in the 2020 Africa Challenge in Namibia, where they emerged gold medallists - (Applause) – Thereafter, they participated in the Netball Africa Championship in Namibia, where they emerged as silver medallists. (Applause)

These achievements have propelled the Uganda She Cranes Netball Team from position three to two, on the African Continent. Please, join me in welcoming and congratulating them. (Applause) Congratulations, She Cranes! We are proud of you.

On Tuesday, we will have a motion to congratulate and welcome you back from Namibia. Thank you for coming. We appreciate you are tired and so, you can excuse yourselves. Go and rest; let us meet on Tuesday. 

Hon. Sarah Najjuma, you had something.

4.03
MS SARAH NAJJUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to say something about hon. Bahati’s statement on industrialisation and I think that is the way to go. However, the roads that lead to industries are worrying. I want to give an example of a road in Nakaseke. 

We have Namukekera Industrial Park, which is doing wonders because it is making the best tiles in this country but the road that leads to that industrial park from Matugga to Kapeeka is worrying. Sometimes, people get cut off. 

Madam Speaker, I remember very well that I raised a matter of national importance and you instructed the Minister of Works to bring a report here but it has never been brought to this House. That is what I wanted to raise. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.04
MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join the House in thanking the honourable minister but I would like to propose that we need to zone this country. 

My district in West Nile is known for growing tobacco. We have now shifted to growing sunflower and soybeans. I am so sorry that we may be at an influx because in this season that just ended, people grew a lot of soybeans; from Shs 3500, farmers were given Shs 900. 

I took the burden to register the farmers in Terego District and they are over 60,000 farmers yet they buy the seeds for more than Shs 10,000 because they are buying first class seeds. I would really like to implore the minister - the industry he is talking of in Lira does not have the capacity. They are only producing oil and the rest that can come out of soybeans is just left to the dogs. 

It is my humble appeal to this House that we do something bigger and better for the community. Thank you very much. 

4.05
MS AISA AGABA (NRM, Bugangaizi East County, Kakumiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to first thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this time and relay greetings from Bugangaizi East. The people love you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MS AGABA: I thank the minister for the good information he has delivered on the Floor on industrialisation. It is the way to go to develop our country. However, we are facing problems with electricity and water. We all know that in order for industrialisation to go ahead, we need to have an abundance of water and electricity in our places. 

Imagine in my own area where I come from, a man with a small scale industry has been looking for a transformer that has taken three or four years. Imagine electricity being brought in our area and giving us transformers that have low voltage that cannot support industrialisation. We have a problem with electricity. Right now, the man has closed down because he has nothing to do. He has tried to look for a transformer but they keep tossing him around and telling him to go to State House or the Ministry of Energy. He does not know where to go; so, I wonder what we are going to do and how we are going to promote industrialisation, looking at such problems. 

You are thinking of improving industrialisation but you are only centred in one place; for example, one zone in the central region. As a minister, what do you have to bring? This is because Bunyoro region and other regions in Uganda also want industrialisation in order to improve their areas and encourage other people to get employment. Thank you. 

4.07 
MR ISAAC ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi County, Madi-Okollo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to also thank the minister for the statement. When you particularly look at the theme: “Promotion of Inclusive and Sustainable Local Manufacturing to Bolster Uganda’s Industrial Sector”, it sounds ironic. To me it is ironic because somewhere, the minister emphasises direct foreign investment and that we are going to continue promoting direct foreign investment. 

Madam Speaker, the minister is aware that agriculture is still the backbone of this economy. However, when you look at the budget given to the agricultural sector, you will notice that it is just a mockery; that we can talk about industrialising or promoting the agricultural industry when we do not have the funds. 

Honourable minister, in 2015, this Parliament approved $100 for agriculture cluster development projects where they are supposed to construct roads and other projects to boost the agricultural sector. You are also aware that these multibillion projects have all failed in the agricultural sector and yet it is only a six years’ project. 

These agriculture cluster development projects are closing next year but when you look at what this farm has done, there is completely nothing and the minister is talking about promoting agriculture. 

We appreciate the efforts of the Government to promote industrialisation but like Members have said, when you look at the whole situation in the country, we have some that fruit industries were established in West Nile. Before they could even withstand the test of time, the fruit industry in both Yumbe and Arua collapsed. Nothing has been done to rejuvenate this. 

Therefore, honourable minister, as much as we are trying to think about promotion of industrialisation in this country, in the 35th year of governing the country – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, let us limit our debate to two minutes.

4.10
MR SANON BWIIRE (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his statement.

Industrialisation is associated with very many advantages, which should not be over mentioned. Unless this country goes industrial, we are not safe. 

I would like to thank the minister. On page 5, he stated that he has made a feasibility study to make sure that some processing factories are started and funded, specifically the last one where he said, “...revival of cotton ginning in Lira, among others.” 

Honourable minister, I would like to inform you that we have a defunct ginnery in Bulumba, Kaliro District. This ginnery has not been operational for the last 20 years and the people would wish to see that they continue engaging themselves in cotton production. What plans do you have in this regard?  

Let me hope that in this statement which reads “among others…” Kaliro is among those that have not specifically been mentioned. I would like to request you that next time it should read, “Cotton ginning in Lira and in Kaliro, specifically, Bulumba” because this area is still virgin for industrialisation. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, in 2012, the President visited Kaliro District and encouraged the people to grow fruits like citrus, pineapples, among others. He also pledged that Government will support the establishment of a fruit factory. 

Whereas we are establishing sugar factories in Busoga, we need to also interest our people to go into other areas like fruit growing. Honourable minister, I would like to inform the minister that there is this pending pledge, which should be taken seriously so that our people benefit from all these Government industrial programmes. I beg to submit.

4.13
MR JOHN MAGOLO (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the statement of the minister for the advantages of industrialisation cannot be overemphasised. 

I stand, first and foremost, to appreciate the work like what is happening in Mbale - because we have an industrial park, which is there. Of course it is still under development. But we would like to appreciate that for the start, but also look at how we are going to engage the young people. 

I expect that we should have deliberate action through skilling to see how young people are going to get involved in this issue of industrialisation because that is where we are heading. We need to build their capacity to see how they can be part of it. Also to do value addition to what we already have. 

In Mbale, we have the Bugisu Cooperative Union. The issue of coffee as the most consumed soft drink cannot also be overemphasised. We need to put in place systems to add value to that. This is because in Uganda, there are coffee shops everywhere, but we need to bring this to a good standard. Export is also very important; we know that we earn a lot from that but we need to add value to it. As we promote that, we need to also look at the cottage industries – (Member time out.)

4.15
MR DONALD KATALIHWA (NRM, Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for the presentation. Through you, I would like to inform the House that this issue of industrialisation has stayed theoretical in some regions of this country. Now, especially the issue of establishment of industrial parks: In the Rwenzori, for example, apart from the small progress we see in Kasese for the Rwenzori and the Fort Portal industrial parks, we have not seen tremendous success. People's “appetite” had risen, but we do not see enough progress. 

Two years ago, in the Rwenzori subregion, we went through a lot of processes with our people to discuss issues that were concerning the subregion, especially industrialisation. People came up with proposals on establishment of small-scale industries. They were all promised under the agri-led programme but of recent, the programme has been overtaken by events – I think by the Parish Development Model, which we love very much, but we are also interested in the agri-led model. We have a big challenge.

My request is; given the current trend, we need to empower our small-scale industries, not the big scale. Why am I saying this? If you look at the nature of fuel prices, if you look at the nature of industrialisation required and the support that is given, it is targeting central - not “central” as a region but the Central Business District of Kampala and the like. But in our small places we will need strategies to support our small-scale industries to benefit Ugandans. Not these big scale industries in Kampala and the others, which benefit more of the external people when our people in the communities can be able to establish their own – (Member timed out.)

4.17
MR LINOS NGOMPEK (NRM, Kibanda North County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Usually, we thank our ministers for statements made on the Floor, although some of these statements stay on paper and are not implemented. That is the biggest challenge we have, especially in regards to Members of the NRM Party who are tasked with implementing things that would help Ugandans manage and enjoy their country. 

We are talking about industrialisation. Recently, we put a lot of pressure on the road network and yet as Government, or Uganda, we have assets like the railway line and then the ship at Port Bell. 

The refurbishment of our ship is taking place at Port Bell. But recently we heard that the locomotives that were bought by Uganda Railway Corporation do not fit on the railway sleepers that we have in the country. And yet Parliament passed a budget for these locomotives to be purchased. 

If we continue, as Members of Parliament, approving monies to such entities that do not promote the will of the people of Uganda, then the issues of industrialisation and all other factors that are aimed at promoting the interest of Ugandans through industrialisation, I really believe – (Member timed out.)

4.19
MR MARTIN MUGABI (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, I thank you for the statement. 

The factors of production, if we are talking about industrialisation, are many but most importantly, we need local raw materials. Not only that, we need labour. Not only that, we need infrastructure.

We have quite a number of agencies that the Ministry for Trade needs work in line with. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is very crucial. If we are talking about industrialisation, it is important that the Ministry of Trade works with Ministry of Agriculture to improve on agricultural production. 

As we speak today, I have 10 subcounties in my constituency but we do not have even a single tractor. 

Secondly, we have only one technical institute that is for the Government of Uganda. And the population that I have in my constituency is over 250,000. The youths who are supposed to be skilled, I am very sure are more than 50,000. The technical institute that we have can only accommodate 300. That means we have an excess of 47 – (Member timed out)

4.21
MR MEDARD LUBEGA-SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The statement given by my brother, the hon. David Bahati is simply annoying. Annoying, because you get the impression that these people know what to do but they are just bad-hearted. With all that hon. Bahati has said, why are we where we are?

Number one, and why I agree with my brother, is; what are you industrialising? You must concentrate on areas where you have comparative advantage.  My mind runs to agriculture. Before you industrialise, first, can you produce? What happened to the extension workers that we had in this country that are nowhere? Why? Because their services have been taken over by men and women in uniform who have no skill in that area. 

This calls upon us to ask ourselves, and I am asking the minister, where is integration in this Government? Have you sat down to harmonise strategies with the other ministries? For example, agriculture? Where is research as a component in your plan? It is nowhere. Why? Because money for research has been scattered in some other offices.

Two, where are the silos in this country? Research has shown that we lose up to 70 per cent of our production to pests – (Interjections) - thank you, Madam Speaker.
 
We have no silos to work as storage facilities as part of doing value addition and therefore, ensuring quality control. Where is fair taxation in this country when we give tax holidays to foreign companies and not our very own with taxation being used as a political tool? How about the budget line? Where is the budget for agriculture, before you talk about industrialising what you do not have?

Finally – because time seems to be running out – is the issue of corruption. You people, before we check ourselves and handle and tackle corruption, we cannot move. People who come to invest here meet our bureaucrats who start asking them for shares in their companies. Those are matters you must handle and attack head-on.

I am happy that hon. Bahati, is now the minister in this sensitive ministry and he has no record of corruption. For that reason, probably he will be able to take us where we want to go. Thank you.

4.25
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (NUP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to participate in this debate by using Namanve Industrial Park in Mukono an example.

Madam Speaker, more than two decades ago, this House degazetted Compartment 1 to 11 of Namanve for industrial development. Land under the Uganda Investment Authority was allocated to various developers to put up industries and factories.

Two decades now, majority of those people – the investors who were given land – have not utilised it. Sadly, most of them have now sold it to other people, fetching billions of money yet they got it almost free of charge. 

Additionally, although Parliament de-gazetted 11 compartments, the remaining part of the forest has been highly encroached on. Compartment 12, where we have the Uganda Roofing industry, to the entire area that was left to offer a buffer zone up to Lake Victoria, has been greatly encroached on.

Madam Speaker, some developers have constructed hotels instead. I hope you will now see one of our big hoteliers setting up another hotel in Namanve Industrial Park. We have about three hotels already in Namanve. Other people have set up residential houses there. Others who are attempting to do something connected to industries have constructed warehouses. There is no manufacturing going on in Namanve, apart from the one being done by Coca-Cola. 

I beg that if it pleases you, Madam Speaker, you send one of our committees - COSASE for example - to go and investigate the issue of land in Namanve, regarding those people who were allocated land, but have not done anything on it; those who have sold it off and those who have constructed residential houses, hotels and warehouses on such land.

Madam Speaker, a forest was brought down; it was the source of livelihood for my people. The feeling was that our youths would get some jobs in these industries. The few people who employ our people pay them almost nothing – peanuts. I do not know why. The industrialists who have come up with some form of industries moved up – (Member timed out.)

4.29
MS BETTY NALUYIMA (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As we plan to commemorate the Africa Industrialisation Day, I wish to draw the attention of the House to the National Industry Policy, which was launched in December 2020. This looks at economic transformation as one of the key objectives. 

This brings me back to inquire from the ministry whether they have again considered the fact that we can never have industrialisation taken over or supervised fully by nationals? Have you looked at the local governments? How many commercial officers are involved in this very plan or this very industrialisation day as we commemorate it? Where are the labour officers? 

You are aware that in this country, we cannot do anything by ourselves at national level. However, it is very crucial to consider the role of local governments in each and every aspect because they are the ones who check the statistics at senior levels, vis-a-vis junior levels. Is our population in Uganda fully employed there?

So, I implore the ministry, at this moment, to consider ensuring that even local governments are able to participate in this commemoration by at least conducting their local commemoration moments, as we also do the same at national level. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.31
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will straight away beg you to give me two extra minutes so that I also can speak for you, because I know it is difficult for you to debate, as the presiding officer. 

Yesterday, I had an opportunity to interact with farmers from your constituency. I was in Kachumbala – (Laughter) - attending a burial.

Madam Speaker, first, allow me to appreciate the ministers because today, the front bench is fully packed, except for a few ministers, who are busy on WhatsApp instead of taking notes. (Laughter) It is so disappointing. I see a few of them but I do not want to name – (Interjections) - yes. 

Anyhow, I am happy they are here today because matters of industrialisation are of a cross-cutting nature, where we need the participation of all ministries, including that of education and sports. 

There is one issue here – the issue of cotton growing, ginning and having a complete line. Honourable minister, you are my friend, but I want you to take charge. The greater north that includes the entire region from Elgon, pushing up to Acholi and back to Bunyoro, has been dependent on cotton but most of those ginneries have collapsed. 

There is the issue of climate change. Irrigation that we have talked about has become a song and people are only dancing to it now. You have not taken it seriously to irrigate the greater north yet our biggest advantage is in agriculture. 

If you go to Mukongoro, there was a ginnery – it collapsed. In the whole of Teso, we now only see the one at Kachumbala. There is another in Oladot – (Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First speak for Kachumbala because that is my constituency. (Laughter)

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, there are two cotton ginneries working. One is in Kachumbala and the other is in Oladot. Then, in Jinja, we are hearing about Fine Spinners but most of our lint cotton is exported. We do not have a complete line of production, yet we have a big advantage. Honourable minister, what are your plans to revamp this collapsing industry?

4.34
MR JOHN TEIRA (NRM, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, honourable minister, for the elaborate presentation on industrialisation. My concern, honourable minister, is the failure to synergise the Government departments to breathe life into the industrial sector. You very well know that we need water and infrastructure but the incoordination has rendered some of the already existing industrial parks very unproductive.

A few weeks back, I visited Nakasongola agro-industrial park on Gulu Highway. It is an amazing facility but has no water and electricity. Therefore, it is dead. When I met the Chinese who runs the facility, he presented to me a letter from Uganda Revenue Authority that slapped him with a Shs 4 billion tax demand, yet he cannot get into production because for the time he has been there, there has not been electricity in that place.

My humble appeal, honourable minister, is that we synergise these different Government agencies to have a well-organised approach to the industrialisation of this country. We have no business having the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives coming up with a programme where the Ministry of Works and Transport, which is charged with the infrastructure, is not involved or where the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, which is producing most of the raw materials that are going to be used in some of those industries, are not involved. I so appeal. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

4.36
MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think this is the best time to industrialise Uganda. If you move down to our communities, they say we have not done a lot to industrialise the country.

Whereas Members are talking about increasing supply before we industrialise, we have a lot of excess supply in the agricultural sector. If you come to Budadiri in Sironko, you will find excess supply of tomatoes, which we are supplying up to Juba and wherever. 

If we supported the ministry and put up those cottage industries and we industrialise the agro-based industries, we can absorb a lot of supply coming from the agricultural sector. Prices can stabilise and go up and, if we add value to the agricultural products, we can export them as well.

If we do selective application well and the industries are evenly distributed, they can offer forward and backward linkages to the communities – where they can supply the raw materials and we can get the outputs from the industrial sector, which can also be used as inputs in the agricultural sector. We can also export a lot of those goods. 

I personally believe that this is the best time. If you look at the budget for the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, it is very small. What we need to do, as Parliament, is to support the ministry so that they put up these industries to create employment for our people and offer the market. Other technologies about training and putting up vocational studies are demand-driven. As long as the – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, we agreed that we should be leaving this place not later 6 o’clock. So, we need to limit this debate. Can I hear from the minister, please? Minister, you have heard what people are saying. We need value addition and linkages. For you to be able to do that, you need electricity, water and good roads. You need to improve on the production, storage and the quality controls. So, you need to address a number of those issues for us to say we are in industrialisation. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and Members, for the contributions you have made on this important topic of industrialisation of our country as an engine for economic growth, creation of jobs and wealth for our people. On the point that hon. Ssasaga raised, under the National Development Plan III, instead of sectors, we did programmes. There is specifically a programme called “The Manufacturing Programme” which is chaired by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. 

We bring together all the stakeholders in a particular sector to plan. If we need water and electricity - that is why I talked about offering $0.05 for the manufacturing - that is going to be handled by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. So, there is a programme. We are working together as the Government to address this issue of industrialisation. It is true that if we work together, we achieve more. If we work in silos, we achieve less. 

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, for example, while in Cabinet on Monday, presented a strategy to address all challenges across the value chain to be able to have enough production with quality and standards. Some of the challenges that we are facing as a country – we have, for example, huge markets in Africa, AGOA and Europe. Remember that in Europe, we are allowed duty-free – (Inaudible) – everything but arms. The problem has been the standards of our products.

So, we are addressing all issues of the value chain. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is addressing this – (Interruption) 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, honourable minister, for yielding the Floor. I thank the Speaker for this opportunity. The minister just told us that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries was in Cabinet this week to present their plan. I am seeking clarification. The coffee sector earns this country $500 million annually. We export eight to nine million bags of coffee every year. 

You, as Cabinet, sat and said you are reverting the Uganda Coffee Development Authority to the mainstream ministry as a department in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Don’t you think this inconsistency you have in Cabinet will affect this particular sector – this cash cow of this economy – that brings into the country $500 million annually? 

MR BAHATI: The Speaker has given me a few minutes to be able to hit the target of 6 o’clock. Hon. Katuntu, the discussion on restructuring is still ongoing and the debate will be concluded when we finally come to the House for amendment of the relevant laws. We, however, hear your concern and your input will be very important at that stage. 

Finally, we have also approved a strategy of textile and apparel. We would like – somebody talked about cotton – to revive the cotton industry. We want everybody – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I thank you. I have heard the minister saying “finally” but I am seated here feeling the pains of my colleagues from West Nile and Arua who said soybeans are grown in Arua but it is thrown away. Yet in Tororo, people are buying a kilogramme of soya beans at Shs 5,000 but in Arua, it is being sold at Shs 900.

Madam Speaker, the minister seems not ready to provide a solution to this situation. He is saying “finally”. Therefore, is the minister right to conclude?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe he is finally giving you a solution to the prices (Laughter). Honourable minister, what Members are raising is very serious. The cost of the products they produce - Imagine in Arua, soya bean is being sold at Shs 900 while in Tororo it is –

Hon. Aogon talked about the cotton ginneries but we do not even know the prices of cotton. People have gone back to growing cotton but they cannot sell. We really do not know what is happening. That should be a solution you are giving to this country, as you celebrate the industrialisation day. [A Member rose_] Members, can we finish?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, maybe at an appropriate time, this House will need more time to discuss the issues of industrialisation to be able to allow the ministry to answer specific issues. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR BAHATI: However, there was one issue about Kaliro and the minister who comes from there wanted -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before the minister comes, you should come to this House with a paper on the issues that have been raised. You have just touched on them but we need solutions to industrialisation. (Applause) How do we handle the linkages? What about the tax incentives? Why do you give an Indian a tax holiday who has come to sell phones and you leave a Ugandan? These are the issues that have been raised by hon. Nambooze. If it is for industries, it should be for them and not residential. (Applause)

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I will come up with a paper that answers all the issues that have been raised here and even others. Next week, I will be ready to do that. Thank you very much.

4.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Cooperatives) (Mr Fredrick Gume): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue of the cotton ginnery in Kaliro is of concern to the whole region. We have moved a step further and consulted the investors that are going to partner with the people of Kaliro to ensure that we use the ginnery that has been redundant for a very long time.

We have problems in ownership and so far, the issue is still in court. I would like to assure my colleague who raised this issue that we shall soon solve that problem. However, Madam Speaker, with your permission, I would like to supplement on something that came up paramount here on the post-harvest handling and losses. 

We have carried out an assessment of the storage facilities in the country. We have an agency under the warehouse risk system. We would like to develop a paper that we will submit to the Cabinet for consideration and eventually here. Otherwise, most losses happen during the times of supply and demand. When the supply is over, then the demand is overbeaten and the prices go low.

Therefore, what we intend to do is that if someone brings a commodity and puts it in a warehouse, that person, who is under an organised farm group, is given a receipt; it is like a land title.

Madam Speaker, at an appropriate time, we will link the receipt system with the banking sector such that if someone has commodities in the stores and the prices are not yet palatable, we are able to allow the person to take the receipts to a bank and advance some money. 

MS NAIGAGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister. The Rt Hon. Speaker and I are former bankers.

Madam Speaker, the Government tried out the warehouse receipt system but it failed because it had no control over the interest rates that are charged in commercial banks.

I would like the minister to be clear to Ugandans; if a farmer from Bulumba takes a receipt to Centenary Bank Branch in Jinja, will the Government guarantee the interest rate that is charged on this person who is borrowing on this warehouse receipt? Thank you.

MR GUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Secondly, do you have any Government bank that guarantees farmers?

MR GUME: For the time being, we may not have a central Government bank that guarantees the interest rates as raised by hon. Naigaga. However, in the absence of that, we have the microfinance support centre, which is countrywide. It can receive the receipts and advance money to the various farmers such that when the prices increase, we are in position to give the money and pay back the commodities less to what has been advanced. That is the system that we are trying to adopt.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you adopting or using it?

MR GUME: Madam Speaker, this is in the process and it is what we are trying to do. We have carried out an assessment; we are developing a system that can fit in the circumstances.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What security do you have with the microfinance support centre?

MR GUME: A receipt is security. A farmer would have put his/her product in a warehouse that gives him/her a receipt. That receipt is an equivalent of security and he/she can use that receipt strictly -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the warehouse, where these farmers are supposed to put the produce?

MR GUME: We have carried out an assessment in the whole country. We are going to develop warehouses and improve on those that are palatable up to now. That is what we are trying to do, Madam Speaker.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, with due respect, you are telling us what you are going to do in prosperity. We want to know what you are doing now.

MR GUME: Madam Speaker, what I have submitted to the House is what we intend to do for the country. 

4.51
MR ABDU KATUNTU (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Sometimes, it is better - (Interjections) - Apologies, colleagues. 

Sometimes, it is better for the Frontbench to come with the Attorney-General because it helps. Otherwise, what the minister is trying to explain is already provided in the law. 

I do not know why the minister is even saying that they are coming up with a policy. It is there. Therefore, there is no reason the learned Attorney-General should not be here to advise his colleagues on some of these issues.

You are going to make us debate something which is actually useless. The warehousing security system is already in place. You can do it. You do not even need a policy now. It is already there. Therefore, let us not waste so much time on that because many businessmen are actually doing it. They import goods and get the warehousing receipt system pledged in the bank and as they – (Interjection) – yes, information through the Speaker – 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Katuntu, have you become the Speaker? Let hon. Katuntu finish. Let us not spend a lot of time on - okay, please say something; you might hang yourself. I fear you. (Laughter)

Mr ekanya: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank my senior brother, hon. Abdu Katuntu. The issue is about the gap in the warehouse receipt system, which we expect the minister to answer. That is the question the Speaker is asking. 

In Arua, for example, the owner of the warehouse receipt system will buy soya beans at Shs 900 and so, the warehouse receipt system does not solve the problem. You need to create a price stabilisation fund to regulate that. 

Therefore, hon. Abdu Katuntu, you are right to advise the minister. This only requires the Attorney-General to come up with those adjustments. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Abdu Kantutu, had you finished?

Mr katuntu: I had concluded but only to say that we do not need that policy because there is already a legal regime in place, sorts out the problem we are talking about, minister.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable minister, go back and handle that. Do not call for another debate. Go, harmonise and come back to the House. 

Mr gume: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable members for their submissions and to assure this House that as a ministry, we want to exploit that relevant law to ensure farmers are in position to store their products. 

For Tororo, if the price is low then we can use that system for the price to get further when the commodities are in the warehouse. When the prices stabilise, we will be able to proceed with that. Thank you. 

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you. Honourable members, allow me to vary the Order Paper. There is a statement from hon. Rwakoojo; let us handle it before we go to the supplementary budget.

4.55
Ms robina rwakoojo (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a request to you. On 5 October 2021, the Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2021 was read for the first time and referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and we were expected to report back to the House today, Thursday, 18 November 2021. 

However, whereas the committee has been able to interact with a number of relevant stakeholders, we still have consultative meetings in the selected districts that are yet to be undertaken. 
It is on this note that I move, under Rule 218(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda to request for three more weeks to enable the committee finish its work.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you, hon. Rwakoojo. We will give you the three weeks you have asked for to present the report.

Ms rwakoojo: Thank you, Madam Speaker. May I lay this on the Table.

Motion for adoption of the report of the Budget Committee on the supplementary expenditure schedule number one for the financial year 2021/2022

4.57
The chairperson, committee ON budget (Mr Patrick Opolot-Isiagi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Aware that the Supplementary Schedule One was laid on the Floor by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and referred to the Committee on Budget, I hereby request to present a report of the Committee on Budget on the process of the supplementary budget. 

However, before I proceed to present the report, I beg to first lay a copy of the report of the committee together with the minutes of the meetings of the committee coupled with submissions from the entities that are responsible for this supplementary. 

Madam Speaker, the minister laid a supplementary request of a total of Shs 3.819 trillion as supplementary budget and had already spent, with a legal limit of three per cent, Shs 1.343 trillion, and therefore, requests for prior approval of Parliament for Shs 2.476 trillion. 

Background to this supplementary
An intervention for:
    i) COVID-19 related emergencies and disasters;
    ii) Expenditure for stimulus packages for support of the economy to recovery;
    iii) Expenditure to fund activities for external funds;
    iv) Expenditure for security interventions, aware of issues emerging; and
    v)  Other ongoing Government contractual obligations.

Madam Speaker, I would like the House to note that in the appropriation budget, the revenue locally generated was estimated to be Shs 22.425.037 billion but due to the emerging issues of COVID-19, which led to lockdown activity drawdown, this was revised downwards by Government to Shs 20.590 billion. That is a fall in revenue of Shs 1.835 billion.

The committee scrutinised the sources of the supplementary and were informed that it is out of suppression within the Government budget of some non-developmental activities, which would were stayed like travel abroad for non-mandatory travels, consumptive items like workshops, which did not run during the lockdown and other methods of doing business. That amounts to Shs 1.298 billion.
 
Government also has arranged to have additional borrowing of Shs 2.049 billion. There is additional external funding of Shs 471 billion thus balancing with the need to fund the supplementary.

As usual, the methodology involved consultation with the different stakeholders, MDAs that are to implement these activities and also relevant documents were examined. We found that the supplementary is within the agreeable legal procedures; legal, relevant provisions of the law. 

Madam Speaker, this report is in two parts. Part A is going to look at the detail of the requests; Vote by Vote, that was falling under 3 per cent. That is what the Minister of Finance had already released and utilised. Still, the mandate to approve is for this House. 

Vote 001: Office of the President 
It required Shs 11.513 billion towards expenses for presidential advisors, of which, Shs 3.2 billion was for salaries and Shs 8.3 billion for motor vehicles for presidential advisors; Shs 3.974 billion - settlement for court awards; Shs 3 billion for establishment of public investment management executive oversight platform, Shs 1.572 billion to clear outstanding obligations of Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort and for housing state visitors during the swearing-in ceremony, which you all know had to occur. It was a mandatory activity. 

There was Shs 550 billion provided to procure a vehicle for the Minister of State for Economic Monitoring; Shs 500 billion to facilitate intelligence in the fight against COVID-19 and Shs 6.464 billion to facilitate RDCs to implement presidential directives in the fight against COVID-19. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that the House approves Shs 27.57 billion to the Office of the President.

Vote 002: State House 
There was Shs 50.4 billion was spent for initial start-up of research on COVID-19 vaccine for the manufacturing plant; so we want to build our capacity. Another Shs 5.69 billion was to fund the anti-tick development project; vaccine project. 
The committee recommends the approval of Shs 56.090 billion to State House on the 3 per cent.  

Vote 004: Ministry of Defence 
There was Shs 10.416 billion released to the minister to cater for COVID-19 related activities during the second wave; Shs 400 billion was provided to meet the shortfall in operation expenses for defence. 

The committee recommends approval of Shs 410.416 billion to the Ministry of Defence. 

Vote 005: Ministry of Public Service
The release of Shs 1.54 billion for payment of emoluments and benefits of former Vice Presidents and Prime Ministers per the Act, 2010.

The committee recommends approval of that amount Shs 1.541 billion to the Ministry of Public Service. 

Vote 006: Foreign Affairs 
The committee recommends approval of Shs 350 million for hosting of the Pan African Women's Organisation. Uganda is now the host; the secretariat is in Uganda. An advance of Shs 350 million was made. I think we should be very happy that we are now hosting the Pan African Women's Organisation in Uganda. The secretariat is here. 

Vote 008: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development 
There was a release of Shs 100 billion to support small business enterprises to recover from the COVID-19 Pandemic; Shs 13 billion to meet contractual obligations under Integrated Financial Management System and e-government procurement; Shs 1 billion to facilitate activities of Presidential CEO Forum Secretariat. 

The committee recommends this House approves Shs 114 billion to Vote 008: Ministry of Finance. 

Vote 009: Ministry of Internal Affairs
The committee recommends approval of Shs 0.3957 billion for personal protective equipment for COVID-19. 

Vote 011: Ministry of Local Government 
Shs 914 million was provided for COVID-19-related interventions. The committee recommends approval of that money. 

Vote 012: Ministry for Lands, Housing and Urban Development 
Shs 45 billion was released to that Vote for the Albertine Region Sustainable Development Project. 

Vote 013: Ministry of Education and Sports 
Shs 48.5 billion was released to enable the ministry to prepare learning materials to cater for classes P.1-P.4 and senior five – senior six. 

The committee recommends approval of Shs 48.5 billion for that purpose. 

Vote 014: Ministry of Health 
Shs 2.9 billion was released for feeding patients; Shs 49.5 billion to facilitate regional support teams. All these are COVID-19 related issues; Shs 144 million for printing COVID-19 registers and distribution of COVID-19 request forms. All that comes to a total of Shs 111.048 billion.

The committee recommends a total of Shs 198.953 billion to the Ministry of Health, which was involved in the fight against COVID-19 second wave be approved. We commend the ministry for having done a good job. 

Vote 015: Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives
There was the release of Shs 8 billion for revamping cooperative unions and Shs 2.8 billion for procurement of five motor vehicles for the new ministers and Permanent Secretary. 

The committee found it fit and recommends that the House approves that amount of Shs 10.8 billion to Vote 015. 

Vote 017: Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development 
There was an extension of the construction period for Karuma Dam, and therefore, an extra obligation requiring Shs 28.98 billion for engineers. 
The committee recommends the approval of Shs 28.95 billion to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development for that purpose. 

Vote 018: Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development 
For COVID-19 response, Shs 53.5 billion is recommended to be approved for that. 

Vote 020: Ministry of ICT 
Shs 8.1 billion for the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance was provided for COVID-19-related issues. They had to do the activities you saw. 

Therefore, the committee recommends that approval. 

Vote 021: Ministry of East African Community Affairs
It required procuring vehicles for the First Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister of East Africa Community Affairs and the other vehicles; a total of three motor vehicles. That is Shs 1.2 billion. 

Vote 112: Directorate of Ethics and Integrity 
The committee recommends approval of Shs 279 million. 

Vote 114: Uganda Cancer Institute. 
We recommend approval of Shs 2,048,000,000 to the Uganda Cancer Institute to support the accreditation of the laboratory. 

Vote 118: Uganda Road Fund 
The release of Shs 3 billion for activities on road maintenance. 

Vote 120: National Citizenship and Immigration Control 
Shs 864 million was released to Vote 120 to support our immigration officers on duty at the border posts for Personal Protective Gear and all other SOPs 

Vote 130: Treasury Operations
Shs 228.3 billion was released to cover contingencies. Aware that Parliament approved only Shs 62 billion during the budget, as such, this amount had to be reinforced to try to come to the agreed law, to meet the requirement for the Contingency Fund. 

Vote 144: Uganda Police Force
Definitely aware that they were very much involved in a lot of COVID-19 interventions in the second wave, Shs 19.011 billion was released to the Uganda Police Force and we all say police performed a good job with that release of funds. So, we recommend approval of that. 

Uganda Prison Service
They had a number of activities relating to COVID-19. As such, there was a release of Shs 6.243 billion to Uganda Prisons Service to support them in control of COVID-19 within the prisons.

Vote 158: Internal Security Organisation
The committee recommends approval of Shs 4.764 billion to the Internal Security Organisation and Shs 1.111 billion to the External Security Organisation. 

Colleagues, there were a number of votes that funds were released to, for various referral hospitals to support them during COVID-19 and that is captured under annex eight of the report. A total of Shs 8.633 billion was released. So, we request the House to approve that amount.

The Mission in Paris had to rent new chancery premises. So, Shs 1.176 billion was released to them. It was the same with the Mission in Abu Dhabi, which was given Shs 99 million for their coordination. For the Mission in Abu Dhabi, it was to coordinate the Expo 2020.

The Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory (DGAL) Definitely, when you have a number of activities of COVID-19, you end up working much with DGAL. There was a release of Shs 231 million to that Directorate and we request you approve that money.

Uganda Investment Authority
For rent obligation, they had Shs 5 billion released and we request for that approval.

Kabale District
We request the committee to approve Shs 190 million to cover the district. Kayunga District; for rehabilitation of dilapidated secondary schools and some primary schools - a total of Shs 5 billion was released to Kayunga District.

Rukiga District
Shs 500 million was provided to facilitate them complete district headquarters, which was in dire need of competition. 

Colleagues, there was release of money to various local governments to facilitate the district task forces on COVID-19 response and the details are as per annex nine. Shs 52.826 billion was released to different local governments.

Madam Speaker, permit me make a correction here. The annex is not nine, but it should be Annex 10, which was a total of Shs 52.826 billion. That is part (a) of the report, which funds were already released and activities are already done. We would request the committees on oversight to follow up on that money. I only request that we do approve that expenditure. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, permit me now go to part (b) of the report. That is the amount that cannot be spent by the minister before approval of Parliament. This is an additional supplementary to the other one. That comes to a total of Shs 2.475969 trillion. That is what was requested. Let me go to the details for us to have:

Vote 001: Office of the President
An amount of Shs 11.423 billion was requested to clear outstanding payee and Withholding Tax for the Commission of Inquiry into Land Matters. Shs 4.22 billion to support Office of the Head of Public Service and Secretary to Cabinet. Shs 1 billion is required for court awards; Shs 550 million is needed to purchase a motor vehicle for the Minister of Ethics and Integrity. Shs 189 million for payment of benefits and claims for former Internal Security Organisation staff and Shs 3 billion for enhancement of the Office of Economic Monitoring. 

The committee observed that Pay-As-You-Earn and Withholding Tax for the Commission of Inquiry into Land Matters should have been deducted at source, during the period the salaries and all other services payments were done. As such, monies were already released for that activity and the committee, therefore, advises Parliament not to approve this amount of money - Shs 11.423 billion. 

The committee recommends approval of a motor vehicle purchase for the Minister of Ethics at 550 million shillings but approve it under Vote 112 - Ethics and Integrity. This one will be catered for when we move to the Committee of Supply. This amount will appear under Vote 112: Ethics and Integrity. 

The committee recommends approval of Shs 4.2 billion to support the Office of Head of Public Service and Secretary to Cabinet and Shs 1 billion for settlement of court awards. Shs 189 million for payment of benefits and claims to former Internal Security Organisations staff and also Shs 3 billion to enhance the Office for Economic Monitoring of government projects and programmes. 

State House: Shs 141 billion is required to fund the Kira Motors and Shs 100 billion classified expenditure; Shs 4 billion to facilitate intelligence operations; Shs 27 billion for research and innovation. Shs 5 billion for financial support to the events association and Shs 3 billion to support Gravity Investment Company.

The committee recommends approval of Shs 141 billion for funding Kira Motors and Shs 27 billion to support research and innovation, but must be under Vote 001 as per the resolution of Parliament, which was passed in this House. So, that amount will be supplied under Vote 001 where the functions have moved. 

The committee further recommends approval of Shs 4 billion under Vote 009: Ministry of Internal Affairs; for facilitation of intelligence operations. The committee recommends, therefore, only Shs 108 billion be approved to State House, of which Shs 100 Billion is classified expenditure; Shs 5 billion to support the events Association Uganda and the Shs 3 billion to support Gravity Investment Company Limited 

Vote 003: Office of the Prime Minister – (Interruption)

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I see Members with their iPads, implying that they have the document uploaded. Therefore, I believe some could have even read it.

Looking at the time – Madam Speaker, you indicated that we should be out of here by six o’clock. I do not know whether – if we moved the way the chairman is moving – we shall be able to really debate.

I, therefore, suggest that the chairman simply summarises since Members have the details in the copy that is on the iPads and then we go into debate and conclude this matter. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you have the document on your iPads. Chairman, can you summarise the main report; we also get a summary of the minority report?

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Madam Speaker, I, therefore, summarise as follows – (Laughter) - that the House considers the committee’s recommendations and approves the supplementary expenditure, under Schedule No.1 for Financial Year 2021/2022, as outlined in Table 2 below.

Recurrent expenditure for supply is Shs 2,018,942,898,703 and development expenditure is Shs 1,758,645,054,089, which gives a total is Shs 3,777,587,952,792. I beg to move, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, the main committee’s report was signed by about 27 members – (Applause) - which was very supportive but we got a minority report from three colleagues, namely hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, hon. Ssemujju Nganda and hon. Gorreth Namugga. 

I would like to lay a copy of the minority report on the Table. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, lay it on the Table. Clerk, reflect all the details of the report on the Hansard. Yes, hon. Kivumbi.

5.25
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. I will, straightaway go to the issues.

First, Rule 153(2) of the Rules of Procedure states, “The supplementary estimates presented in subrule (1) shall clearly spell out the source of funding for the supplementary expenditure request for each Vote.”

Madam Speaker, this was not complied with. To the contrary, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented broad sources of funding and they were three:
    a) Budget suppressions of Shs 1.29 trillion; 
    b) Domestic borrowing of Shs 2.04 trillion; and 
    c) External financing of Shs 471.13 billion.

The committee requested the minister to present the suppressed budgets for scrutiny. However, the minister, up until today morning, had not availed the committee with the Votes that were suppressed, for us to make a critical analysis and draw a conclusion. 

Madam Speaker, why we have issues with this, is that it is very cardinal. In the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development attempting to suppress a budget, they are encroaching on the powers of Parliament to appropriate. (Applause) 

The law established only says the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development can do a supplementary of three per cent, which they try to hide under. However, it is envisaged that they have found a resource – a windfall of money over and above what was budgeted for: either a borrowing or raised revenue.

When the ministry attempts to suppress a budget - the conditions laid in the law are clear. You either do a reallocation - which is the sole monopoly of Parliament to approve - or a virement, which is restricted to only 10 per cent and within a Vote.

So, the committee needed to critically analyse and scrutinise the suppression of Shs 1.2 trillion and ascertain whether the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development did comply with the law. If they offended the law, the Rules of Procedure and the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act defines clearly what this Parliament should do.

Madam Speaker, this matter is very critical because it has become an annual event. We changed the budget cycle and said that by the 30th of May, the country must have a fully-approved budget so that by the 1st of July, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has a budget to start with.

However, by the 1st of July, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development invokes the provision of the three per cent. Before they start on the budget, they first consume a supplementary. This is abnormal. It is not done in any budgeting process anywhere in any country. When we were in Zimbabwe, somebody said: “Can Government do that? Is there a Parliament that approves it?” 

Madam Speaker, that is why we recommend - in our minority report – that approval of the three per cent should be stayed until we go through each and every Vote that was suppressed and analyse to critically know that they conformed to the law.

This suppression will not affect Government functions because the money has already been spent, in any case. However, we want to set a new chapter and compel Government not – we spend a lot of time - I have been on the Budget Committee for the last five years. We burn the midnight oil to approve these budgets. There could not be an unconstitutional super body somewhere that reviews the work of Parliament. This is about us and our powers and we need to fight and protect them. (Applause) 

So, I have spoken about illegal cuts, Madam Speaker. I also want to draw the attention of the House to the essence of these suppressions. They said and committed the Secretary to Treasury, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the President that they were going to crowd out excessive and consumptive recurrent expenditures in our budget – extravagant workshops. 

However, when they looked at the budget, they came out with Shs 1.29 trillion in the suppression yet when you look at the Shs 3.3 trillion they have brought here, you notice that the recurrent budget still has got Shs 2 trillion. That means they suppressed Shs 1.29 trillion and brought Shs 2 trillion, an excess of almost Shs 779 billion.

Madam Speaker, so what was the essence of their exercise aimed at suppression? Otherwise, they interfere with the plans of agencies including Parliament. I have a case, where they suppressed less money on a single item and they gave them more money in the supplementary budget. 

The danger with this is that in the supplementary budget, ministry officials exercise discretion. When they exercise discretion, it is a recipe for corruption. Instead of the money passing through normal channels, the accounting officers have to speak to semi-gods in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who hold them at ransom. This is why there is corruption in this money.

Madam Speaker, these people fund items that Parliament rejected at the appropriation by 1st July. This is an abuse of the powers of Parliament and it is illegal. This is why we are stating that since the Budget Committee did not look at those budgets, let us stay that supplementary budget until we look at it. It is incumbent upon us to do so. This is because some of the suppressed money is in our districts or small agencies, where people are voiceless.

Let me speak to where they put the money that was suppressed. For instance, in this budget, there is Shs 53 billion for purchase of new vehicles for the ministers. For heaven’s sake, every minister, even if he or she is an ex-officio, automatically becomes a Member of Parliament and partakes of the Shs 200 million meant to purchase a vehicle for a Member of Parliament. 

Why do you create an emergency because you do not have a vehicle? Can’t you wait for six months, under normal budgeting so that you do not distort the national budget and we avail you a new vehicle? After all, you have already taken Shs 200 million. (Applause) Where is the patriotism of the people we elect as ministers, who want instant comfort and luxury? They require Shs 500 to 600 billion to buy vehicles, as if the vehicles Members of Parliament drive cannot drive ministers. 

We must curtail this. This is why I am moving here that any money for purchase of vehicles should be delayed until the next budget so that there is proper planning. This should be done across the board. I do not care which agency. 

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development appeared before Parliament and talked about this money. This culture is even set in our Parliament. We have associations that run private businesses that want to come here to receive donations in billions of shillings. There is a company called Events Association Uganda. I can go through the list of its directors. In fact, the directors here are some of the richest people in this country. These rich people who always parasite on the donations of the State are not good entrepreneurs. We cannot encourage them. 

If you permit me, Madam Speaker, I can go through the list of the directors. If you do not, I will not. (Interjections) I left it to the discretion of the Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is like you have all become Speakers. Can you summarise your report?

MR MUWANGA: I can summarise my report, Madam Speaker. The directors are the following – Now, there is another one – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I asked you to give me the summary and not the directors. Those people are not here to explain themselves. 

MR MUWANGA: Some of them are here, Madam Speaker. The directors of – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not given you permission anyway. 

MR MUWANGA: For example, there is a company called Gravity Investment Company Limited, whose directors are Members of this House and they are here. Some of them are ex-officios that want the Government to pay them Shs 3 billion, for donation and in the supplementary budget.

This money is going to be borrowed. The next borrowing in this supplementary expenditure is Shs 2 trillion. Because of the Shs 2 trillion, our debt to GDP ratio is going to rise to 54 per cent since we want to make some people comfortable.

Let me speak to – There is a company here – and - my friend from Ntungamo was here. This agency has come here for Shs 50 billion. It is under Parliamentary investigation. This expenditure should be stayed until that investigation by Parliament is dealt with. (Applause) Otherwise, we will breed impunity. 

Let me go to the mother of all issues, called the Atiak Sugar Factory, as I summarise. Uganda has, so far, invested Shs 171 billion in Atiak Sugar Factory. The majority shareholders of Atiak Sugar Factory, who own 61 per cent, have invested Shs 120 billion. The Government is a minority shareholder. They are seeking an investment of another Shs 108 billion. In total, we will have invested Shs 279 billion in Atiak Sugar Factory. With that, we shall still be 40 per cent shareholders, in a company, where the Director, Amina, is the Executive Director. Yet, this is a company in which the Committee on Trade, Industry and Cooperatives said has huge management issues.

We are sure this money will not be good. The majority report has agreed with the challenge they face and recommended the following which we seek to amend. They have said, “The only way we can fund this company is if we are increasing our equity in the company”. I want to applaud the majority report for that observation.

However, I would like to point to the minister that if money is to move to Atiak Sugar Factory for equity, we need to amend the narrative. We need the minister to commit that the money we are going to give will strictly go to buy equity and raise our stakes in Atiak Sugar Factory. 

I know the committee has made recommendations but the recommendations of Parliament are advisory. I have been in this Parliament for some time. These recommendations are quite often ignored. Therefore, for us to give the money, we want the minister to amend the narrative here and say “This money you are taking is purposely for the takeover of Atiak Sugar Factory.” It is because once we have invested – How can a rich man be a minority shareholder? 

Uganda is the biggest investor in the company and yet we are the minority shareholders. Which economics is this? I know people here are citing the levels of poverty in Northern Uganda. I have moved the length and breadth of Northern Uganda in the last 20 years, I have been an activist in this country and so, I know the levels of poverty. We do not need lectures on them.

Even the people of Northern Uganda want to have a stake in that company. Busoga is an example. If sugarcane growing could change the fate of people, the people of Busoga should have been the richest and yet they are the poorest. Therefore, we do not want to import the weaknesses of Busoga into Northern Uganda. They have seen enough of war. They have been through everything. We want this to be well protected.

I want to conclude by talking about the money that is going to be a little wasted in rehabilitating the railway line from Malaba to Kampala, at a cost of Shs 184 billion. This company did not even go in any competitive bidding. This company’s only credential is that it operated in Kenya. The company that is going to receive this money does not have anything to show that it has capacity and capability yet we are here approving money for this supplementary. I beg to move and urge Members of Parliament to approve our minority report. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi. That is the beauty of having the Opposition. It helps in the checks and balances. Even what we didn’t know, we have known what is happening. Thank you for your report.

I also urge the Government that whatever has been seen and identified, take it up. Can the minister come and explain the legality of the supplementary and give a commitment on Atiak?

5.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate the Chairperson of the Budget Committee for a very good maiden report.

Madam Speaker, the supplementary Budget -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By the way it is our maiden supplementary report. Maybe I should also take this opportunity to tell the House that our maiden Bill has been assented to. (Applause) 
  
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, allow me to also appreciate hon. Muwanga Kivumbi for always making us alert by his proper analysis in the minority report. I say so because I have worked with him for some time in these assignments and his minority reports have always enhanced our planning. Thank you so much, hon. Kivumbi.

He raises a number of compliance requirements in as far as the Public Finance Management Act is concerned, specifically section 25 on the supplementary budgets. I would like to inform this House that for an item to qualify for supplementary, there are conditions to be fulfilled. One is that it must have been unforeseen at the time of budgeting and condition No.2 is that it must be unavoidable in nature.

Madam Speaker, the Supplementary Schedule No.1 we bring before the House for approval mainly arose as a result of the second wave of COVID-19, which none of us anticipated at the time of Budget. Therefore, in this regard, substantial items under the three per cent relate to the COVID-19 interventions, which we had to deal with in the month of June after we had passed the Budget and they cascaded into the month of July -(Interruption)

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to bring to the attention of my honourable friend and minister that it is not my intention to impeach your confidence in submitting on this subject. However, I heard very well the directive of the Speaker and I am seeking her indulgence whether the honourable minister is presenting within our limits of time on the issues that were particular on legality.

The minority report is very clear on illegality; part of what you are requesting for is borrowing. Does it have parliamentary approval both external and internal? There are issues of compliance to the PFMA.

Madam Speaker, would the honourable minister love to move in that direction and therefore, move the House well instead of veering into the objective which this House duly appreciates but is only questioning the methodology and compliance with the law?

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In inviting the minister to make a response, you were very specific on the commitment of the Government on Atyak. (Interjection) Yes. I would like to find out because the shadow minister was very clear. Regarding this money you want to put there, are we increasing our equity? Do we seek to increase our equity or is it just normal support?

The Speaker was very clear inviting you to make a response on that aspect. It is important for us to be very clear on that aspect. Is it just supporting Atyak or do we seek to increase equity in that company so that as a country, we are the majority equity holders?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when I gave you the chance to make a rebuttal to the minority report, that was basically meant to reduce our debate in the House. We have known what the Opposition is raising and what the Government is raising and in most of the issues, you seem to be together.

The issue that they wanted was on the legality of the supplementary budget which they wanted you to point out and then the other issue was the commitment or condition that you are giving Atyak. I have seen from the report the condition that you are giving is that the governance issues must be solved and the equity bit.

Are we giving money as a donation or are we adding on our equity? That is what the House wants you to do; to make that commitment that you will not disburse this money until these conditions are fulfilled.
 
MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the legality element, I wish to state clearly that this Supplementary Schedule No.1 comprises all the legal requirements as clearly stipulated in the Public Finance Management Act.

Regarding Atiak -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where you are not sure whether it complies, please get back after the House and sit down with this team and see where we have missed out.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, I am very sure and outside the House, we can have an engagement with colleagues to clearly demonstrate to them how this supplementary schedule complies with the law. I am confidently sure of what I am talking about.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are two points I have encountered here. The issue is the legality and the question has not been well answered, if we go into legal. That your role is to move money in its excess from your collections to find unforeseen priorities; that you did not plan for. His question was very simple: Where did you get it? If you have an answer, you can state it.

Secondly, on the issue of Atiak, I beg to differ a bit. How will he give us a commitment before carrying out an evaluation of the other company? For him to come here and give us a commitment that, “We are coming up with this equity,” and does not do it, will be giving us hot air. For him to come up with a commitment that – (Interruption)

Mr katuntu: Point of information. Thank you very much, hon. Nsereko for yielding the Floor. I think all of us are trying to move to the centre so that we move together. I will again raise the issue of the Attorney-General; he is missing in this House. 

The issue of equity is about shareholding. They are talking about equity; some people may not even realise what it is. It is about shareholding. You cannot change shareholding of a company except when you have a resolution of that company. You need a board of directors to sit, resolve, file their returns and do what we call reallocation of shares.

How will the minister you are asking do that? It will entail a board resolution. That is when we can talk about equity or shareholding. 

Madam Speaker, if I got you correctly, you were suggesting that if the minister and the minority report group and the chairperson, can sit and see how they minimise their differences, then they make it easier for other colleagues other than trying to tear each other up on the Floor of this House.

Mr nsereko: Thank you for information, hon. Katuntu.  

The Deputy Speaker: When you look at the condition that was given to Atiak by the committee, it was on issues of governance. Later on, the issue of equity would come in. However, the condition that has been given for this money to be disbursed is on governance. The issue of governance is arising out of – I am told there is a report. It still takes you back to what hon. Katuntu is saying. You must handle the issue of equity but it is not this House to discuss equity.

Mr nsereko: Madam Speaker, as I wind up my point, what we implore you to do is that these are public funds. No one stops you from choosing your priorities. However, protect the interests of Ugandans; it is what everyone is saying. How do you protect it? We cannot direct you in getting us equity without evaluation of a company. That is beyond us. 

Matters of governance are where you have representation on the board and continuous reporting. It is part of the commitments that people would like to have. 

In trying to fund different trade priorities; whereas I have no objection to this matter – and I can say it clearly. When we were funding Kinyara – I was here and we rose on these matters. Funding the export subsidy for sugar to Tanzania, which you presented – remember hon. Bahati. We were here in this House. 

Also, the issue we would like to ask the honourable Minister is that we also remind you of the commitment that you made for our traders in South Sudan and we need answers for that. I have no objection at all; keep our commitment as a country but also consider our people that have been trading and have lost their goods. 

Madam Speaker, with leave of this Parliament, I would like to present a motion on the matter of compensation of traders who lost their business in South Sudan.

The Deputy Speaker: Bring a motion next week. Also, I want to implore the House that you have heard issues raised by hon. Kivumbi. Some of these are administrative in nature. Honourable Minister, you would take it up after here to make sure that it is implemented to the letter. Let us go ahead with the debate.

5.57
Mr Wilfred niwagaba (NRM, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to guide the House on two aspects. One is in respect of the concept of suppression. Admittedly, it does not exist in our laws. However, because what was suppressed is in respect to what Parliament passed under the Appropriation Act, this particular supplementary schedule, although not properly worded, is an amendment in some way. If it were to be properly done, it would have been by an amendment of the Appropriation Act to cover those aspects that were suppressed. 

Coming to the issue of Atiak, the money being proposed is not to be spent on Atiak as such; it is to be given to Uganda Development Corporation (UDC), which holds our shares as a country. 

Therefore, the only condition would be that for UDC to spend this money, we want you to spend it in acquiring more shares. Unless you acquire those shares in accordance with the provisions of the Companies’ Act, then you do not spend this money. To me, that would be the best way to answer this particular matter – (Interruption)

Mr katuntu: Thank you very much – 

The Deputy Speaker: And that is what I was saying. This is more of administrative. The money is not going to Atiak; it is going to UDC, which is our own institution. 

Mr musasizi: Madam Speaker, how I wish - 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Katuntu.

Mr katuntu: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we need to do things the right way. You cannot pass a budget with conditions. You cannot appropriate money with conditions; you do not do that in budgeting. You either appropriate money for use or you do not. You cannot say, “I am giving you this money but you will be doing it like this and that.” Appropriation of money is for a particular purpose. There is no way you can appropriate money and give conditions to it. 

The Deputy Speaker: Anyway, as hon. Wilfred Niwagaba said, I do not even know how you are mentioning Atiak in this thing because the money is going to UDC – (Mr Ekanya rose_) – I am not going to allow you. First sit down.

Mr moses aleper: Thank you, Madam Speaker – (Interjections) – I am providing information. There are two issues; one is about the issue of suppression of the budget. There is no need for amendment of the Appropriation Act because the size of the budget remains the same. You only require the amendment of the Appropriation Act if the size of the budget had changed. What has happened actually is this – in case of abstract – if, for example, a vote had Shs 3 billion allocated within it, what you call “suppression” is that certain budget lines have been rendered idle; for example, travels abroad and within the country. 

The issues that have cropped up are that, that money has been relocated within what is called a virement. Therefore, there is no need for amendment of the Appropriation Act.
Then, for the case of Atiak, this is what happens; if you vote money for the construction of a road -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, let us revise the Public Finance Management Act and speak to it. Let us not mislead the House. Honourable members, you have heard from both the Ruling and Opposition side - I have ruled. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, when we started the House, you said we needed to leave this place by 6 O'clock. Our safety is very important. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to leave this place by 5.30 p.m.; I now put the question that the minority report, as presented by hon. Kivumbi - 

Honourable members, I am putting the question. I am starting with the minority report. I put the question that the minority report, as presented by hon. Kivumbi, be adopted. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that the report of the committee, as presented by the Chairman of the Committee on Budget, be adopted by this House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, as the norm has been, we are going to supply on recurrent expenditure worth Shs 2,018,942,000 - on the recurrent expenditure, I propose that a total of Shs 2,018,942,898,703 be provided for under the supplementary budget 01 of the Financial Year 2021/2022.

I now put the question -

MR OPOLOT: There is a technical error. Madam Chairperson, I beg to make a correction on page 36 on the table. Where there is recurrent expenditure, cancel billion (bn); do the same for development expenditure and the grand total.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The correction has been captured. I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,018,942,898,703 be provided for recurrent expenditure under the supplementary budget 01 of the Financial Year 2021/2022.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Development Expenditure
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose that the total sum of Shs 1,758,645,054,089 be provided for development expenditure under the supplementary budget 01 of the Financial Year 2021/2022. 

I now put the question that a total of Shs 1,758,645,054,089 be provided for development expenditure under the supplementary schedule 01 for the Financial Year 2021/2022. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the grand total of Shs 3,777,587,952,792 be approved as a supplementary expenditure 01 for the Financial Year 2021/2022. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House resumes and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

6.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered Supplementary Schedule No.1 and passed it as follows:
    • Recurrent expenditure – Shs 2,018,942,898,703. 
    • Development expenditure – Shs 1,758,645,054,089.
    • The total sum of the supplementary expenditure under Schedule No.1 is Shs 3,777,587,952,792. 

I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

6.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

6.13
MR PATRICK OPOLOT (NRM, Kachumbala County, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank all the colleagues in this House. Thank you for approving and adopting the supplementary as processed by the committee. I would like to thank the strong Budget Committee which we have, supported by ex-officios – chairpersons of our sectoral committees – which was able to hold marathon meetings with entities, including even yesterday when there was a bomb scare. I thank you. The struggle continues (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much for the day. I adjourn the House to Tuesday at 2:00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 6.14 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 23 November 2021 at 2:00 p.m.)




