

Thursday, 17 November 2016

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYER

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting and as per our Rules of Procedure, on Thursdays, the private member’s business takes precedence. Although we have a statement from the Government, it will come slightly later; otherwise we are ready for work. Thank you.

2.42
MR GUTOMOI ABACANON (FDC, Erute North County, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in respect of our dear Ugandans who endeavoured to go into business in South Sudan between 2008 and 2010, when they exported maize grain to South Sudan. 

Indeed, we should appreciate the effort and risks these businessmen and women took. However, eight years down the road, these people have not been paid and they have been patiently waiting. Some of them have lost their property since they acquired loans from banks to do these businesses.

As a result, recently I think the Government of South Sudan honoured the plea by the Government of Uganda to pay these businessmen some money. They are in categories of A(1), B(1) and C. Some people in category A(1) were given some money sometime back but recently, a good sum of money was disbursed to the Government of Uganda to pay these businessmen. Unfortunately, some of our businessmen had their names omitted and their cases completely unattended to and they are suffering most. 

There is a case which is before this House in a petition by two businessmen, that is, Akejo General Enterprises Kampala Uganda and Gunya Company Limited. These businessmen are from Lira and have petitioned this Parliament, through their lawyer called Lugoloobi Associated Advocates. 

In the documents, they have also included a request - which is a letter from the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in this respect. They requested for legal assistance by the Government of the South Sudan. Attached on this list is a summary of URA data on Uganda maize exports (bags) to South Sudan under the 2010 Memorandum of Understanding by supplier/importer in the years 2008, 2009 and 2010. That is in annex one.

In annex 2, we have a summary of URA data on Uganda maize exports (bags) to South Sudan under the 2010 supplier/importer Memorandum of Understanding in 2008, 2009 and 2010. Under this, Akejo General Enterprises Kampala Uganda and Gunya Company Limited have been omitted from the list. What is surprising on this list is that some companies have been considered several times.

For example, we have Aponye which has been considered nine times and according to this report, they have already been considered for Shs 45 billion while others who are in group C, some of whom are individuals, have not been considered at all. 

These other two who have petitioned this Parliament are therefore praying that if possible Parliament intervenes and considers seeing how this payment can best be done so that every company that exported maize to South Sudan is considered somehow.

If it all goes to one company, then it cites one common aspect in Uganda called corruption. They pray that this payment be done and supervised fairly by our intervention. There are other people who also supplied to South Sudan but whose names are missing from the list. They say that there is a list with the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and with the Uganda Revenue Authority and if need be, they can be summoned to bring this list and an amicable way of payment be reached. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I would like us to be clear; are we talking about the South Sudan, Khartoum Government or the Government of South Sudan.

MR GUTOMOI: No, it is the Government of South Sudan, whose capital is in Juba. I beg to lay this document on the Table.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: The honourable member talks of categories one, two and three; can you clarify who is in category one and category two? 

THE SPEAKER: That is what he has laid. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development I do not know whether you are familiar with that situation. 

2.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

Yes, we are familiar with this situation and given the fact that it is a very serious matter as the member has said, I request you, Madam Speaker, to give me 10 minutes. I will give a brief statement to inform colleagues and the nation on what Government is doing about this matter. 

THE SPEAKER: After we have completed the Private Member’s business, you will be given time. Honourable members, I forgot yesterday to inform you that our colleague, hon. Kabaziguruka, the Member of Parliament for Nakawa, is out on bail. I was expecting him to come this afternoon but he has not. I just wanted you to know that he is back and has started work.

Interestingly, we have children here from Kisule Nursery and Primary School in Bukoto; they are represented by hon. Kabaziguruka and hon. Naggayi. You are welcome. (Applause)

2.50
DR MICHAEL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is with a heavy heart that I talk about this. Yesterday, I had a patient in Kawempe Hospital and because it is my business, I tried to establish the impact of the closure of Makerere University on medical services in the national referral hospital. I found out that every day, between eight and 16 children are either stillborn or die immediately after birth because of delays in making decisions on whether to carry out surgery. 

Where did this come from? Makerere University was closed and I know we talked about this. However, with the closure of Makerere University, the College of Health Sciences was also closed. The College of Health Sciences has 350 doctors - not interns. These are mid-level doctors who have gone back to do masters degrees. These doctors work as staff at Mulago Hospital while studying and they are not paid.

Therefore, when the university was closed on 1st November, there was a directive by the Minister of Education and Sports to re-open the college for the students to go back and offer free labour. The students said they are not labourers, so they asked to discuss with the relevant ministry following up on a directive by His Excellency. 

Madam Speaker, the President recently said that his ministers are in defiance. The President directed about three months ago that these post-graduate doctors who are called “residents” should be paid, because for them to work without being paid is modern day slavery. When the college was closed, 70 staff were withdrawn from Kawempe Hospital. Therefore, Kawempe has 30 doctors who are struggling to handle the situation for the last 17 days. They are being assisted, on a voluntary basis, by 15 lecturers from Makerere University. That makes it 45 staff at Kawempe and they are struggling to cope with this work. 

I have talked to the relevant people casually but nothing is being done, yet it is a silent genocide on Ugandans. This is worse than Ebola. When we did the mathematics of what they demand, it is about Shs 2 billion to complete the financial year and formalise the process of paying these resident doctors in the next budget.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that Parliament resolves that the relevant ministries of Finance and Health take up this as a matter of urgency. Since people are dying, I do not know whether Parliament can get a report to sort out this issue, because innocent Ugandans are dying. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can’t the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development raise Shs 2 billion to pay the resident doctors?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I am going to work with the Ministry of Health to see how we can arrest this situation. However, we had not been informed about it. Therefore, I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Health. I will liaise with the Ministry of Health and we see what we can do immediately.

THE SPEAKER: Can you give us a report on Tuesday because the children really need support.

MR BAHATI: Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we also have in the public gallery pupils and teachers from Mbuligwe Primary School, Makulubita Sub-County, Katikamu South in Luweero. They are represented by hon. Ssembatya and hon. Eng. Nakate. Are they here? They are not? Let me also check whether the ones of Mawoito Church of Uganda Primary School, Buwenge in Jinja District are there. Please stand up. They are represented by hon. Walyomu and hon. Katali. You are welcome. (Applause)

STATEMENT ON MISMANAGEMENT OF UGANDA TELECOM COMPANY LIMITED IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 25(4) OF THE RULES PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

2.54
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri West County, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Ugandans own 31 per cent of shares in Uganda Telecom Limited (UTL). Initially it was 49 per cent but around 2008 or 2009 or 2010, we lost 18 per cent. A Libyan company called Libyan Africa Portfolio Green Network took over. When they took over, we were privatising, following the 1997 Act, which separated Uganda Telecom from Posta and the Government maintained 100 per cent control of Posta.

Madam Speaker, you are aware that UTL is the one providing services to Parliament of Uganda, the Uganda Police Force, the Uganda People’s Defence Forces and government departments and ministries. It used to be called the preferred service provider until of recent.

Uganda Telecom Limited has not been audited for the last four years yet under the National Audit Act, even if you have one shilling in a company, the Auditor-General is supposed to audit. We do not know why we have not had the audit, yet we have 31 per cent shares in the company. 

UTL is on the verge of collapsing, if it has not collapsed already. There is a Cabinet memo dated 20 May 2015 which says, “Report of Cabinet committee arising from the Cabinet Memorandum CT/20/15/55 on challenges facing Uganda Telecom Limited (UTL)”. I think that means that Government was aware.
 
The recommendations which were directed to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development were the following:

    a) To develop a rescue plan and to implement it.
    b) To review classification of UTL to either “Class A” or “Class B” in view of the strategic importance of UTL, and the most important one was to; 
    c) Undertake a forensic audit to establish the credibility of UTL’s balance sheet and why their accounts had not been audited.

There were many recommendations but that is it. However, Cabinet was also aware that UTL was indebted to a tune of Shs 150 billion to the Uganda Revenue Authority, Uganda Communications Commission and other suppliers.

Madam Speaker, given those facts, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development never took any action. However, of importance are the frequent changes of top management and poor management. After the Libyan crisis of 2011, UTL has had frequent changes in top management. It has had six managing directors - almost an MD a year. It has had eight chief technical officers. It has had nine finance officers and the last finance officer to resign came in May. He resigned a few days after being paid and they recruited another one recently.

The current MD is called Mark Jude Shoebridge. He resigned in July 2015 as Chief Fixed Service Officer only to return in February 2016, six months later, as managing director.

Madam Speaker, the current top management has about four people. The four take Shs 420 million per month. The Managing Director takes Shs 150 million, the Chief Financial Officer takes Shs 120 million, the Chief Legal Officer takes Shs 90 million and the Chief Human Resource Officer takes Shs 60 million per month. Those four only take Shs 420 million, in addition to some shady deals which I am going to demonstrate to you that have led UTL to bleed and yet we have a chairperson who is representing Uganda and one man from the Privatisation Unit called Mwase. They are just enjoying per diem and monthly sitting allowances. In fact, they are paid a retainer of US$1,500 per month.

Madam Speaker, the following are UTL’s debts. The Uganda Communication Commission, as we speak, is owed Shs 27 billion. This is the one per cent charged on the phone calls that we make. The second one is the interconnectivity with MTN, which is Shs 8 billion. Thirdly is Uganda Revenue Authority; this is VAT charged when you make a phone call. UTL is supposed to collect and remit it to URA but they do not remit. Among this, is the withholding tax and excise duty - you remember the 33 - on your iPads you will see it.  As we speak, it stands at Shs 58 billion.

We also have the Huawei Technologies which is about Shs 25 billion and non-remittance of NSSF of staff - the 10 per cent and five per cent which they claim they have deducted; Shs 16 billion.

Madam Speaker, I would like to give an example of how these guys steal. There was an agreement to rent a house for one of the staff, who is the managing director. It says, “The monthly rent shall be US$ 5,000, payable six months in advance”. The interesting bit is this: “The applicable Withholding Tax shall be borne by the tenant.” Withholding Tax is a tax of the person who is supposed to pay. This should have been deducted from the US$ 5000. However, this means that UTL must pay withholding tax on behalf of the owner of the property because they are saying that the applicable withholding tax shall be borne by the tenant. Of course the tenant here is UTL. This is very bad. Hon. Bahati knows such contracts; they are quite dangerous.

Madam Speaker, there is asset stripping. As we speak, they have so far sold three prime areas. One of them is on Plot 41-47, 5th Street Industrial area near Diary Corporation Ltd. It is a very prime area which was sold without tendering but just negotiations under the table. They signed it off and sold it to a company called Magnet Construction Company Ltd. There was no advert and if they had advertised, the market value of that property, according to the valuer should have been US$12.5 million. However, they sold it at US$4.9 million. That was the valuation report.

Plot 1-7 Nsambya Road in Nakivubo was also sold off. Again the people who signed off were Mark Shoebridge, one Nambale the lawyer and Bob Kabonero and the chairman. This was sold at US$ 1.56 million and yet the valuation was Shs 5,484 billion. It was sold for not even a quarter of the value.

They have also sold off Mengo Exchange and Mbuya Exchange and there are more properties lined up for sale. These are the following: Plots 125, 128, 130, 131, 132, 133, 142, 143 and 273 Kibuga Block 38 Makerere, Wandegeya - You have seen that very big prime area in Wandegeya. There is also plot 41-43 Kyambogo. I will lay all these documents on the Table.

There is Plot 2, Siad Barre Avenue in Nakasero opposite Rwenzori Courts, which is currently used for parking. Even the masts and upcountry stations are on the verge of being finished. I have here the list of those places which are going to be sold immediately according to UTL - upcountry - and the map of Uganda, which I will lay on the Table.

Madam Speaker, this is how some of the theft is being done. There is a Bandwidth company called BCL Group. This company was supposed to have provided a dark fibre and UTL was supposed to provide some equipment to do the work. However, when they entered into agreement, which was non cash because each of them was supposed to provide facilities, UTL provided the majority - about 90 per cent but this company never even made 50 per cent. 

However, of interest - going by default, Uganda Telecom is paying this company on average US$430,000 per month, yet it has not done what it was supposed to have done. As we speak, UTL has just paid US$471,682 yet the company is in dire need of more money. The agreement clearly says that none of them was supposed to pay since it was a non-cash agreement. The question is, why do you pay? The interested party here is the managing director because it is believed he knew this company very well because he is the one who brought this company on board.

Madam Speaker, they procured a certificate from the Uganda Land Commission. Initially, this was under the Uganda Post and Telecommunication at a lease of 99 years. However, changing the lease to UTL cost Shs 1.5 million but they went ahead and planned a claim of Shs 160 million in 2014 and 2015. Again the managing director was the one who did it with the legal officer. 

There is a company called Payment to DISC Africa Ltd.  They paid this company Shs 34 million cash for services not known and yet the standard order of UTL says anything above Shs 200,000 must be by cheque. It is believed that the MD wanted cash hence the Shs 34 million payment. In addition to that, I have here blank cheques whereby they went and told the finance officer (the one lower in rank) that they needed blank cheques. This is what the finance officer said, “I have about 10 for now but they are many.”

Blank cheques were signed and released to James Wilde, Chief Financial Officer, upon instructions from Mark Shoebridge, the Managing Director on Friday, 26 August 2016. He was busy filling in money between the Chief Financial Officer and the Managing Director and picking money. For one of them, they picked US$7,500 dollars, another one was US$10,000 dollars, they picked another US$ 17,000 dollars and others are yet to be got. The cheques are hereby attached.

Madam Speaker, the chief financial officer was recruited recently at a cost of US$ 64,080. The people who recruited him are in London. I have searched them – it is a small company in UK which deals in stationary but how it came to recruit - (Laughter)- we do not know the reason they recruited him at that amount. This is the agreement and they paid the company to recruit somebody who was in Uganda. They had formed a company called Sub-Sahara Group in which he owns 999 shares and his other colleague owns one share. 

This company is now doing audits of sites in UTL, repairing vehicles and providing breakdown services and the owner of the company is the chief finance officer. I have the memorandum here, which I will lay down showing clearly he has 999 shares and the other one has one. If you go by percentage, it is 99.9 per cent.

Recently, he got a contract to audit 472 sites at Shs 100 million. To audit sites, you visit the sites and check whether the generator is working and leave. Therefore, it is just driving around Kampala and upcountry a bit and you come back to collect Shs 100 million.

Madam Speaker, I have talked about the salary. It is Shs 420 million and this is a third of the salary workforce of 500 workers of UTL. Therefore, it means 500 workers of UTL get a third of what the other one is getting in three months.

Dubai

This company made a deal that it is going to have the headquarters in Dubai, since the one in Libya was closed. I am trying to summarise so that -

THE SPEAKER: Maybe let me introduce these children who are here, as you take some water. (Laughter) 

Honourable members, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Barkley High School, Iganga District represented by hon. Andrew Kiiza Kaluya and hon. Hailat Kaudha. You are welcome. I do not know whether the team from Makulubita has come. Have the children of Buligwe Primary School from Makulubita come? 

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, please conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I couldn’t get the water.

THE SPEAKER: It is coming. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Despite talk that LAP Green headquarters closed in Dubai, UTL management has continued flying out purportedly for meetings in Dubai and Malta. No capital is being injected into the company. One such trip is when money was requested for in May 2016, signed for and received by Ms Stephen Kaboyo, the chairperson; Moses Mwase, the one of privatisation, hon. Aston Kajara, the then Minister for Privatisation and David Nambale, who is the legal officer. They travelled and ate per diem and came back empty handed.

It is not clear who is the owner of UTL because there were press reports by the former ambassador to Libya saying the people coming here to Uganda as ministers are just masqueraders posing for photos in Uganda, yet they cannot do the same in Libya to confirm their genuineness. Available information confirms the closure of LAP Green offices in Dubai 2014. It seems there is a cartel that is masquerading as LAP Green and it is busy siphoning money from UTL.

Madam Speaker, as we speak, the former and current workers have taken to court against UTL and NSSF. Initially, UTL took NSSF to court demanding for the money which it has been contributing saying it was being collected wrongly because there were two retirement schemes: one for NSSF and another called Uganda Communication Employees’ Union which was under Government.

The first one was in Labour Court. Unfortunately, it never took off and it went to High Court where the Lady Justice Lydia Mugambe ruled in favour of UTL in September 2016 saying NSSF must return the money to UTL. The issue here is: the Shs 35 billon you would like to return belongs to workers. If you return it to a company which has collapsed, these four people are going to take the money away from the workers since they have their own ways. 

For your information, for COSASE’s members who are here, one of the persons who were involved in the issue of NSSF was David Nambale. By then, he was the corporation secretary and the lawyer. He left NSSF but when he went to UTL, he said UTL was contributing wrongly and yet when he was at NSSF, he never said there were wrongful contributions. Such people are very dangerous. [MR SSEWUNGU: “I would like to give you some information.”] You will give me information later.

Madam Speaker, as we speak, the network of UTL is shrinking at a very fast rate due to poor services, theft and vandalism. These involve siphoning fuel, spares, equipment and paying for non-existing workers. They claim they would like to close some sites because demand is not high and yet MTN and Airtel are running to increase their capacity there. So far, they are lining up 46 sites for closure by October 2016. I am sure they have done it already.

Madam Speaker, there is lack of investment in this network. The so-called investor is not investing anything. What he is doing is picking what belongs to us. The issues I have talked about: land and equipment, were the old ones they got from UTL. They came with nothing and are now selling our equipment so that they can run away with the money. The earlier we wake up, the better.

Their accounts have not been audited. That is why you can see that an internal auditor can even allow a blank cheque. I have never heard of a blank cheque except in UTL. Personally, if I am to leave a cheque with my staff, at least I’ll put an amount that should not be exceeded. Otherwise, it can easily be exceeded. What about this? The petty cash going out on average is over Shs 1.5 billion. This was even reported last year in the media.

Madam Speaker, because of the information coming to Parliament, the people are now threatening workers. One of them is the Chief Human Resource Officer. This Chief Human Resource Officer was recently hired from Warid. However, when he came, he was welcomed by a handshake of Shs 60 million and another US$6,000 advanced to him yet he was going to earn Shs 60 million per month. The payments are here and they will be laid at the Table.

They are threatening workers to lay them off and terminate their contracts under unclear circumstances. Recently, the managing director requested for passwords for all the information systems and has blocked some staff from accessing some of the systems. Normally, the passwords are only accessed by heads of department and the IT stations. Madam Speaker, if I have my staff in finance, it is the head of finance to access the passwords and not the managing director. The MD can only access the password of the head of department.

In conclusion, Government owns 31 per cent shares in UTL, that was once a giant and that still provides services to its institutions like Government of Uganda, the public and others. It is a major player in the economy and should not be allowed to be killed by a few individuals.

I would like to make proposals and recommendations but before I make the recommendations, I would like to lay papers first. This is the map of Uganda showing the network of UTL; these are the sites they want to close and one of them is Jinja-Bujagali. 

I would like to lay the contract in which Sub-Sahara was paid Shs 100 million. Sub-Sahara is owned by the chief finance officer. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to lay, the “hand-shake” of Shs 60 million and the advance of US$ 6,000 when they were welcoming the human resource manager, a one Emmanuel Jones Kasule, who is threatening everybody. He is chief human resource and administrative officer.

I would like to lay an agreement of rent of US$ 5,000 per month payable six months in advance. It expires on 25 June 2018. The most interesting bit is that they paid US$ 5,000 without deducting withholding Tax, which is tax for the landlord. Instead the tax was paid by UTL on their behalf.

Madam Speaker, I would like to lay the blank cheques which the Managing Director, a one Shoebridge gave to his friend, James Wilde the chief finance officer, who owns the Sub-Sahara Group, which is doing business with UTL and the payments they transacted in the bank.

Madam Speaker, I would like to lay the BCS agreement and the payments they have made so far but of interest are the comments where the staff said, “There is no way we should pay this company.” This was a non-cash agreement and they have not fulfilled what they are supposed to have done and yet they are going ahead to pay. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to lay the agreement of sale of plot 4147 to Magnet Construction Limited. I would like to lay the demand from URA of Shs 58 billion - by the way, this is by December 2015; by now we do not know what it is. 

This is UCC - Shs 27 billion; Shs 8 billion - MTN. This is the contract and the voucher by Wehe Mark Quarter international; the one which recruited James Wilde at 20 per cent of gross base pay $ 64,080. They are found in Eastern fasix BN14LJ UK. It is a small stationery place. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to lay the agreement of $1.7 million of AWIL demanding from UTL. This is the agreement for sale of property of the one of Mbuya down there to NTAKA limited. This is where some people are raising or about to be sure that it should be a non-cash agreement.

I would like to lay the document where a one Mwase, who is a civil servant, is being paid $1,429 per month as a retainer as a board member of UTL plus $6,000 being paid to Stephen Kaboyo. These are the minutes. 

I would like to lay the Cabinet memo - and it was serious; they had even proposed a takeover but I do not know what happened. It shows that there should have been a forensic audit which has not been done to date.

Madam Speaker, these are the valuation reports for the plots I mentioned of 125 and others and also the ones they have sold. This is the one for Sub-Sahara Group, where they were getting the Shs 100 million and the memorandum and articles of association are attached, you can see; 999 shares plus one share. Here it is.

These are the titles of how they stole the Shs 160 million. This is where they paid DISC Africa Shs 34 million in cash and the Shs 160 million which was taken to chase the lease. This is the file –(Laughter)- this is the one on fuel theft. 

I would like to conclude by requesting that this acting at UTL must be stopped immediately by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development or Parliament taking action that these people who are involved are either put aside as investigations in UTL take place.

Secondly, a forensic audit for the last four years be carried out quickly to find out these people who are stealing our own resources and the Auditor-General should have audited. Why didn’t he audit under the National Audit Act?

Madam Speaker, because of UTL being an important aspect, I would plead that you set up a committee of Parliament to quickly investigate Uganda Telecom -(Applause)- and those culprits who have been responsible for the UTL affairs should be prosecuted once found to have abated or aided acts of defrauding UTL, which is our company.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. We have a shareholder in the ministry of finance but I do not know what the Prime Minister would like to say on this matter. Let us hear from the shareholders.

3.29
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi. These are very important revelations. I do not know what line you are going to take, but I would like to propose that you give an opportunity to the privatisation minister, who is currently indisposed but is represented by hon. Bahati, so that the House has both sides of the report. We shall then be able to debate it with full information from both sides.

In advance, we would like to thank our colleagues for always having very investigative reports. I am sure hon. Nandala-Mafabi has taken a lot of time to bring out all this information. My prayer is that if the Speaker can allow us on Tuesday -(Interjections) - no, I would just like to propose and then you can say what you want. I pray that the Speaker allows so that the minister is able to come back here and tell us his side of the story. I thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: I thank you, Madam Speaker. It was within your wise communication that you warned the ministers about their absence. I would like to thank all those ministers who have responded to the Speaker’s call.

As of now, the Attorney-General of Uganda is not around and he is an irregular member here. What hon. Nandala-Mafabi has given us involves a lot of legal issues and yet the Attorney-General and his deputy are not here. They are both irregular in the House –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I gave permission to the Attorney-General to go and attend a meeting concerning the International Criminal Court.

MR SSEWUNGU: The Deputy Attorney-General is also not around. Madam Speaker, I thank you, for giving the Attorney-General permission like you also do for us. However, that aside, he is always absent.

With due respect to the Deputy Prime Minister, I have liked his directive to the minister. He directed the minister to stand and the minister did stand. We always see ministers here but they report to the ministry. Hon. David Bahati is from the finance ministry – why don’t we give some additional information and then we shall conclude the matter. Parliament continues whether the minister is around or not. Whatever we say goes onto the record.

The issue of UTL is not a joking subject. We did carry out investigations on some of its issues. Madam Speaker, you sent us to handle the NSSF – when I was trying to interject and give hon. Nandala-Mafabi information about David Nambale and transfer of funds from NSSF to UTL, we did see the connivance. The Government has spent money on construction of masts.

Two weeks ago, I was with the Leader of the Opposition in Moyo. We saw dysfunctional masts. The people in Moyo are not connected. I do not know whether UTL mobile still works – you could research from MPs here who have the UTL mobile code 071. It is only the Government that is paying.

Madam Speaker, would it be procedurally okay that we give some additional information and then the minister can – Gen. Moses Ali fears to give out facts on the taxes that Government is losing and that is why teachers are not getting their money.

I would like to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for dissecting this company in the manner I handle the education sector. We shall give information and leave no stone unturned. Gen. Moses Ali, you know that the mistakes are Government created. You left the company to struggle alone. 

We have information that there is somebody from the Uganda Communications Commission who has travelled within two months and spent over Shs500 million. It is on record that none of them is supposed to travel business class. 

We have information that we shall reveal here. People are amassing wealth from this company and the company is collapsing. The buses transporting people and mail have broken down. I suggest that we continue. Gen. Moses Ali, what is your fear? You are the Prime Minister as of now and you can command. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if I were in court, I would have said that hon. Nandala-Mafabi has made a prima facie case on this matter. I do not know whether we need to waste time debating it or we just agree to investigate immediately.

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: The minister can take the information to the committee. This is a prima facie case.
 
3.35
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for the good and undisputable research that he has laid on the Table of the House. 

I pray to the Deputy Prime Minister that he finds it within his powers and heart to accept that a select committee of this House is put in place, without even meandering around so that the committee uses the Nandala-Mafabi report to carry out further investigations and then we shall possibly be able to discuss the issues when that committee reports to the House. 

I pray that we do not waste more time and that we should simply put a select committee to look into the issues of UTL and when they report, that is when each of us will input into the outcome of the committee. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, looking at our records here, when it comes to select committees, it sometimes takes really long for the findings to find their way to the House.

My proposal, which is subject to your procedural ruling is that why don’t we send this report to COSASE so that we can be assured?

Madam Speaker, you instituted a select committee to investigate the illegal degazettement of Nonve Forest. I was a member of that committee. We concluded our investigations in November last year but the report has never found its way to Parliament. That is my only fear.

Would it, therefore, be procedurally right that we send it to a complete committee of the House? I thank you, very much.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry to come in before your ruling on a procedural matter. However, I imagine that you will consider both sides as you make a ruling.

My humble appeal is that we do not congest COSASE for now as it is already involved in a lot of work on behalf of this House. As we may all be aware, COSASE deals with the Auditor-General’s reports and if it is not a matter that is coming out of the Auditor-General’s report, then the mandate of COSASE may be diverted.

I am of the view that we come up with a select committee that we shall give specific timelines within which to report because this matter is so dear to all of us. Let us off load the matter from COSASE and we give this to a select committee because it would do a thorough job and we would ensure that it reports, Madam Speaker.

MR LUBOGO: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for the statement he has made.

I beg to differ from what my colleagues have submitted. I request for your procedural guidance on this particular matter. The issue has come up as a Member’s statement and it has recommendations for this House to adopt. For the short time that I have been here, I would have expected that this matter should have come by way of a motion, we debate and we make resolutions to it. 

What we are doing is going to have an impact on how we shall conduct business later. I am also trying to bring up a statement with recommendations. I need your guidance on whether we can vary a member’s statement and two, whether this is how we should be conducting such a matter but I do appreciate that it is very important. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I will give my ruling after 10 minutes. Let us go to another item. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for the statement he has made on UTL; and to confirm that UTL is not in a good state, and that there is something wrong. Government has put in place some steps to correct the situation. We shall accept the committee but in our opinion, it would be better if this issue was handled by the sessional Committee on ICT. 

Yesterday, you saw what happened; you remember we wanted the issue of mining of sand to be in a select committee and some of us asked why the sessional committee shouldn’t handle it. Yesterday, you saw the Natural Resources Committee do a fantastic job in the way they handled their work. 

Therefore, since the ICT committee is not overcrowded currently, they would go on and do the work because this is their work. We are willing to give information to any committee whether select or sessional that you will put in place, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we gave the ICT committee two Bills and we gave them 45 days in which to report. Those Bills came at the end of the Ninth Parliament and the second one came I think in the Tenth Parliament. However, this is not just about IT, it is about fraud, accountability – it is really mixed up. 

And to respond to the issue of hon. Kenneth Lubogo, hon. Nandala-Mafabi brought a statement but at the end he made some prayers. Therefore, it is okay if we proceed and consider his prayers because they are part of his statement. (Applause) 

Let us have a few discussions on – oh, do you want to say something honourable minister? Let us have some discussions on the prayers. Leave the content for the committee. 

3.43
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for the job well done. He has brought up information that we did not know that in this country, there are so many fake companies that are stealing resources. 

There is a Ugandan who studied in Libya and when Col. Gadhafi passed on, this fellow fronted so many fake companies from Libya to come and loot Uganda; one time they had wanted even to take the Nile Hotel. They have taken Entebbe Hotel, the white flats in Bukoto and so many other properties under the pretext that during the war, which Gen. Moses Ali knows about, Libya gave this country arms, and, therefore, they must be paid in kind. They came and grabbed. You can see daylight robbery, stealing the resources of Uganda and we are just looking on. 

Madam Speaker, I pray that you set up a select committee to work on this issue specifically. The unfortunate part of it is that when you have got less than 50 per cent in a company – I think this auditor has to be changed. The Auditor-General has no right to go and audit; that is why these people are taking money at liberty. The question of saying that the minister is not here – there is hon. Bahati, who is a minister from Finance. So, I pray that you set up a select committee to investigate the robberies that have taken place in –(Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. According to the National Audit Act, any company where Government has even a single shilling is supposed to be audited by the Auditor-General. You do not have to have majority shareholding to be audited. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Have you been auditing UGMA?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is the National Audit Act but what is happening is that most of these companies have powerful god-fathers in the Ministry of Finance, who do not allow things to happen. How can UTL where we have 31 per cent not be audited for over four years? 

Under the Companies Act, there is what we call the annual returns. This is a public company and it must file annual returns. Finance should have asked where the 31 per cent interest is but they are just sitting comfortably and that also applies to UGMA, which he mentioned. There are so many companies which we cannot talk about now. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Hon. Bahati, as hon. Nandala-Mafabi said, there are so many companies that the Auditor-General does not go to audit. As the Minister of State for Finance, you should have brought this information to us but you bury your heads in the sand and you do not want it to come to us.

When this information comes, you want it to go to the committee, which has a lot of work. We want this to be investigated urgently so that these fellows do not run away; they must be brought to book. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.46
MR ABACANON GUTUMOI (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This matter which has been exposed by hon. Nandala-Mafabi is very important. My experience with select committees of Parliament to investigate such an important matter like this is not good. They sometimes end up in a very unserious manner. 

I remember in the Eighth Parliament, a select committee was put in place to address issues on the relations between the police and the public and then the police and honourable members of Parliament. I was on that select committee and our chairperson, who then became the Attorney-General, disappeared with that report up to date, for reasons which have not been explained by Government. 

I, therefore, advise that when selecting the people to do this very important task, you have to be very careful because some of these honourable members who pretend to be very serious about issues later disappear or distort information. 

In that report which we worked so hard to produce, when he was presenting it to the committee, we realised that he left out some very important information. Even some discoveries were ignored. I decided to come out with a minority report and when I presented it to the committee, the honourable member disappeared with the main report to-date. So, Madam Speaker, be careful. Thank you very much. 

3.48
MR ARINAITWE RWAKAJARA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for being our investigator and being strong enough to bring these facts out. Thank you so much. 

Madam Speaker, some of us get such information and we know how UTL is being brought down. Honestly, it is very unfortunate that in the Ministry of Finance – I suspect there is a representative on that board from Ministry of Finance. It is a culture of such people who represent ministries on those boards to end up owning those companies.

Madam Speaker, I have no doubt that we should have this select committee in place – and it should be immediately. However, I will insist that the top management should immediately step aside as we investigate. (Applause)

There is no government company that should not be audited even for one year. If it is true that they missed even one year, the management should step aside and the investigation starts immediately.

And my humble request is that the committee should be constituted immediately so that it can start work immediately.
Thank you.

3.50
MS CONNIE GALIWANGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank hon. Nandala for the good research and information that he has given to this House. I want to note that UTL is just one out of the very many mismanaged public entities. Having a select committee is a very good idea – I buy it. However, Madam Speaker, my humble request is that this select committee, as for now, should not be announced here because the culprits are going to look out for these Members immediately – I request that you do not say the Members who will compromise the committee. But the committee can begin doing its work and no work should be stopped. Maybe, we give them a timeframe so that the work will be finished within a particular limited time so that the report is brought to the House immediately. Otherwise, this is very urgent and has to be worked on immediately. Thank you.

3.52
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You know I am always disturbed by such happenings; Uganda is being looted by the elite who are in some of these offices.

When you look at this report, it is not the only one; I will give you another one so that you understand. There is one called Uganda Property Holdings Limited – the one handling our properties in Mombasa. They get Shs 6 billion and then they give the country only Shs 150 million. And who are the people on these boards? They are basically big shots in government like ministers. This is something annoying and disturbing because that is destroying our own country – it appears as though we were just passing through, en route to a different country and yet Uganda is our country. That is why we must condemn such acts, and must be willing to mention those who are in the wrong.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, we should not be intimidated. If we are going to be intimidated by anybody, we shall not save this country. Thank you very much.

3.52
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora North County, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we were vetting the ministers, one of the reasons that were given for the high number of ministers by most members who were in support of the big number, was that they were going to be more effective. That was the premise on which this Parliament pronounced itself on that matter.

What is coming out is that, actually the big number of ministers is not helping this country. In the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Planning alone, there are more than four ministers, but what are they doing if they cannot even know such rot that has transpired for the last four years?

So, Madam Speaker, I just want to bring it to the attention of this House that, in the wisdom of Government and President Museveni, privatisation is going to address the challenge of corruption in most of the state enterprises.

Madam Speaker, when you look at the Uganda Commercial Bank, all its former assets have been grabbed; Uganda Railways Corporation, their land and property have been grabbed; talk of the Civil Aviation Authority and you will see that their properties have also been grabbed. So what are we left with, as a country?

I just want to ask you, Madam Speaker, and seek your indulgence that these individuals who hon. Nandala has mentioned, their passports should immediately be withdrawn from them, so that they do not flee the country. If they are left with their passports, they may leave even tomorrow yet they have stolen a lot of money. They can run away with our money yet our citizens are dying of hunger in Isingiro and Teso, while thugs are stealing money that would have bought food for them.

When the President launched this term, he said it would be a term of no jokes “kisanja hakuna mchezo”. Now, Gen. Ali, as the Leader of Government Business, what are you doing to achieve that? The President has directed that this term of kisanja hakuna mchezo –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I do not know whether we should really go into a debate. I think we should just take a decision to adopt the prayer to establish a select committee.

I put the question that this House do adopt the prayers to establish a select committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The next one is on the number; nine or seven? Seven, members? Okay, honourable members, the question is that, should the committee be comprised of seven members?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, the third one – I was just trying to establish the names of the big people there: Mr Shoebridge, Mr Wilde, Mr Nambale, Mr Mwase – who was the other one? The ones who have been running the - 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: There is Mr Wilde, who is the Chief Finance Officer – 

THE SPEAKER: James Wilde? And then there is Nambale?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: They are: Shoebridge, Nambale and Kasule Emmanuel.

THE SPEAKER: And Mwase?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Mwase is there -(Interjections)- no, Stephen Kaboyo is the board chairman. And yes, Madam Speaker, you are right; Mwase is from the Privatisation Unit.

THE SPEAKER: So, the question is that those people who have been named be restrained from travelling while the investigations are on-going.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: So, honourable members, we shall work out the details and give you the set-up on Tuesday -(Interjections)- the minister? Yes, hon. Aston Kajara, former minister should also be included on that list. Duration? Is two months adequate? The committee is to report within two months. Okay, next item.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL, “THE NATIONAL GRADUATE SERVICE BILL, 2016” IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 25(4) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was informed that the Members are doing some mobilisation around that area; we shall have that issue on Tuesday.

MR GODFREY KATUSABE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Tuesday 15 November, you promised to create time to give members and this House an opportunity to debate the status or the predicament of Makerere University. 

Today being the last day of sitting this week, I am at pain because members and myself stand a risk of being confronted by angry parents and students just because we have not given this pertinent item due attention. So- 

THE SPEAKER: We shall give it time at the end of this sitting. 

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: In the next one hour. 

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 25(4) OF THE RULES PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

4.01
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I seek your indulgence on this particular item, because according to our Rules of Procedure, I am supposed to read out the number of the question. However, I have not received an answer to this question, so I am praying that the item be deferred and probably the minister be required to supply the answer so that it comes out on another day altogether.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister knows that he or she is required to supply the answer in advance to the member. I know that my office reminded the ministry over two months ago about this issue, but let us push it to Tuesday and he must also supply the answer to my office today. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO MAKE GIRL-CHILD EDUCATION A PRIORITY IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 25(4) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

4.02
MS EVERLYN CHEMUTAI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): The motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to prioritise girl-child education is moved under Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure. 

“WHEREAS Objective XVIII (ii) of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy mandates the state to take appropriate measures to afford every citizen equal opportunity to attain the highest education standard possible;

AND WHEREAS the same Constitution in Article 21(1) provides for equality of all persons before and under the law in all spheres of political, economic, social and cultural life and in every other respect and shall enjoy equal protection of the law; 

FURTHER NOTING THAT the same Article 21(2) protects a person from discrimination on the ground of sex, race, colour, ethnic origin, tribe, birth, creed or religion, social or economic standing, political opinion or disability; 

AND WHEREAS the right to education is a fundamental right enshrined in Article 30 of the Constitution is expected to be enjoyed by all persons of Uganda, and Article 34(2) places a responsibility of providing basic education to children on the state and parents;

FURTHER AWARE THAT there are various social, cultural, economic as well as religious obstacles to the enjoyment of the fundamental rights to education by the girl-child;

RECOGNISING THAT the state is empowered under Article 32 of the Constitution to take affirmative action in favour of groups marginalised on the basis of gender, age, disability or any other reason created by history, tradition or custom for the purpose of redressing imbalances which exist against them;

FURTHER RECOGNISING THAT the same Article 32(5) empowers Parliament to make laws for purposes of giving full effect to this article;

NOTING THAT the state has a duty created in Article 33 to provide facilities and opportunities necessary to enhance the welfare of women to enable them to realise their full potential and advancement, and to protect them taking into account their unique status and natural maternal functions in society;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that this Parliament urges Government to:

    1. Consider girl child education as a priority by- 
    a) Expediting the process of presenting a Bill to Parliament, which is intended to encourage the maintenance and support of the girl child at school; 
    b) Ensuring that the budget proposals presented to Parliament contain provisions which prioritise gender equality in favour of the girl-child with a view of facilitating and promotion of their education.
    2. Expediting the process of presenting a Bill to Parliament which provides explicitly for the protection of the girl- child against sexual offences.”

I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded by hon. Margaret Baba Diri. 

4.06
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion for Government to prioritise girl-child education. 

Madam Speaker, you are aware that the girl child has been marginalised and discriminated against since time immemorial right from birth. When a baby girl is born, the parents are usually not happy because they would rather it were a boy. In some cultures, they do not buy meat for the lactating mother because she has produced a girl. If she produces a second one, they complain and the mother is sent away. This girl is only loved heartily by the mother so the discrimination starts from there. 

The girl-child grows up to imitate the burden of her mother. She is the very one who is supposed to cook at home, fetch water, collect firewood, carry the baby on her back and to do all the work the mother does when she is away. She, therefore, becomes the slave of the home. 

When it comes to education and the money is not enough, preference is given to the boy child while the girl-child remains at home. The girl child, therefore, grows up knowing that her work is domestic. Leave alone that; when the girl attains the age of 15, the parents will celebrate and get ready to marry her off in order to get bride price. This bride price will later be used to pay the boy’s school fees, leaving out the girl.

When the girl goes to school, even the school environment is not conducive. In some schools, there are no separate toilets or bathrooms for changing pads when the girl child is in her menstrual periods. The girl-child, therefore, feels out of place and prefers to sit at home and wait until her period is over.

The teachers also have a negative attitude towards the girls. They believe girls cannot perform well at mathematics so when the girls try to answer mathematics questions, they are told that they are useless. You find that the girl will not get courage to study mathematics, physics and chemistry. With all this, the girl child requires affirmative action and also prioritisation in form of money to support her education. 

We are also grateful to the Government that it has given us Universal Primary Education (UPE). But how many girls are reaching university? How many girls qualify? If you consider primary schools, the girls drop out. I can give you one example in a school in my district; Lima Primary School.

They started with 250; both girls and boys. Normally at that age, the girls are more than the boys, but as they go higher to primary seven, they ended up only 20 and out of the 20, four only were girls. Where have all the girls gone? They have dropped out of school.

So, that is why we feel that affirmative action is very necessary. It should be given to entry in public universities. We demand that this affirmative action should start from primary seven, after PLE. This is because; many girls drop out at that age. By the time they reach university level, they are very few. So, the affirmative action should start all the way from primary seven, senior four and senior six up to university.

This is to enable us to push more girls to higher education and they complete their school, so that they can contribute to the development of Uganda. You all know how useful girls are; when a girl completes school and gets money, she uses it more carefully than a man. (Laughter) Yes, her money is for the family - for the children.

I can give you one example, a research was done; when you go to a workshop and you give Shs 10,000 to each participant, the man will go back home with Shs 2,000, while the woman will go with Shs 8,000. What happens is that the man drinks the rest and uses the balance for his benefits. So, when we have educated women - you have heard that our economy can grow, our families will become healthy, and they will also contribute for the education of their children. So, let us support the education of the girl- child. 

We are also aware that the women who are educated, take family planning seriously while those who stay at home believe that their work is to produce. You find that they have got very many children. It is very difficult to sensitise and change their mind set. So, it is very important that we send our children to school so that the girls can understand and live quality life. Even the heads of families at home, a girl who is educated can keep a healthy home; hygiene at home is very good and thus, the family members will be healthy.

This also applies in a situation where both the man and woman are working, the home is better off financially. So, I really implore Members to support the idea of prioritising girls’ education. We need that law so that we embark on policy formulation on girls’ education, and then we move to coming up with an Act on girls education. This will help us in that whatever is put in place is by law rather than at people’s mercy. I, therefore, support all the prayers there and I urge you to support our resolution. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for justifying the motion. Oh, the mover is back – 

MS CHEMUTAI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have statistics that show that the girl-child rate of dropping out of school is going higher by the day. By last year, we had 13 per cent at primary school level, 30 per cent at secondary level – actually, they do not complete school. Then, there is something that is alarming; the rate of HIV/AIDS is so alarming among the girls, between 10-19 years of age.

There are statistics that show that for every new infection; about 257 girls are infected daily. If you make an estimate, it is about 83,000 girl children infected per year. If we keep these girls out of school, they will not learn about HIV and its effects.

Then, there is a new discovery that the girl-child, especially from the slums, is getting so much addicted to harmful drugs, like marijuana, among others, and you know the effects of such drugs. 

This is my prayer to this House, that the girls’ campaign should be done in the whole country, especially in the rural areas. Let us not have it in the boardroom.

We have the Women Members of Parliament as role models, you inclusive, Madam Speaker. I also ask the Parliament of Uganda, this year, to consider holding a very special forum for the girl-child. Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Shall we have more contributions? You all have three minutes each.

4.15
MS LOY KATALI (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion moved by my colleague to support the girl child. I would like to thank Government, first of all for introducing UPE and USE which are helping in the girl- child education. But from the statistics, we realise that this is not good enough. 

This is because it is not being monitored and education for the girl-child is slowly but steadily going down. My colleague has talked about the menstruation cycle which affects these girls. During that time of the month, girls stay at home, they do not go to school and, therefore, it becomes difficult for them to compete with the boys.

We have weak laws, especially, in relation to these greedy men who go and “feast” on these young girls, ending up impregnating them. Many girls are falling out of school because they become pregnant and most of the people out there are poor to the extent that they do not want these culprits to be taken to court.

The police connive with the parents and they pay them off and, therefore, these girls remain out of school. So, we request Government to enact tougher laws that will enable us to bring these errant men to book, so that they stay in jail to serve as examples, in order to deter more culprits. Thank you

4.16
MS LILIAN NAKATE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luwero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support my colleague. This issue is very serious and I have two points to put across. Recently, I tried to conduct research in my district and I found out that many girls are being brought to Kampala here to do domestic work; house helps.

This is so disturbing because most of these girls actually do not concentrate on their studies because they know that there is fast money in Kampala. So, something has to be done about the bureaus which exploit girls under the guise of training house helpers. We have very many of them here in Kampala and they are recruiting many of our girls. So, something has to be done about those employment bureaus hiding in the name of training house helps.

Secondly, and this will go to the Ministry of Education; something has to be done about the facilities, in order to encourage the girls to stay longer in school. We need bathrooms. When it comes to those simple days, the few days in a month, these girls need to have secluded places which are comfortable, where they can bathe and change. Part of the toilets that are being constructed in schools should be allotted to girls. Thank you so much.

4.18
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I stand to support the motion, but I would like to first recognise that there are already some laws that are positive to the empowerment of the girl-child. The challenge we have is enforcement. When girls join the primary level of education, they are very many. But I think we have not taken the initiative to know where they disappear to. These girls come in school but when they reach primary seven, they begin dropping out. When it comes to the secondary level, it becomes worse. 

I think that there is need to begin doing critical research and know where the girls go after they reach a certain level of education. Then teachers, who are supposed to be the protectors of the girls, are their worst enemies.

Of recent, in the newspapers, we saw a teacher reported to have raped a girl-child. Others are defiled and it looks like the law is not serious about these teachers.

When parents negotiate with them, things are left at that level and this poor girl is at the mercy of this man, who I would call a lion because he is going to get other girls in schools. I think the ministry should deregister and not give any other job to teachers who defile and rape our girls.

Madam Speaker, because our girls play the role of biology, they get pregnant but nobody follows up on the boys who impregnate the girls. However, when this girl is pregnant, she drops out of school, everybody in the society curses her for having got pregnant, and nobody knows whether she can come back to school.

I remember at one point there was a debate of how these girls can resume studying after getting children. The problem we have in our families is poverty. Who would keep the child and allow the mother to continue studying? Government needs to come up with a mechanism of tracking these girls and ensuring that incentives are given to them to go back to school. We are aware of some institutions, which have done that, like FAO Uganda and Plan Uganda. They are trying to take these girls back to school and some of them have done well. I think there is need to come up with a critical policy to ensure that these girls are returned to school.

The other view is about the role of the senior women teachers. When I was in school, the senior women did a lot of work. They would educate these girls and protect them from the men who deceive them with small money.

The senior women would really prepare us. You would even fear to be with a man in a corner. However, the girls have been left alone these days. They are at the mercy of some persons like a bodaboda man who comes and says, “Let me give you a lift” and innocently the girl thinks that this is a very good man. The girl jumps on the bodaboda and you know what happens on the way –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, join me in welcoming teachers and pupils of Mivule Primary School from Nakawa represented by hon. Kabaziguruka and hon. Naggayi. I think they are here because their Member is back. You are welcome.

4.21
MR TOM AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Chemutai for this motion. I would also like to congratulate Ugandan women and the Government for emancipating and empowering women.

For instance, the Ministry of Health is led by a lady, Uganda National Roads Authority by a lady, Uganda Revenue Authority by a lady, KCCA by a lady, Education by a lady and the Speaker is a lady. Congratulations ladies!

I would like to thank all governments right from 1930s and 1940s for having introduced single sex schools such as Gayaza, Nabbingo, Nabinsunsa, Muni Girls in Arua, Ediope Girls, Maryhill High School in Mbarara, Bweranyangi, etcetera. 

My appeal is that Government should come up and equip these schools with modern laboratories and computers so that our girls can also cope up and be able to replace the ladies who are right now leading our institutions in Uganda.

I thank Government for introducing UPE and USE but a lot needs to be done in terms of mobilizing, motivating and encouraging our teachers so that they can teach our girl-child.

The 1.5 points for our girls under affirmative action is very positive. We, therefore, encourage our girls to come up so that they can take advantage of these points for joining the university.

The women representation in Parliament is very good but more avenues should be created for more women to come to join Parliament. 

Sanitary conditions also have to be improved, otherwise, this is what is discouraging our girls from being in the classroom. They are shy because they are not courageous like boys or men. Whenever they start experiencing menstrual periods, they tend to run away from schools. They should be encouraged to use pads as said before.

Lastly, concerning health related issues; girls should be encouraged to stay in the class and our schools to have women teachers –(Member timed out.)

4.25
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the mover of the motion and I support the motion as well. Madam Speaker, assuming that at point T, nobody supported you; I do not know whether you would be a Speaker of this Parliament.

That is why my view on this is that there should be no discussion on those matters that deal with supporting the girl-child education. There must be a will and momentum from all of us and we must all go with our heads, hearts and legs to make sure that our girls are protected.

We are not discussing it. If we are saying that, the future of Uganda is education, what happens to our girls? The majority of them have fallen along the way. That is why we are saying that we must be willing and have that morale to support this kind of thing.

Secondly, even the Bible says that children are a heritage from God, the prayers that are always mentioned here talk about God and, God supports education. Who are we not to support the girl-child education in Uganda?

Madam Speaker, that is why I say that we should not be discussing this. We should be asking ourselves what we are doing and asking people who are in charge what is happening.

Madam Speaker, we must empower the senior women teachers in schools in Uganda to counsel our girls because this is where the problem starts. The majority of them are falling out because of small things.

Finally, we should think of reviving what is called PEAS (Promoting Equality in African Schools) because at that time, it was doing a lot in Uganda in terms of improving the quality of education. Unfortunately, for now, it was closed and that is why we have these challenges now.

We should be thinking of putting dormitories in some of these schools especially for girls. As we talk now, a girl can walk up to five kilometres; what do you expect? There are vultures along the road waiting for these girls and that is where the problem is. 

However, if we have accommodation for some of these girls, I am sure the girls will remain at school and they will be in Parliament tomorrow. Some of them will be presidents of this country, ministers, heading many departments and ministries in this country. Thank you so much. God bless you.

4.28
MS ROBINA RWAKOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Girls are courted on their way to school and they become pregnant, especially in the rural areas. If we had dormitories and supervision for girls so that they are not attacked there - because you can put them in one place and make them easy target for these men.

Therefore, they still need to be protected. We need gender sensitization of the parents and of the law enforcement officers because if these ones don’t understand the role that these girls play and they cannot protect them, then the girls will live through this ordeal.

The other thing that we can come up with are discriminatory laws under Article 32(2) of the Constitution and provision of pads in schools for girls. Then we as female Members of Parliament are role models in a great way; every word that you tell these girls matters. 

All of us went through challenges as we were growing up but we overcame them and found ourselves here. Let us use our examples to bolster these girls and help them come up. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. as hon. Ebaju comes, I have been talking about the need for additional halls of residence for girls at our universities. It is the girls who live in those dangerous hostels, the boys have seven halls at Makerere, girls have two and a half so it is the girls who are in danger.

4.30
MS ANNA EBAJU (Independent, Female Youth Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the movers of this motion and also speak to it. The biggest advocates that we should have for empowering the girl-child education should be our male counterparts in this House, because I think that the struggle is not one that should be defined by gender, and that it should be properly embraced.

When you talk about empowering girl children by increasing the access to education it goes a long way into solving so many problems; for instance, problems related to early pregnancies such as fistula are sorted.

We are battling with a population that is constantly growing, the fertility rate of women in Uganda is so high; so when girls start to produce at the age of 15 by the time they are 30, they will be having over ten children. And that is increasing our population and yet we do not have a clear plan on how we are going to manage it. 

Away from that, I would like to speak about affirmative action; I think that in its current state it is too politicised and the numbers in Parliament are just deceptive about how far women have gone in this country. 

We shall sit here and say, “Oh, yes women are in Parliament and our Speaker is a female”. But how many girls cannot make it to primary seven because they cannot afford sanitary towels.

I think that affirmative action should no longer be political; it is not about having women in places where they can make decisions. It is about helping those women who are outside political spaces to rise through the system.

We must have a system that accounts for the girls who join school. Why must 10 girls join school and only two can make it to secondary and we are singing about USE and UPE? It is not helping!

We must support them through the system and make sure that they come out and we account for them until they reach the level of higher education. 

I would like to ask the movers of this motion to amend their prayers to include a total revision of the affirmative action policy as it is in its current state. It must be realistic and should appreciate the challenges of girls in this country.

4.33
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion and forward this to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and maybe to the Minister of Education and Sports. 

It was in this House that one of the honourable members moved a motion of providing sanitary pads to the girl children; it is an issue that they are putting in as a way of promoting and supporting the girl children at school. 

May I know from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development what happened because the motion was supported and there was a budget to that effect and I know there was money for it? But we do not see it being implemented. 

If that had been effected this financial year, I think a number of girls would have been helped and some would not have dropped out of school. We should not be seen to be failing but we should be seen to be doing things. 

Madam Speaker, recently I moved in the constituency and I discovered that much as we are supporting girls to be at school, some parents are defiling their own children. It is very unfortunate and the police are not helping our children. 

A minor of ten years who is supposed to be protected by a father is being defiled by her own father. It is very unfortunate; Government has got to wake up. Our children are not attaining what we are planning for.

Some parents are conniving to marry off their own children at a tender age; we are saying if we find you marrying off your daughter, the person who has married and the parent should be arrested! 

These persons call us leaders but it is the local councils down there - what are police doing? We need these girls at school. Madam Speaker, let those who are supposed to enforce the law do the right thing. Thank you so much.
 
4.35
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also stand up to support the motion as a professional. As a teacher research has shown that these girls love their fathers more than their mothers. If you do not support such a motion and you are a man then you are –(Interjections)– the level of perception for girls is higher than that of boys. For example, I used to teach and in my class, I had 150 children but it took me a full term to learn all their names.
 
However, there is a girl in Uganda who is now the Speaker called hon. Rebecca Kadaga, within one month, she knows all our names, that is the level of perception. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, I am going to lay a report from an NGO which carried out an investigation about USE and I will give the honourable ministers copies. That report is showing that most of the USE schools or some of them are leaving out girls because they know that the moment they push them out because they have not paid their contribution, they cannot get the money but if boys are sent out they can work for money.

I can leave this place and go to Kalungu and visit a number of areas and I leave without talking to my mother. But my sisters can never go to the village and forget to see their mother.

We can’t handle this motion as a matter of debate and get away with it, we must push the Ministry of Education and Sports. Madam Speaker, you have talked about dormitories, we have hard-to-reach areas like the islands. I do not have an Island in Kalungu. Kalangala, Buvuma -(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, hon. Gonzaga, for giving way. The information I would like to give my colleague is that most of these girls are dropping out of school because the parents prefer to pay school fees for boys.

As Members of Parliament, we are going to help these girls. I have a belief that a girl can do better what a boy can. My daughters always came up with four As and they are conquering in the university. One was the best in the University of Leeds; she is a lawyer in London School of Economics. As a Parliament, we should pass a motion that Government pays school fees for the girl-child in Uganda. Professionally, when a school is constructed, there must be a side for girls -(Member timed out.)

4.38
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I moved a motion in the last Parliament urging Government to provide sanitary pads and kits in all schools. 

It was supported and by now we should be asking Government how far they have gone with implementing such motions. When we move motions of this kind; which are so important to the girl-child in this country, we should start thinking of how we can ensure that it does not end on the debate.

I am also glad that the motion was able to make a provision within the NRM manifesto because the President also moved around the whole country promising that the NRM Government would provide sanitary pads.

I think the Ministry of Education and Sports should now be telling us how far they have gone in implementing that manifesto. It is very important. This is because I see - especially the girl children, who drop out in the latter primary school. It is not necessarily providing sanitary pads for all girls, but if we could provide emergency kits for the schools to manage the girls so that they do not miss classes, in case they start experiencing that.

Madam Speaker, provision of sanitary facilities does not just end at providing sanitary pads. It involves making sure that there are those small things such as changing knickers and towels as well as making sure that there are separate toilets and bathrooms for girls, which are not there in most primary schools.

Madam Speaker, all of us have experience in school dropouts in our different districts and constituencies. It is very alarming. I took a sample study in my schools during the Ninth Parliament. I realised that from P1-P4, girls are the majority in their classes. However, from P5-P7 the number drops by up to 70 or 80 per cent. That is why we are trying to commit ourselves as a branch of Government to pronounce ourselves that we will support the girl-child, and make her a priority as we plan for this country. This is because development can never take place when the girl-child is left behind.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, during the recess, I received a delegation of school girls. They had come to demand to know from me whether the President had made good on his pledge to supply sanitary pads.

4.42
COL FELIX KULAYIGYE (UPDF Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. Indeed, as hon. Ssewungu said, if any father does not support this motion something would be wrong with him. Legislation alone is not enough. We need to sensitise the parents. This is because I have known of teachers who bother to sensitise the children, but there is no back-up at home. 

Therefore, when the child goes home she finds a different atmosphere from what the school was encouraging. In addition, indeed, in the evening as they are going home they are in the company of boys and boda boda riders and you can guess what follows. Therefore, there is need for parents to socialise with their children and tell them what happens when they become adolescents. We must talk to the children. 

We must also support the school system with supervision, and this goes to my ministers in charge of education. Being a teacher by profession, I am more than interested. When I was in Pader, I monitored the school system. Whenever I go, supervision has been lacking. We need to go back to the old system. If on a day it was known that either the district education officer or inspector of schools was coming you would see teachers on tenterhooks, but these days it is not there.

These days, everybody has become a teacher. People apply for law and medicine and go for education as a last resort. These ones have no interest in teaching. In fact, whereas Government is giving them motivational allowance as science teachers, they are not actually responding to this motivation. Why? It is because they went for education as a last resort, but not because they loved it. Can I request that since there are very many teachers out there who are not on payroll, we insist that for people to be recruited into teaching they must put education as their first choice.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, parents who do not encourage their children to go to school or support UPE and USE should be arrested and prosecuted. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.45
MS SYLVIA AKELLO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam speaker, for giving me this chance. I would like to support the motion and add that one of the biggest reasons why girls are dropping out of school is menstruation. If we talk about giving sanitary pads, I think that one is just a sub-component of the solution. This is because, if menstruation begins at home and there are no pads at home, it means you can still even remain at home.

Therefore, I think we should teach these girls how to make their own pads. I have tried with the use of reusable sanitary pads and it works. If you only teach them how to make reusable sanitary pads without panties, that becomes a problem because you cannot use pads without knickers. They must also be taught how to make knickers. 

Another thing is about soap. We are talking about menstrual hygiene management where there is soap, knickers, reusable pads and water. That is when a girl can walk with the head up saying, “Yes, I am complete. I can fight the war of menstruation”.

Another issue is stereotyping. Madam Speaker, since time immemorial, everybody looks at menstruation as a taboo. If you look at the book of Leviticus, it says that when you are menstruating, you are not supposed to move anywhere. You are termed “unclean”, yet this is a very normal thing. When a girl grows up without menstruating at all, they again change and say, “You are abnormal”. (Laughter) 

This whole thing really makes a girl to be at crossroads. Unless we appreciate and agree that menstruation is real, good and that when you do not have it there is a gap, we are going to continue fighting without finding solutions. (Applause)

Another thing I would like to talk about is the issue of teachers. I appreciate the fact that there are female teachers. I am one of the teachers. You find that most teachers are within the town areas. When you go to schools in rural areas, you do not find female teachers. That is why you find other male teachers posing to be working on behalf of female teachers, yet they do not know what senior female teachers are supposed to do.

In my own district when I was still in the council, we had derived a method whereby we identified key mothers in the rural areas who knew the benefits of education and we trained them. We used to call them “school mothers” -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I think she should finish that statement about the school mothers. It might be a good innovation.

MS SILVIA AKELLO: They would go to schools and talk to young girls as well as women in the communities. From that year, we realised that at P.7 we got 50-50 per cent of girls and boys. I wish we could really have those. It was an NGO which was facilitating, but after that even the idea of school mothers died. I wish we could also take it up. Thank you.

4.48
MR ISAAC ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this chance. I thank the honourable member for moving this motion about girl-child education. I would like to say that much of whatever we are talking about here has already been put in place.

If we can trace back from the time UPE was introduced, it was a policy that out of the four children in a family, two must be girls. In various schools, you all know that there are separate toilets and shelters for girls and boys. However, the major problem here is implementation. This is because when we look at all that we are talking about here, we will find out that Government has tried to do everything possible to see that girl-child education is promoted. 

However, you will find that the parental support is not enough for the girl-child. When we look at it critically, you find that an educated parent takes girl-child education more seriously than that of a boy. There is a common adage that when you educate a girl, you educate a nation. 

Madam Speaker, as we talk about this, our focus should this time be the implementation; how are we going to do it? Much as we can do everything as a Government to promote sanitary pads and other facilities, if the parent is not able to support this girl to continue with education in secondary and other higher levels, definitely, even both the boys and girls will remain at home especially, those of such parents.

I, therefore, would like to say that we should try as much as possible to ensure that Government looks at the facilitation part of it; payment of school fees for girls particularly in secondary and higher levels. 

To me, it is the issue of parental support and poverty. You Members of Parliament will agree with me that since you are able to support education, you will not segregate your children. Let us go back and look at how we are going to take all these things into actions.

Madam Speaker, the issue of the senior women teachers is real. Information granted – (Interruption)
 
MS JACQUELINE AOL: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also support this motion. However, as we talk about specialising the girl-child education, are we still going to bank on the teachers who are demotivated? I think it is going to be an extra job. What are we saying about the teachers, as we talk about specialising the girl child? The way it is being stressed is like it is going to be something additional and vigorous. Are we really thinking about the teachers? All the time, they are on strike because they are demotivated, and yet now we are going to give them additional work. What are we going to do? We should also be thinking about that. Thank you.

MR ETUKA: Thank you. I, therefore, would like to conclude by saying that as a nation; we should come up with clear strategies on how we are going to help these girls not only to stop at primary level, but to continue with their education up to higher levels. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.52
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Connie Nakayenze): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the mover of the motion and I stand to second the motion.

Madam Speaker, what I noticed is that most of the people who are being held hostage or suffering in countries like Dubai and Saudi Arabia are girls taken out of this country. Unless there is a deliberate policy by Government to stop any school going age girls from being taken out of the country – they should travel only when they are going to study. We are still going to have girls suffering because this is where they think they are going to find better jobs and yet they are suffering as it is always reported in the media.

Madam Speaker, culture in our country is not favouring girls. Many times, girls are looked at as people who are supposed to perform domestic work and also to get married and, therefore, education is not being taken seriously.  This calls for a deliberate move for the sensitisation of our parents that girls need to be schooled and girls need to be given all the necessities to stay in school. That is when we shall have many of them complete school.

Madam Speaker, many times, parents make the girls to serve the boys yet they all go to school. For instance, the boys are always fed fast. While the boys are going to school, the girls start to prepare themselves.  If we take all the children equally, we shall have girls complete school.

Madam Speaker, one important thing that I would like to mention is that we have had the problem of some wealthy men who take advantage of our girls just because they have cars and boda bodas. This is how they are luring our girls into sex and therefore hindering them from completing school. I, therefore, call for a deliberate policy that whoever is caught – I know there are laws but whoever is caught with a girl in his car or bodaboda without any proper reason, that person should be held responsible for anything that happens to the girl –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have some other things on the Order Paper. Members, who would like to speak, will speak on the Makerere debate because it is also about education. I would like to invite the minister to respond. When you are talking about Makerere, you will speak more.

4.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the honourable member, who moved this motion and the seconder, and also to thank the Members who have passionately contributed to this motion.

As the Minister in charge of Primary Education, I strongly agree with the Members that we really have to promote the girl-child. However, I would like to make it clear to this august House that, it is true that Government of Uganda is doing all it takes to ensure that the girl-child gets education. There could be challenges and I do think that you all agree with me that yes challenges could be there, but we are doing our best.

In the NRM manifesto, this was a pledge and I would like to inform colleagues that the Ministry of Education and Sports, in the 2017/2018 budget, put a provision of about Shs 14 billion to start off the programme of provision of sanitary towels. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I know that this is just a starting point for the children in UPE. Our plan is that as we get more funds, we shall be able to roll it out to secondary level.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to remind Members that the mere fact that we also have the Education Act which provides for Universal Primary Education, Universal Secondary Education and the loan scheme; all these are programmes that have been intended to ensure that a girl child gets an opportunity. You have all pointed out how our girl children have been left at home because parents who cannot educate all their children were prioritising the male children. That is why Government came up with these programmes so that all the children can have an opportunity especially, the girls.

My dear friends, I would also like to state that the Ministry of Education and Sports, in the Gender Department, under the Gender Mainstreaming, has a programme to sensitise parents, teachers and the general community to enable the girl-child go to school and stay to completion.

Madam Speaker, the issue on the policy of the 1.5 for admission of girls in universities – I would like to assure Members that we definitely, support it and it came to stay. I am assuring you that many of our girls have gone to the universities through that affirmative action. 

Colleagues, you will also agree that Government has supported strongly the Female Genital Mutilation Act (FGM). We are trying to implement the provisions in that law to fight against FGM which is hindering our girls from continuing with their education especially when they are affected by that kind of circumcision and the cancers associated with it –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I am attracted by what you have said that the Government is working on the campaign against FGM. What is the ministry doing on the campaign against FGM? The country would like to know.

MS SENINDE: Colleagues, I just wanted to remind the House that definitely the FGM Act that came in Parliament and was passed, as a Government we are doing our best to make sure that girls are saved. That is why we have encouraged children to go to school. In the eastern region, many of our children are sensitised on avoiding FGM -(Interruption)

MS KHAINZA: Thank you, Madam Minister. A week ago, I was in Bukwo and Kapchorwa and actually, one of the challenges that girls face, including FGM, is that they are married off early because they cannot access secondary education. Government pledged to construct a quality school in Bukwo to support girls and parents who have denounced FGM but to date, the school has not been constructed. Thank you.

MR MANGUSHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the information of the minister, Government has not done enough to fight FGM. The only school being built so far under the FGM programme has just taken off and is halfway, and this is since 2009. The school has only four permanent classes and one dormitory so far, and yet it was intended to have 10 permanent classes and at least four dormitories. We do not have enough facilities in that school. 

THE SPEAKER: Is that Kosil Girls School?

MR MANGUSHO: Yes, it is. I thought the minister would tell us how far they have gone in completing that school. You know those are vulnerable areas- Bukwo, Amudat and Tepeth. The school is not even half done. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I know that in Amudat, the construction of the school has not even started. Kosil and Amudat were supposed to start at the same time but nothing has happened in Amudat.

MS CHEMUTAI: Actually, there was one that was promised in Bukwo in 2009 but nothing has been done so far. The residents are asking for that school to be a refuge for girls who run away from the FGM practice.

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank honourable colleagues as well. 

Honourable colleagues, I would like to remind you that we have not sat back. We are doing all that is possible to build those schools; we know about them. I would like to assure my sister that we are considering all those schools that we promised to work on to provide at least a boarding section. I know we may not have the funds now but it is in our long-term plan.

I would like to remind colleagues that Government has also -(Interruption)

MR NAMBESHE: Honourable minister, I would like to thank you for all these responses. However, given the challenges that the ministry is already battling, don’t you think it is more prudent and cost effective to use the Shs 14 billion that you are to spend annually to procure sanitary pads, to erect a factory that can manufacture them here in Uganda? 

THE SPEAKER: Maybe I can give some information. After those girls came with their petition, I went to see the President to ask him what my response should be to the children. We agreed that we would do some research on the possibility of manufacturing reusable pads in this country. I have not yet given him an answer because I am checking on the NGOs, which have been doing this work, so that we can kick off the programme.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether the honourable minister has seen the report from AIZA. If you do not have it, after this let me give you that report. It is a very good report about secondary schools. 

That aside, I beseech you, as a ministry, to cater for island districts in terms of boarding schools. Most of these sexual harassment cases from fishermen - Madam Speaker, I do not want to attack people, but there are some bad habits that are very common on islands, and they affect learning. 

At one time, I transported exams to the islands of Sigulu, Hama and Dolwe. Hama was the first island where we took exams. However, about three scouts jumped off the boat because of fear. Now, imagine the children who have to cross to these islands every day and yet some of them are girls. I have seen so many things on television, which I do not want to narrate here, but they are so painful. Kindly help us.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. I am giving one minute to Africa Online.

MS BETTY AOL: Madam Minister, thank you very much. I would really like to interest you in domestic violence. Although we have the Domestic Violence Act, it has not taken root in the communities. Therefore, it is usually the girl child, sometimes a P.3 or P.4 child, who takes on the house chores and drops out of school, however young she is. 

Also due to poverty, instead of giving time to their children at a tender age, some of the women are very busy in the market all the time. As such, the girl children miss out on informal education that they should obtain from their parents. The parents are very busy trying to work for food, clothes and other necessities for the children but they have left out the most important thing, which is informal education. We are now leaving everything to the teachers. 
In Gulu, I see that as a very big problem. 

Parents complain a lot about girls not working well with their mothers but it is because at that early age, the mothers have been in the market and have left them out. I just wanted to inform you.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude, honourable minister.

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, I appreciate some of those issues that have been raised. On the issue of domestic violence, I would like to inform you that we have worked with the police and they have set up toll-free centres almost all over the country. People can now report cases of domestic violence. In addition, medical examinations can be done for free while cases are forwarded to court.

Madam Speaker, I also want to inform Members that we have worked on the issue of cervical cancer. There is the Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) vaccination for girls who are 10 years old and above, whether they are in or out of school. This was introduced in 2015. 

I would like to add that regarding issues of education, much as the Government has done all it can, we have to join our hands in sensitising the communities. The attitude of the communities and that of parents has an effect on the education of our children. How can a parent forget the responsibility of feeding their own children? They have gone as far as forgetting their responsibility of teaching their children how to help themselves when they get menstrual periods.

Much as we have raised this as Government and we know it is our responsibility now, because we have pledged to help the girl-child, I would like to remind you, like hon. Akello has said, that sensitising the community should be our work if we want to achieve and benefit. As Government, we are doing that and we have asked all radio stations to give us free airtime. We shall continue doing that until the girl-child is fully liberated.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, thank you. I would like the minister to inform this House about the absence of senior women teachers in some schools because this came out from most Members of Parliament. This is a very big problem, especially in the rural areas. What is the ministry doing to make sure that there is at least one senior woman teacher in a school? There are some schools in the villages that do not have a single woman teacher. 

In addition, there is the issue of providing bathrooms. Since you have this package of providing sanitary pads, do you have any plan to factor in providing at least a bathroom in every school?

MS SENINDE: Colleagues, you are aware that it is a Government policy that for every school, there must be a provision for sanitation facilities for boys and girls. I would like to emphasise that we would like to continue doing the same. In the next financial year, we have budgeted for this and I want to assure you that we want to do all that is possible to ensure that schools have provision for both boys and girls as far as sanitation is concerned.

On the issue of senior women teachers, as a ministry we have been sensitising the school management committees on most of these issues. The issue of senior women teachers has been one of the issues discussed whenever we meet. We are encouraging them because every school has got female teachers but what is important is to make sure that there is a teacher who acts as a senior woman teacher to help the children. 

We have been sensitising them and whenever we go, we have been inviting senior women teachers from the schools that have them. For those that do not have -(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, it is not about the senior women teachers -

THE SPEAKER: It is whether the Government has posted women teachers in those schools and designated those persons in charge of the girls. That is what she would like to know.

MS SENINDE: Dear colleagues, I would like to assure you that we have worked on this and we are still working on it. We are doing our best. First of all, we make sure that every school recruits female teachers as well as male ones. 

Even regarding the pads that we are talking about, we want to make sure that the senior women teachers are the ones in charge. Therefore, even before the pads are in schools, we would like to make sure that the senior women teachers are available to do their part. I would like to assure you on that. 

Once again, I would like to thank you, dear colleagues, for your contributions and for the passion you have for the education of the children of Uganda. As a ministry, we shall always try our best and as Government, we shall do all that it takes to make sure that Ugandan children are educated.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House adopts the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Can I now invite the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to respond to the issue raised by hon. Gutomoi in three minutes and then we go to the Committee on Health.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

5.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to read a short statement regarding the Ugandan traders in South Sudan. 

There have been several media reports and petitions made seeking the intervention of Parliament and obviously, the question has also been raised here by our friend, hon. Charles Angiro Gutomoi. This is in respect to the assertion that arrangements were being made to pay US$ 41 million to a selected group of claimants of Ugandan traders to the exclusion of other claimants.

I wish to state the following facts regarding the claims of Ugandan traders who did business in South Sudan: In 2010, the governments of Uganda and South Sudan entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) for the Government of South Sudan to pay $56 million to Ugandan grain traders who had sought the intervention of the Government of Uganda.

An initial payment of US$ 15 million was paid to the Ugandan traders in December 2010. The Government of South Sudan was unable to fulfil all other claims as agreed. Since then, other claims beyond the beneficiaries in the 2010 MoU have been lodged. 

The Government of Uganda compiled the list of all unpaid claims and presented the same to the Government of South Sudan for verification and settlement. The two governments have since held meetings on how to settle these claims and agreed as follows: 

1. 	The already discussed and agreed verified upon claimants under the MoU of 2010 should be paid the outstanding balance of US$ 41 million first. 

2. 	The other claimants be verified by the joint team of the two governments for authentication and thereafter, modalities shall be agreed for their settlement. 

3. 	It was agreed by the both governments that this verification exercise should start within a few weeks from now and should end in the first quarter of 2017.

4. 	The Government of Uganda agreed to take up the responsibility of paying US$ 41 million and the Government of South Sudan shall give a refund to the Government of Uganda. These payments would be subject to approval of the Parliament of Uganda because this would be a loan to the Government of South Sudan. Therefore, it should go through the normal process of approving a loan. 

5. 	All payments shall be based on verifiable documents that shall be furnished to the Government of South Sudan. 

As per now, Madam Speaker and colleagues, I need to state that there is no single shilling from the Treasury of the Republic of Uganda that has gone out to pay anybody who traded in South Sudan. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please take this information to the claimants and check where they stand in this process and you can come back to us.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON HEALTH ON THE Hepatitis B ENDEMIC IN UGANDA

5.17
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Michael Bukenya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the 19th Sitting of the First Meeting of the First Session of the 10th Parliament of Uganda held on Tuesday, 20 September 2016, the issue of funding of Hepatitis B testing, vaccination and management activities across the country arose and was referred to the sectoral Committee on Health for harmonisation.

The House, noting that the outbreak of Hepatitis B had affected all parts of the country, with worst hit areas being the north, north-eastern and eastern parts, directed the health committee to take up the matter with the Ministry of Health and Ministry Of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The committee now begs to report.

The scope

The committee assessed the following areas:

1. 	Global and local facts and statistics on Hepatitis B; 
2. 	The prevalence of the disease in the country against the Government’s current response;
3. 	Funding available for Hepatitis B response against funding requirements for mass vaccination;
4. 	Recommendations for better management of the outbreak;
5. Recommended management strategies for the outbreak.

Madam Speaker, I will go to the background to give people some information on which we based – 

THE SPEAKER: They can also read that. 

DR BUKENYA: About Hepatitis B

Hepatitis B is a potentially life threatening liver infection caused by the Hepatitis B virus –(Interjections)- We have got a lot of information on this before.

THE SPEAKER: Members, you can get the rest of the information from your iPads. You have the information already.

DR BUKENYA: So, can we go to transmission?

THE SPEAKER: Go to your observations and recommendations.

DR BUKENYA: Perhaps before we get there, I would like to highlight a few things under point No 4.14 - the risk for chronic disease. I shall read through it briefly.

The Risk of Chronic Disease

The likelihood that infection becomes chronic depends on the age at which a person becomes infected. Children less than six years of age who become infected with the Hepatitis B virus are most likely to develop chronic infections.

In infants and children, 80 to 90 per cent of infants infected during the first year of life develop chronic infections and 30 to 50 per cent of children infected before the age of six years develop chronic infections. Less than five per cent of otherwise healthy persons who are infected as adults will develop chronic infection. 

We thought that with these statistics, there should be more concentration on the children. In addition, most of the people being diagnosed could probably have acquired the disease during childhood.

Diagnosis

It is important to talk about diagnosis because one of the challenges has been the provision of test kits throughout the country.   

Treatment

There is no specific treatment for acute Hepatitis B; therefore, care is aimed at maintaining comfort and adequate nutritional balance, including replacement of fluids lost from vomiting and diarrhoea. 

The World Health Organisation recommends the use of oral treatments, tenofovir or entecavir. These are antivirals and not the anti-retrovirals that we use for HIV. They can work but we are not using them appropriately. 

There are challenges with the national statistics because the records we have in the country are over 10 years old. You will find that the statistics are scanty and they go over 10 years back.

Prevention

The Hepatitis B vaccine is the most important aspect of Hepatitis B prevention. The World Health Organisation recommends that all infants receive the Hepatitis B vaccine as soon as possible after birth, preferably within 24 hours. The birth dose should be followed by two to three doses to complete the primary series.

In most cases, one of the following two options is appropriate - Currently, we are using the three-dose schedule of pentavalent vaccines where we start giving the vaccine at six weeks. This means that we miss out the first six weeks of life where we may get challenges.

The complete vaccine series induces protective antibody levels in more than 95 per cent of infants, children and young adults. Protection lasts for at least 20 years and is probably lifelong. World Health Organisation does not recommend booster vaccination for persons who have completed the three-dose vaccination schedule.

All children and adolescents younger than 18 years and not previously vaccinated should receive the vaccine if they live in countries where there is low or intermediate endemicity. In Uganda, we are struggling with areas where we have high endemicity and I will talk about that later on.

In low or intermediate endemicity settings, it is possible that more people in high-risk groups may acquire the infection and should also be vaccinated. Some of the high-risk groups have been mentioned here, like those in the armed forces, travellers who have not completed their vaccination, healthcare workers, people who receive blood transfusions, people with multiple sex partners and households of people diagnosed with the infection. 

The next chapter summarises how the vaccine works and how it has worked for other countries. As of 2014, 184 member states of WHO vaccinate infants against Hepatitis B as part of their vaccination schedule and 82 per cent of children in these states receive the Hepatitis B vaccine. This is a major increase compared with 31 countries in 1992, the year that the World Health Assembly passed a resolution to recommend global vaccination against Hepatitis B. Furthermore, as of 2014, 96 member states have introduced the Hepatitis B birth dose vaccine but Uganda is not among those countries.

I am going to read point No. 4.2 but I will refer you to the table for purposes of explanation. The source is the Uganda Gastroenterology Society. It talks about particular regions in Uganda - those that have been exposed and those that are being diagnosed with the chronic infection. 

In areas of the northern and north-western regions, we have 82 to 90 per cent exposure. This means that the majority of the people there have been exposed and possibly, only 20 per cent may require the vaccine, contrary to what we are doing by giving the majority of the people there vaccines. This means that it is necessary but with the meagre resources, we are not getting value for money.

The data on the next table is from an NGO, which we should not be quoting, but the Ministry of Health is handicapped as far as current data on this disease is concerned and yet it is the one supposed to oversee the response. We, therefore, use available data from well-wishers and local sources. What we wanted to capture from the data is that the ministry is not properly treating people for Hepatitis B. These people were tested and diagnosed but you can see that 30 per cent of the people were put under care compared to what is required.

Government Response 

A total of Shs 21 billion has so far been provided in two consecutive financial years. A total of Shs 13 billion was provided in the Financial Year 2015/2016 and an additional Shs 8 billion is available in this financial year. I think that is the money that the Speaker requested for, for frontloading.

The committee was informed that Shs 21 billion had been approved and only Shs 13 billion had been received. If you recall, and the minister repeated this in the committee meeting, the health ministry could not account for the Shs 3 billion that had been released, hence losing Shs 8 billion because of lack of accountability because the financial year changed to 2016/2017.

There are projections for the whole country that go to about Shs 220 billion, if we are to have an adequate response using the current methods being used. However, we were not able to get a detailed strategic plan or response from the ministry to understand the accountability of the Shs 220 billion.

Human Resources 

The committee noted that there has been no epidemic specific staff recruited and trained to manage Hepatitis B in the country. The Ministry of Health, as the policy making body, relies on local governments to deploy District Health Officers (DHOs) and other health workers working at the districts in general hospitals and at the health centre IV level to handle activities related to Hepatitis B.

The committee noted that the already demotivated health workers in the districts have been involved in cases of selling Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) vaccines. To explain a bit here, the vaccines are procured by the National Medical Stores and then - I will use the unpalatable word “dumped” - they are dumped at the district. The ministry is then comfortable that they have procured vaccines and provided for Amuru District, for example. They then go back to their offices and wait for feedback from the local government. 

There is also the issue of the test kits. The committee noted that money that was provided had been divided into vaccines and test kits. However, if you go to some parts of Teso, people are vaccinating anyone they come across because they have the vaccines but they do not have test kits. The most recent case was in Serere where vaccines were provided and were supposed to be launched but there were no test kits. I am trying to skim through the report. 

Treatment 

The committee noted that the Hepatitis B clinics at the moment include the hospitals listed below, and those are requirements for a hospital to be accredited. 

The committee noted that only 30 per cent of those who test positive for Hepatitis B are eligible for treatment using antivirals. Let me skip and go to page 15. 

Treatment with Antivirals

The committee is aware that the number of patients infected with chronic Hepatitis B is estimated to be about 10 per cent of the population, numbering about 3.5 million Ugandans. Remember that these are statistical calculations based on studies done in 2005 by Centers for Disease Control (CDC).

The committee is further aware that of the 3.5 million Ugandans, only 30 per cent are eligible for treatment, numbering to about 1,050,000 Ugandans. However, the number of people targeted for treatment in the Financial Year 2015/2016 was only 350, according to plans presented to the committee by the Ministry of Health.

Treatment of Hepatitis B must be done using the globally recommended entecavir and tenovir because they are effective and the disease is least likely to form resistance to them. The committee noted that the National Drug Authority (NDA) has approved tenovir, locally manufactured by Cipla Quality Chemicals, for the first line of treatment for adults and children above 12 years of age, but no procurement orders have been placed. 

Entecavir, which is also locally manufactured by Cipla Quality Chemicals, is readily available for children below 12 years. It is, however, not being used at the moment as it awaits approval by the National Drug Authority (NDA). Currently, most of the people being treated are being given triple therapy - anti-retrovirals that are supposed to be for HIV but which have three drugs, which increase side effects and a bit of wastage. 

Achievements Gained In the Response to Hepatitis B

The committee noted the following gains in Government’s response to Hepatitis B:

i) 	Since 2002, the Government introduced vaccination for all babies at six, 10 and 14 weeks.

ii) 	The Uganda Blood Transfusion Service continues to ensure that all blood used in hospitals is screened for HIV and Hepatitis B to ensure that it is safe for use.

iii) 	Funds appropriated by Parliament in the last two financial years have been released to the Ministry of Health for Hepatitis B testing, treatment and vaccination activities.

iv) 	A massive adult vaccination campaign is being implemented in selected districts in the country despite funding constraints.

v) 	There are safe injection practices in place to curb injection-associated infection. 

vi) 	A national health worker vaccination campaign was launched in 2011 and is still ongoing. However, we cannot document how many workers are vaccinated where. To trace them, you just have to interview them as individuals.

Challenges Faced By Ministry Of Health in the Hepatitis B Response

The committee noted the following challenges faced by Government in its Hepatitis B response:

i) 	Inadequate social mobilisation, communication and information sharing due to limited funding;
ii) 	Inadequate funds for procurement of test kits, vaccines and consumables;
iii) 	Slow and scattered coverage may not achieve herd immunity;
iv) 	The treatment centres are few compared to the overall need for the treatment;
v) 	Limited allocations for procurement of antivirals;
vi) 	Funds for printing tools, guidelines, support supervision to districts and coordination with the private sector are not there.

The following is a summary of the observations and recommendations on page 17: 

Prevention

a) 	For prevention purposes, the committee noted that there is a need to increase vaccination rates among children. The first dose of the vaccine should be administered at birth as recommended by the World Health Organisation and confirmed by the Uganda Gastroenterology Society. This would go a long way in preventing future infections of Hepatitis B as we noted that most of the people we are struggling with must have acquired the infection in childhood. 

The committee recommends that Government, as a matter of policy, introduces a requirement for children to be immunised against Hepatitis B at birth such that we do not lose the six weeks as that is an opportunity for the children to get the infection.

b) 	The committee further noted that the ongoing vaccination programme is targeted at the general population rather than the most-at-risk individuals. There is a need to target the vaccination at the most-at-risk groups including health workers, medical trainees, HIV positive people, those serving in the military, organ transplant candidates and unexposed sexual and household contacts of carriers. Our army has been in Somalia, in Sudan and in Congo and all those countries do not have sound health systems. It is also possible that they bring the hepatitis from there and worsen our problem here. 

The committee recommends that vaccination activities should be refocused to target the most-at-risk groups listed above, given the funding gaps that exist in the mass vaccination exercise.
 
c) 	As part of the prevention campaign, there is a need to expand on-going immunisation campaigns in an organised manner and to build knowledge and skills in the priority population targeted for vaccination such as healthcare professionals and communities. 

The committee noted that even the healthcare workers who are supposed to manage the epidemic are not aware of how it can be prevented and managed.

The committee recommends that mass sensitisation on prevention of the spread of Hepatitis B should be emphasised, starting with policy makers, health professionals and the high at risk groups before expanding to the entire population.

In our discussion with Members of Parliament, we found out that even the policy makers are not on board because if someone has an exposure of 90 per cent, he is the one who would prefer to have his place get the vaccines first and yet he has a smaller population to reach. If you go to other parts of the country where you have three per cent then you may benefit more in that area if you do massive vaccination. 

d) 	The committee noted that to prevent mother-to-child transmission of Hepatitis B, there is a need to set up a programme to test, treat and manage Hepatitis B among pregnant mothers. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health sets up a programme to specifically address concerns of Hepatitis B among pregnant mothers to curb mother-to-child transmission of Hepatitis B.

Testing 

The committee noted that over 70 per cent of individuals exposed to Hepatitis B, provided that they have a fully functional immunity system, build immunity from the exposure. This simply means that the majority of those in areas with high prevalence rates have already been exposed and built the ability to resist the disease. 

The committee further noted that with the right policy in place, testing should be increased among high risk populations such as those mentioned below. Also in those populations where there is high prevalence, we have only one test, which is Hepatitis B surface antigen test, which is scarce. We also need Hepatitis B antibody test, which can detect those who may not qualify for vaccination despite the fact that they are Hepatitis B surface antigen negative. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that a testing policy should be developed and should prioritise testing and vaccination among high-risk populations.

The committee further recommends that a protocol should be developed and disseminated for use by primary healthcare managers of Hepatitis B vaccination programme.

Case Management and Support

The committee noted that the Ministry of Health lacked statistics of people with chronic Hepatitis B currently undergoing treatment - you do not get it anywhere – and those vaccinated. The information is not there, even about health workers, although the programme was launched long ago, apart from the children who are vaccinated in the national programme and we can assume they are 14 years and below. There is also no statistics on those who have tested positive and those under treatment. That information is not available even at the Ministry of Health. 

In addition, the committee also noted that there was no documentation available to show who has been vaccinated and who has not. There are no vaccination registers or vaccination cards allocated. To make it worse –(Interjection) – Let me first leave that one – 

THE SPEAKER: Do not heckle the Chairperson. 

DR BUKENYA: The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health develops standards for the management of Hepatitis B cases, including the introduction of records at the level of the health facility and proof of vaccination for those who have been tested, vaccinated and the infected.

Dealing with Stigma Arising from Hepatitis B

The committee noted that due to the limited information available on Hepatitis B in the country, there exist several myths about the disease, which has resulted in undue stigmatization and national anxiety of those with chronic Hepatitis B.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health should encourage the formation of groups by those living with Hepatitis B to augment sensitisation efforts on consequences of chronic Hepatitis B infection and reduce stigma.

Treatment and Care for Hepatitis B Patients

The committee noted the need to focus on treatment of patients suffering from chronic Hepatitis B ahead of vaccination activities, especially since research has shown in some areas that mass vaccination campaigns among adults have a low level of effectiveness in building mass immunity. 

What is challenging is that in those areas where they are testing now, if you test positive, you have nowhere you run. Despite the availability of drugs at Cipla, you just remain there stigmatised with your diagnosis.

The committee recommends that this be resolved by availing funds to the National Medical Stores to procure and supply testing kits and antivirals to the programme areas, to start the treatment for those who test positive.

Accountability

The committee noted that the Ministry of Health had failed to secure the release of Shs 8 billion approved by the Ninth Parliament as part of a Shs 11 billion supplementary budget for Hepatitis B screening, vaccination and treatment activities. This was due to the failure of the ministry to account for the Shs 3 billion that had been earlier released to them.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health promptly accounts for funds utilised for Hepatitis B activities before more funds are released for the mass vaccination campaign.

Coordination between Ministry of Health and Ministry of Local Government 

The committee observed that there is no coordination of activities between the Ministry of Health, who are the supervisors, and the Ministry of Local Government, who are the implementers. While the Minister of Health blamed the failure of the mass vaccination on implementation gaps in the Ministry of Local Government, the Ministry of Local Government informed the committee that it was not aware of their role in this process.

The committee recommends that the two Ministries should work together to address challenges in implementation of the Hepatitis B response, prioritisation of preventive medicine and to resolve issues in the management of primary healthcare and district health management systems. This does not stop on only Hepatitis B but all other issues.

Before I conclude, I will tell you that we looked for the strategy that was agreed on by the technical working group in the ministry and we failed to access it. So, there is no national strategy at the moment on the management that is documented and can be availed to the House. We also got information that the technical working group sat but as soon as the first batch of money was released, there were no more sitting. 

Nevertheless, there is a noted need to develop a national Hepatitis B strategy with set goals, a testing policy, treatment and vaccination policy with verifiable indicators, and a funding plan if the Hepatitis B is to be effectively managed. The policy development process should include all stakeholders including, among others, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Local Government and the Gastroenterology Society. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair. I think you are required to hand over your minutes.

DR BUKENYA: Allow me to lay on the Table the minutes of the health committee on the issues of Hepatitis B. I also beg to lay on the Table a copy of the report made by the sectoral committee on health on the Hepatitis B endemic in Uganda. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair. I believe that congratulations are in order because this is your first report as a committee. We congratulate the health committee. (Applause)

5.46
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Committee on Health for the work they have done. I think it is worth commending them for what they have come up with. 

I want to defend the ministry on part of what they have said, especially as far as records are concerned. In Tororo, Tororo Hospital in particular, the programme for Hepatitis B vaccination is ongoing and I have my card here to prove that I was vaccinated on the following dates. I do not know if they stopped doing that in Tororo and other areas. 

I want to say also that the sensitisation level is low –(Interjection)- I will lay it on the Table because it is mine and I have it here. Sensitisation is really low. The ministry should start on sensitisation because we have now taken up that role. Whenever I ask in a population of about 300 people how many of them have been vaccinated, they are about only 10. So this is very serious.

I also want to say that I have a challenge; in Malaba, vaccination has started, but we have a problem of very many people who come from as far as Kenya for vaccination in Uganda. Therefore, I would ask the minister here to step up the status of Malaba Health III to a health centre IV so that they can vaccinate many people. 

Aware that Somalia has a problem and yet the camps in Kenya are closing, we expect very many people to come to Uganda and that might actually increase the infection rate here. One of our colleagues in this august House suffered a lot from Hepatitis B, and that is hon. William Beijukye from Ruhaama. I would like to ask the chairperson –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, he reported. I am told he has been away for two months in India. He is here. Welcome back; we are happy to see you again. (Applause) Okay, hon. Angura, conclude that statement.

MR ANGURA: I know many of you have not interacted with hon. Beijukye and so you may not know what his ordeal was. If today you asked him to remove his shirt and you saw what happened to him – He was operated from up here up to down. (Laughter) He is there and cannot undress himself here but the ordeal – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Angura, I think that information about our colleague is enough. 

MR ANGURA: If the chairperson has told us that it is true the money disappeared and that whatever we appropriated the other day is not seen, then the honourable minister should actually tell us what is happening in the ministry. This is very serious and we need to give this issue a lot of attention. I have buried many people who have died of Hepatitis B in my constituency. Therefore, honourable minister- (Member timed out.) 

5.50
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I come from Tororo and Tororo Hospital is one of the selected hospitals for Hepatitis B treatment. It is unfortunate that the statistics given here indicate that only 30 per cent of those diagnosed with the disease get treatment. 

These are the very cries that we have been making in this House here; that people are diagnosed and when they go for treatment, they are told that the vaccines are not there. They are told to go and buy these vaccines but when you raise the issue here, the responsible people will tell you that the vaccines are there. My question is: where are these vaccines? 

We do not have these facilities that have been highlighted in the report in Tororo Hospital. If you visited that hospital, you would find that there are no ultrasound machines. Patients are advised to go and seek these services from private service providers. This becomes very costly for the citizens of this country. 

My appeal to Government is to prioritise health issues. We cannot leave health issues to the private sector because the population cannot afford some of these services. As I speak, in Tororo and specifically, in my constituency of West Budama North, the majority of the people who have been diagnosed with Hepatitis B have not received the vaccines –(Member timed out.) 

5.52
MR JOHN TWESIGYE (NRM, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to, first of all, thank the committee for this good report. I would like to bring recommendation No. 8.7 to the attention of the honourable members. It has been clearly pointed out that the Ministry of Health is not coordinating well with the Ministry of Local Government. 

I was in my constituency recently and I found out that most of the diseases that the people in the community are suffering from are preventable diseases. In this situation, when we get challenges of Hepatitis B coupled with broken-down health management systems in the districts related to primary healthcare, we are going to have a big challenge. 

The committee I sit on has toured some of these health units in the country. To be specific, you find that someone is complaining about malaria, which can be prevented from the start. A majority of people are suffering and they are not sensitised, so they do not know what to do exactly. 

I also support this recommendation that the coordination between the ministries of health and local government is strengthened, especially in the areas of primary healthcare. The country would save a lot in terms of its people. I thank you.  

5.54
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. At the height of the Hepatitis B scourge, in the Ninth Parliament, we passed a budget of Shs 11 billion and all of us were passionate about it. It is very sad to hear that at the level of implementation, it became an issue of coordination. 

We represent and speak for the poor and suffering people. At the end of the day, we have a ping pong match between the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Health. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development claims that the Ministry of Health is not accounting for the drugs while the Ministry of Health claims that is not their issue. It is now the grass that suffers. I think it is very unfortunate that the powers of the institution of Parliament are being abused. When this issue was brought here, we were told that it was urgent. 

Madam Speaker, I also want to talk about the health workers. I remember we said that the health workers must be immunised with all the three doses. This is because they are the ones who are going to vaccinate those who are either already infected or those who are supposed to get the vaccine. How can they do this if they have not been vaccinated? If we are talking about occupational safety and we are not protecting the health workers, what exactly are we doing? 

I think the Ministry of Health needs to pull up its socks and ensure that the local government is aware of what is happening. This is because when these drugs are taken, they are just dumped in the institutions and you do not know who is going to handle these issues. 

Madam Speaker, the people who are already infected with Hepatitis B are also suffering. We are now talking about a vaccine but the treatment of those people is at stake and many people have died. We have interfaced with people suffering from Hepatitis B and due to the conditions described, those who are not infected are afraid to touch the infected persons. Many of them have died in very pathetic conditions. 

Therefore, I would like to call upon our ministers and ministries to coordinate to ensure that we deliver services to the poor people of Uganda. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.56
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My worry is about the accountability of the Shs 3 billion, which was given out as part of the Shs 11 billion to start on the job of vaccination. The Shs 3 billion is not too much money to account for. If those people could not account for it, that means there will be a problem if they are given the Shs 8 billion. 

These are the people who went to school, got the jobs as technical people and at the moment, they are claiming that they cannot account for Shs 3 billion. I look at these people as if they are the ones who are going to make us lag behind as far as treating –(Mr Abala rose_)- I do not have enough time, hon. Abala. 

The report was written before the committee discovered that these people had failed to account for Shs 3 billion. Now that we have discovered that they have failed to account for that money, I propose that the committee summons those people so that they face this committee. Thereafter, we can give recommendations to this House again and see how we can handle those people. 

We need to have trustworthy people in the ministry to handle the money to treat our people. Previously, I remember that there was a scandal in that ministry where money, which was supposed to treat HIV positive patients, was mishandled. In my opinion –(Member timed out.) 

5.59
MR WILLIAM BEIJUKYE (NRM, Ruhaama County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I have suffered from Hepatitis B. I was taken to India for treatment immediately after the swearing-in and I spent three months there. I applied to Parliament to be facilitated but I was told that there was no money. I had to resort to money lenders to get money so as to access treatment out of the country. Up to now, I have never been reimbursed. I am supposed to go back – 

THE SPEAKER: Have you written to the Speaker? Where is the letter?

MR BEIJUKYE: Yes, the letters are everywhere.

THE SPEAKER: When I receive letters, I act immediately. I have acted on all the Members that have fallen sick. I have not seen your letter.

MR BEIJUKYE: Okay, it is fine. Maybe it is on the way. People are dying of the virus but the ministry is continually misappropriating what would be used to buy the drugs. Hepatitis is real but if you have not suffered from it, you may not know that it is there. It is all over Uganda because the information I got is that Kampala International University tested 800 students and found over 80 of them already infected with the virus.

Therefore, I call upon Parliament to support immunisation. We need to increase the budget because there is nothing that we can do if the other money was eaten by corrupt officials. There are so many people that are going to be affected by the same.

If people would like to be immunised, there are many clinics in Kampala that can immunise but they are very costly. As such, maybe the Government can subsidise on the vaccination because all clinics have the ability to vaccinate. People should be able to go there and get vaccinated at a fair fee of maybe Shs 20,000. However, the majority of the clinics are charging Shs 55,000. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.01
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for giving us comprehensive information. I would like to talk about the use of treatment. 

When we talk about Hepatitis B, its treatment is not like that of malaria or other diseases. For you to undergo treatment, you need to undergo at least three tests to confirm that you need treatment. One, it must be ascertained whether the Hepatitis B virus is developing or it is dormant. Two, they must know whether the level of the virus in your blood requires treatment. Three, the state of your liver needs to be ascertained. If all these are confirmed – 

Hepatitis B virus enters the cells of the liver and the white blood cells cannot keep on fighting the virus; all they do is to remove those cells that are infected. As more cells are removed, at the end of the day you find that your liver has less cells. If you are put on treatment at this stage, that means that the drugs will kill you fast because the liver becomes weak. 

The challenge here is that there is need to have machines that can ascertain the level of the virus in your blood and the state of the virus - whether it is dormant or not. In West Nile, for example, we have three clinics, which are well established. One is in Arua managed by Dr Emmanuel and another one is in Adjumani managed by Dr Drametu. However, these people cannot go ahead to treat because these machines are not there.

Therefore, as we talk about vaccination, if we are to take care of those who are infected, we must also look at the budget to procure these machines and have them at the regional level, so that those who are tested positive can have the state of the virus in their blood checked so that they can undergo the treatment. Without that, there is nothing that can be done.

As of now, when they get people who are infected, they are not treated; they are left at the mercy of God. I think that as we are doing vaccination, it must be done concurrently with treatment so that we can help those who are infected and those who are not. 

I propose that as we look at the budget for vaccination, we also ascertain how much it will cost to get these machines. As of now, those who have money can travel all the way from Yumbe to Kampala or from Arua to Kampala just to check their status. However, those who do not have money do not come. Let us look at the issue of treatment vis-à-vis the machines and also the issue of vaccination such that we have a complete approach to –(Member timed out.)

6.05
MS JACQUELINE AOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You know, sometimes we need to give credit where it is due. As I speak, we have received vaccines in Nebbi. I am in touch with the DHO and he says that they are waiting for the testing kits. Therefore, I would like the minister to also furnish us with information. Now that they have sent the vaccines, how long will it take for the testing kits to follow the vaccines? 

On the issue of the ministries that are supposed to work together, we get lost as Parliament when we find out that they are not working together. If one ministry says that they do not know what is happening in another ministry and yet they are supposed to be coordinating, what are we supposed to do? Tomorrow we might hear that the Ministry of Trade and Industry does not know what the Ministry of Agriculture is doing or that they are not aware of what the Ministry of Water and Environment is doing regarding irrigation. We do not want to come and find the same story. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.07
MS SILVIA AKELLO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice on the issue of Hepatitis B treatment. We have heard from the chairperson that the treatment for Hepatitis B patients, who have undergone all the tests that hon. Onzima was talking about, is ARVs and yet the same ARVs are used for those who are on treatment for HIV/AIDS. When you compare HIV/AIDS with Hepatitis B, people will imagine that you would rather have HIV/AIDS than have Hepatitis B. This is because Hepatitis B takes a shorter time to kill someone compared to HIV. 

In addition, we now know how to handle those who have HIV. However, with Hepatitis B, people are not aware. You find some saying that when you have it, you are not supposed to share shelter, clothing and plates, among other things. That means that we regard those who have tested positive for Hepatitis B to be more high risk. I propose that we need to do serious civic education on how to counsel people who have Hepatitis B so that they can also prolong their lives. Thank you.

6.08
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report, which has given us an insight into what is happening with this Hepatitis B pandemic. 

I am wondering why Government, or even ourselves, have taken things lightly concerning Hepatitis B. In the 1990s, when HIV was at its peak, Government came up full blast and sensitised the populace. There was great awareness in the whole country. 

I remember I was a principal of a TTC and the Ministry of Education came in and the students put together a musical drama and other activities for awareness. However, I do not know what is going on. People are not aware and do not even know what Hepatitis B is, what they are supposed to do, its cause or what they would feel like if they got this disease.

We have not been hearing about it in Manafwa but it is coming because Tororo is now pushing it to us. (Laughter) One of my cousins called me last week and said that her son was suffering from a disease they called hippopotamus. I did not know what they meant, so I tried to figure out which disease this was called “hippopotamus”. When I inquired from someone, he said they could be talking about Hepatitis B. People do not know. How do we make them aware? 

Honourable Minister of Health, what is your strategy? How are the people deep in the villages and the mountains going to become aware of this pandemic? One of my voters told me that her nephew had got the disease; she knew it –(Member timed out.)

6.11
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee but I am here in tears. In my place, some people call it “appetite”. (Laughter) When you talk of “appetite”, people think you have the disease.

The ministry has not accounted for money and I am perturbed, Madam Speaker. May I know from the minister, who was the director general at that time, what happened? A fish starts rotting from the head. Can I get information from the minister what action she took? 

I request that everybody who was involved in the Shs 3 billion scandal steps aside and we get other people to implement this. Otherwise, people are going to die because X and Y has not accounted for the money. Madam Speaker, I request that instead of reporting to the Committee on Health, which has other issues to deal with, these people should go to the Public Accounts Committee.

6.13
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Reprehensive, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I was reading the report, on page 12 I saw the indications of the committee on projections for the whole country. They give the required finances for vaccination and all the necessary things they have to do to make sure that the whole country is covered, especially in areas of prevalence. 

I got so disturbed because the amount of money that is required is very little; only Shs 200 billion is required to cover the country for vaccination, laboratory reagents, antivirals and programme activities. How can we fail to afford just a total of Shs 200 billion to have districts that are affected, vaccinated when we can afford to bail out Crane Bank with an equivalent of Shs 200 billion? We have to get serious, Madam Speaker.

Secondly, when this matter was brought on the Floor of Parliament, you are aware that Members have been coming back and forth on the Floor on this issue. We were told by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that the Ministry of Health does not have the capacity to absorb the funds that are provided for Hepatitis B and any other activities. May we know from the minister what the problem is? How can Parliament help you? 

Agago District is one of the districts that have a high prevalence and we do not have this vaccine; we are still waiting for money to be appropriated so that my people can get the vaccines. However, even for districts where the vaccines are going, you are not able to account for the number of people vaccinated and you are not able to provide testing kits. The honourable member from Nebbi has just informed us today that the vaccines have arrived but the testing kits are not there. What is happening, honourable minister? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.15
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by thanking the committee for this good report.

Honourable minister, you are a professional but we are throwing vaccines because some people are being vaccinated without being tested. What is the implication of vaccinating people when they have not been tested? I see this as throwing people into the condemned section of medical treatment. We are giving the ministry money but you go ahead and do this kind of thing for us! 

I talk with a very heavy heart, Madam Speaker. Sometime back on the Floor of this Parliament, there was a clash between the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Ministry of Health. Ministry of Finance was blaming the Ministry of Health for lack of accountability, but the Ministry of Health defended themselves. However, today, here we are; the issue is very clear that there is no proper accountability.

The technocrats go around very actively, but when the money is released, they go back, sit and fold their hands and begin eating. Can the minister before us here clarify what is happening in her ministry? Many times we blame the Ministry of Finance but I see that other ministries also have questions that must be answered before this Parliament. I am very disappointed that there is no coordination amongst ministries. Look, for example –(Member timed out.)

6.17
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Madam Speaker, this Parliament is blessed because the former Director General of Health Services is the Minister of Health now, meaning that we are going to get the best answers about this matter. 

Let this go on record; I want to thank you, Madam Speaker. In the Ninth Parliament, I saw you seated there when Members from these regions suffering from Hepatitis B were rising up here and you were giving them time to push Government. Now, if we were going to heaven, this is the time to ask, “Joseph Ssewungu, Rebecca Kadaga, when the issue of Hepatitis B came around, what did you do?” You will say, “As the Speaker, I directed” and Ssewungu will say, “As a Member of Parliament, I did my work”. “Now go to the right hand of the Father.” The Ministry of Health will be told, “What happened when you were given this money? The report is revealing nasty things. Go to hell!”

Madam Speaker, I beseech Members here, kindly, when reports are being read on the Floor of Parliament, pay attention to them. Some Members do not comprehend these reports. I saw Members from Tororo clashing with one another. One Member from Tororo says he was vaccinated. 

The issue in this report is about value for money, where they tell you that there is no single document revealing those who were vaccinated or Ministry of Health cannot provide kits. What did they do? This means that they are treating people who are already suffering before vaccination. This is the value for money that we are talking about.

Former Director General of Health Services, now the current minister, what answer can you give to this Parliament about value for money? We are not going to keep playing about with these things -(Member timed out.)

6.20
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute South County, Lira): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and members for bringing out this report. 

This report is a big indictment on Government. I am beginning to wonder for how long Ugandans who pay taxes must cry, kneel, undress; what should they do for Government to respond? If it was another country or Ebola somewhere, you would see how this Government would be struggling. What more do we need for this Government to love the people that have put them in power? 

When you read this report, you realise that there has been complete gross negligence by the ministry in responding to Hepatitis B since 2005. The statistics that we have here were from a study on people who have HIV and Hepatitis B. They did not study people who have Hepatitis B. It means that many people with Hepatitis B, or those at risk, have not been studied in this report. 

This Government is not investing in knowing how many people were infected in 2016; there is no record. However, if you ask where Mr Besigye is going tomorrow, the Government knows it in advance. If you ask them who is organising the meeting tomorrow; they know it. However, they do not know the records about Hepatitis B. 

I would like to advise that the Minister of Health stops playing around. If you are given money and somebody came and borrowed it for elections, tell us on this Floor. You cannot be asked to account for money and you keep quiet. If somebody took it, just tell us; that is part of accountability. If it was given from the left and the right hand took it, tell us and we will take it as accountability. Therefore, I would like to move that this House demands that the minister comes to this Floor and explains where the Shs 3 billion has gone.

Lastly, you cannot talk about the whole country at this stage when you have failed to use the little money. Shs 200 billion is much, but we would like to see the money that has been extended to you so far being used on the people that are suffering, especially in Lango sub region. On the treatment centres that the committee has identified, I have carefully analysed that in Karamoja there is Moroto; in West Nile, there is Arua and Adjumani; in Acholi -(Member timed out.)

6.23
MR ABACANON ANGIRO GUTOMOI (FDC, Erute North County, Lira): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, this is a very grievous matter that we are discussing. I would like to thank the Committee on Health for their good report, which I described as a very worrying statement. 

Very soon, we will now know how many Ugandans are dead-living and those that are living. When we go through testing, we are very sure that we shall know those who are already dead and those who are alive. I think we should have a census of those who are sick because after testing, we will know those who are already negative and those who are positive. Therefore, we need to know how much money is needed so that each Ugandan is allocated money for treatment. Therefore, we now need a supplementary budget immediately. 

If any supplementary budget came to this House before this, then I think we must throw it out with concern because people out there are dying. The question is: Why is it that accountability of only Shs 3 billion cannot be given? This is a trend from the GAVI funding; we are aware of how that money was swindled and the results of that swindling. This is exactly what is going to happen.

I would like to make it very clear to the NRM Government that this is going to force us to attempt to impeach the President of this country. There is no way you can survive if we are continuing to die when we can borrow the money. Why can’t we borrow? What is wrong with borrowing the money? Why should we wait until people die? Then we talk of not impeaching him! –(Interjections)- You do not care about this. I see how you are behaving; you do not care about Ugandans - the centre where the war has been.

Committee members, what information can you give us about Kenya, Tanzania and others; are they suffering from Hepatitis B? Uganda has been at the centre of war for a long time and this has resulted into Hepatitis B. 

We have suffered in the north; we know what it takes. Maybe there is a hidden agenda. Should all the people in northern Uganda die so that you get the land? Is that the issue? Why can’t you go full swing and get money to treat the people of Uganda equally? –(Interjections)- There is no point of order here; the order is that we want money now so that we buy drugs and we test the people of Uganda and they get treatment. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.26
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I would like to differ from my friend who is looking for the President to impeach him when the people whom we have to impeach are among us. A country where we want the President to be the vaccinator, where we want the President to be the supplier of medicine is very dangerous. That is a country where institutions have collapsed.

I stood here and for the first time, I clashed with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because of matters of health. I will join hon. Ssewungu in appreciating your leadership in this House, Madam Speaker, regarding matters of health. Nobody can fault you on that. 

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had to put me to order but a matter of health is health. When he was talking about the Shs 3 billion not accounted for, I did not understand that the problem was from the Ministry of Health. For the record, I will have to apologise to that minister. The people we need to blame are not the Ministry of Finance; the people playing around with the lives of Ugandans are Ministry of Health.

I stood here on 20 September this very year and said that one LCI chairperson called Moses Owori was sick; he is no longer - the chairman of Yokolo Zone, Nabuyoga Subcounty, Nabuyoga Parish. He died of the same –(Interruption) 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, honourable member, for giving me this opportunity to give you information. Hon. Oboth, you said that we should not blame Ministry of Finance but we should blame Ministry of Health singlehandedly. I do not want to agree with you. 

The committee in this very report we are debating has indicated very clearly that even when Parliament appropriates money, Ministry of Finance does not release it all. They were supposed to release Shs 34 billion but they released only Shs 13 billion. So, all of them have to be blamed. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, but I am also aware that accountability requires that you first account for the money disbursed before you are given more. Thank you for that information. I will find the right place for it.

Madam Speaker, this Parliament should be known, praised and appreciated for working for the health of Ugandans. We would like to identify that from 2002, children have been vaccinated at the age of 6 months, 10 months and 14 months and that is good. How about we, the adults, who could have acquired it before 2002? In fact, in my place now when you fall sick and your tummy expands – I see some Members here with expanded tummies; they could be taken as people who are suffering from that disease. (Laughter)

6.29
MR ONESMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi East County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the last two consecutive financial years, the Government availed some funds for the first phase of 39 highly endemic districts, of which 30 are from the northern region and nine are from Teso.

When you go through table 2 of this report, Kasese District has 2,570 people who are Hepatitis B positive. The total number of patients under care in Kasese is 771. The total number of patients in Kasese is third highest after Dokolo that has 3,463 and Gulu that has 3,262. Madam Speaker, this Kasese District, which has the third highest number of people living with Hepatitis B, was not included in the first phase. This was data gathered by the National Organisation for People Living with Hepatitis B sampled in some district health facilities.

You could even find that in other areas such as Kabarole and Bushenyi, there are people living with Hepatitis B. The same applies to Kibaale where I come from. My point is that even in western Uganda, there are people who are victims of this. Therefore, let Government avail the Shs 200 billion to do nationwide mass screening and vaccination of Hepatitis B, not simply in northern and eastern Uganda-

THE SPEAKER: Is hon. Twinamasiko a member of the committee? We are discussing your report in totality.

6.32
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Madam Speaker, there is an exceedingly dangerous cancer eating up the entire national fabric that is much more dangerous than corruption, bigger than kleptocracy and even greater than embezzlement; it is called impunity. 

There was an accounting officer of the Ministry of Health who was managing the financial aspect of the ministry during this period. I remember very well that there was a scandal where money was diverted to a private bank account and he ran away for one month and later came back. Therefore, we are not surprised that we are seeing another Shs 3 billion missing. However, where is he now? Recently, there was a reshuffle of accounting officers and permanent secretaries. Some of them were dropped -(Interjections)- Was he dropped? He was not. He was given another entity. This issue of continuing to condone corruption is exceedingly disturbing.

Madam Speaker, we come here sent by Ugandans and we work very hard. You appreciate the hours we spend here. You push us and we appreciate how you manage to sit here even up to 11.00 p.m. However, we write very critical reports but what do we see? This money, which was meant for vaccines, could not have just left the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We do not know where the money meant for vaccines goes. 

Therefore, there is certainly a racket and we must address this. It begins in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Unfortunately, most of the corruption is connected. Some of it begins with various budgeting, while some comes with supplementaries. From here, it goes to the entities. Year in, year out we come here and keep on agonising –(Member timed out.)

MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue of Hepatitis B is real. I would like to say on the record that in Soroti District, for every 10 deaths recorded, seven are as a result of Hepatitis B. We are burying people every day because of Hepatitis B. It is a very serious problem and the Ministry of Health needs to step up their game to control this epidemic.

On a good note, I would like to appreciate that last Friday, we launched mass vaccination as a district. On 29th of October, we interfaced with H.E the President when he was in Teso and I told him that this problem is real and he really needs to come in as the chief executive of this country. We are happy, and he said if there is need to borrow money, he would do it. That was a very positive note on his side and I would like to thank him for that.

However, the problem we are experiencing is that even in areas where they have delivered these vaccines, the people who have been vaccinated receive one dose only. By the time they are supposed to get the second dose after one month, the vaccines are over. That means they have to start all over again. Where is the value for money here? In some areas, they are delivering the vaccines and the test kits are less than the vaccines provided. How can a whole ministry do this? (Member timed out.)

6.38
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the rest who have lamented. Ugandans have prayed and God has heard. Unfortunately, some people seem not to understand the call of God. This is a call of God. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Health should actually tell us the truth. The truth of the matter is that a special audit was actually conducted. Madam Speaker, this is a reality. If they want me to prove, I will do it; I have the proof. It is signed by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. He is the one who endorsed that report -

THE SPEAKER: An audit on what?

MR ABALA: On the Shs 3 billion.

THE SPEAKER: Lay it on the Table for us.

MR ABALA: Unfortunately, I do not have it here but I will bring it to your office, even tomorrow –(Interjections)- I am sure, Madam Speaker. (Laughter) The ministers should tell us the truth; I do not want people to lie to Ugandans. They are both Christians.

Secondly, the report does not say anything about Ngora. As of 30 September, Ngora District had 3,185 people who were suffering from Hepatitis B. In the last five years, I have been attending all the burials and I have buried about 106 people in Ngora. If nothing is done - You see, our colleague went to India because he could afford but how about the Ugandans who cannot borrow; what are we going to do? (Member timed out.)

6.40
MS JUSTINE KHANIZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is estimated that 3.5 million Ugandans suffer from Hepatitis B. I am perturbed by the fact that the committee has reported that Ministry of Health has no data on those who were treated and those who were tested. Honourable minister, this is very sad for Uganda. 

As a country, we would like to get to WHO standards of reducing Hepatitis B infection by 90 per cent and 65 per cent deaths by 2030. How shall we achieve this if as a nation we do not have statistics? How are we planning for the country if we have no data? Data can be used for projections and even for the current treatment. It is very unfortunate and I do not believe this, honourable minister. Please, shed more light on this. 

If this is the case, it is very unfortunate and it shows the unseriousness in the ministry. It makes some of us agree with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that Ministry of Health has no capacity. What are the technocrats doing since it is their work as partners in fighting the disease? Where are those statistics, honourable minister? I am really disappointed. Thank you. 

6.41
MS DOROTHY AZAIRWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee chairperson and the committee members for the exhaustive report they have presented about Hepatitis B. 

I feel very bad, especially when in the august House we have a fellow Member of Parliament, hon. William Beijukye, who suffered from the same disease. He tried his best to go for treatment despite the fact that his request has not reached the Speaker, who is a mother of this nation and always gives positive responses to whoever makes a request, especially in terms of health. I also understand the pain he was going through when he was out of this country. He made a request to the Clerk’s office because they were assisting him to make sure that he got the travel documents to India.

Madam Speaker, I see a very big mess in this country. When we got the problem of the HIV/AIDS scourge, every radio station and newspaper was circulating this message and trying to explain what could be done to avoid or stop the HIV/AIDS scourge. Hepatitis B is like Ebola; it gets you when you do not know and by the time they realise it is there, you are done. 

Why can’t Members of the Tenth Parliament declare that we have a state of emergency if we cannot control Hepatitis B? I sit on the Public Accounts Committee and it is a pity whenever we identify these issues of accounting officers failing to account for money we give them. This is a ministry we have been advocating for to be given a lot of money but they cannot account for Shs 3 billion. I feel very small -(Member timed out.)

6.44
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee for its report and to thank the honourable members for the questions that they have been raising. I am happy that they are concerned about the health of our citizens. The emotion with which they talk gives me encouragement that in future when I come here and present, they will definitely support me. 

Madam Speaker, in response to the issues raised, I would like to agree with the honourable members that there has been low sensitisation of the public for a number of reasons. In the Financial Year 2014/2015, the budget that was provided for Hepatitis B was Shs 10 billion and in that budget, there was no provision for sensitization; it was strictly for vaccination and test kits. In this financial year, a budget of Shs 2 billion has been provided and part of it is for sensitisation. 

Our partners will not come in to support us on this. Allow me today to inform the House that we need to appreciate our Government that took up the vaccination of adults against Hepatitis B. It is not a recommendation of WHO and no other African country has undertaken this except Uganda. We really need to appreciate Government.

Madam Speaker, Uganda is handling this alone. Government, therefore, has to mobilise resources and invest in this in order for us to save the adults that are suffering from Hepatitis B. No wonder, Kenyans are coming into the country because of our porous borders to access vaccination. It is not only Kenyans; there are other porous borders all around and they are also coming in to access vaccination. However, the Hepatitis B vaccine is not cheap. It is extremely expensive and we have to take note of this.

Madam Speaker, we have got some little money for sensitisation. This is being remitted to the districts majorly for radio talk shows but also for sensitisation of the district leaders as well as training health workers. The programme is ongoing and we shall continue expanding it as resources come in.

We have got medicine for treatment of people who have Hepatitis B. As we have previously presented here, not everybody who tests positive is eligible to treatment. There are other tests that you have to undergo for us to confirm that you are eligible according to the hepatologists. However, by Monday medicine will be in Mulago, Adjumani and Arua. Subsequently, we shall distribute the medicines to some of centres that have medical officers who have been trained and are able to give it. 

We acknowledge the challenges with supportive supervision, not coordination, because the mandate of the ministry is very clear and the mandate of local governments is very clear; they are the implementers. Medical officers are also very aware about what they need to do. 

While I accept that the training of the health workers has not been very adequate, the local governments know their mandate and they have received guidelines on how they are supposed to implement this activity.  Definitely, there have been challenges because this is a new activity added onto what they have been doing before and we are not providing extra resources for that. However, I would like to appreciate that they are actually undertaking the activity in spite of the challenges.

Madam Speaker, health workers have been immunised but we all must realise that recruitment takes place every year and therefore, new people come in. Nobody has requested me to provide the data of all workers who have been immunised. If I am requested, I will provide it. I have that information.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, just supply it to the country; do not wait to be requested.

DR ACENG: Health workers were immunised between 2014 and 2015. Right now, they are part of the adult population that can be immunised in the districts where the vaccines have been supplied. Also in the hospitals, we are providing vaccines for them.

There was a statutory instrument that clearly indicates that it is mandatory for health workers to be immunised and this was officially launched. However, health workers are also human beings like all; they are also faced with fear and stigma. Therefore, some of them actually avoid going for the test and being immunised.

It is true that we do not have equipment in all the facilities to analyse people who test positive. However, I am also happy to state that we have a national hepatitis reference centre just here in Butabika where we have our National Health Laboratory Services. Samples are transported from all over the country and results are returned within 24 hours. We are doing this for all who test positive and we would like to find out whether they are eligible for treatment.

It is quite expensive to have these machines all over the country, but we are also doing this with viral load and early infant diagnosis and it is working. I believe that what we have here can push us for now. I am happy that some honourable members came and visited our laboratory toady, which we were officially commissioning, and they have seen the capacity that Government has set in place. (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I was among the 18 Members of Parliament who were invited for this function. When we reached there in our Coaster, we were really harassed because they told us that we were not invited, and so, we were not on the list of those invited. There are Members here who can bear witness. 

In the end, we had a very big quarrel there. The new Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Health found us there and she did not even greet us. We boarded our Coaster and we only left the chairman of the Committee on Health and hon. Katoto Hatwib. They said they were going to stay and meet the President to tell him about the situation. Now, is the minister in order to say that some Members were invited when actually some Members and I had to leave because we were told we were not invited?

THE SPEAKER: I had not yet got the report but the indication in the Members’ faces is that they were ejected. I can see a number of Members here saying that.

DR ACENG: Madam Speaker, allow me to apologise to the Members for the mistreatment that they got. It is, indeed, true that they faced some mistreatment at the gate. However, it is also true that my Permanent Secretary came in to save the situation. Some honourable members actually came in and sat throughout the commissioning. The others left and as I said before, I am truly sorry for that. (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. All along, we have been telling Members of Parliament that going to ministries is very dangerous. You can see the whole Ministry of Health chasing away Members of Parliament who probably were sick too. 

Madam Speaker, would it not be procedurally right that from now on, any ministry which wants our MPs first asks you and then you are the one to select which Members should go to the ministries’ functions? Otherwise, going alone, they might treat you as strangers or enemies.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, we have to address this. The other day, some Members were ejected from a tobacco control meeting in India. Somebody from there organised for their ejection. We need to address it, really. I will think of what to do and I will give you an answer on Tuesday. Honourable minister, please conclude.

DR ACENG: Madam Speaker, the Members also raised issues of the absence of test kits. I would like to inform this august House that test kits were distributed with vaccines to all the 25 new districts. It is only test kits for the Selexon machines that we did not distribute because they are extremely expensive. If we bought them, we would not have an adequate number of test kits for the population that we would like to screen. Therefore, we opted for the cheaper ones - the Hepatitis B surface antigen - and they were distributed. They are available in all the 25 districts. What is missing are the vacutainers for collection of blood, which will be distributed next week, because the distributors are different and they did not supply at the same time. 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of data, I do not have any letter requesting me to provide data but I have the data. I know who has been tested, who has tested positive and who has tested negative. In the districts where we have been vaccinating, we have the information- (Interruption)

MR NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, the report has indicated that there is no data. Is the minister in order to stand before Parliament to say she has data, which she cannot lay on the Table of Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the chairperson of the Committee on Health; why didn’t you get the data from the minister if she has got it?

DR BUKENYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the Members here can testify. When we talked about data, the minister said local government is the implementing body, therefore it is not her duty and she cannot force them to give her data. That is what she said in the committee. Hon. Aol here was there. 

That is when we actually called the Minister of Local Government and he did not appear but the permanent secretary came with a focal person from the ministry. That was her statement, like she said here today, that the mandate is very clear that local government implements and she could not give us statistics. 

MR SSEWUNGU: I think we are now going to use our language very well. Madam Speaker, I have listened to the Permanent Secretary very well -(Laughter)- I am sorry, the honourable minister -(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, hon. Ssewungu is a senior member of this Parliament. He was in the Ninth Parliament and he is one of the most effective members of Parliament in this House. Is he in order - moreover a teacher of language - to keep on referring to the honourable minister as a Permanent Secretary while she has never been one? Is he really in order? Unless we ask him to withdraw and apologise and we even say-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Ssewungu is a member of the Committee on Appointments. He was present when we were vetting the minister. Therefore, he is out of order.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I am very sorry. You see, we used to interact very much with her in Public Accounts Committee. 

I have heard the minister say “I have data” in her own words. She said, “I”; is it you as an individual who has the data or you as a ministry? We need to separate the two. We are getting good information and indeed, there are challenges in the ministry. That is what the chairman of the committee said. He talked about challenges and he gave the same challenges. 

Now, can you tell us, honourable minister, do you have data as an individual - “I” in the first person - or you have it as a ministry? Why did you deny the committee information because that, again, is a violation of our Rules of procedure and the Constitution? You must provide data because this is public information. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the issue of data, in my opinion since the minister says she has the data, we can upload it on our system even tomorrow. Therefore, we can give a chance to the minister because probably she has just seen the report. So, tomorrow she will be able to upload it here. Thank you.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, we are talking about life and death here and what we are seeing is either a game of words or a ploy. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development why do you say it casually that a minister can come to this House and say, “I have data and nobody wrote to me”? 

The same minister appeared before a committee and the chairperson of that committee, representing this whole House, says they interfaced with the minister and the minister did not find it convenient to give and share information there. Now you, the hired Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as an advocate,-(Laughter)- you are pleading for the Minister of Health. Must we take you as casual as you sounded, that you can move in, say anything here and move out? 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, thank you. Is it in order for my friend to stand up and handle this issue casually –(Laughter)- when I have stood here, dressed in a suit and speaking about this issue authoritatively -(Laughter)- to request somebody that we can upload this data tomorrow? It is just a few hours from now; if it is available, Members of Parliament should access it tomorrow. Is he in order to take this House for granted?

THE SPEAKER: No, you are dressed in a suit. (Laughter) However, I would like to draw the attention of the minister to Article 90(3) of the Constitution. It provides thus: “In the exercise of their functions under this Article, committees of Parliament may- 
(a) call any minister or any person holding public office and private individuals to submit memoranda or appear before them to give evidence…” 

They also have powers of the High Court for- 
“(i) 	enforcing the attendance of witnesses and examining them on oath, affirmation or otherwise;
(ii) 	compelling the production of documents; and
(iii) 	issuing a commission or request to examine witnesses abroad.”

Therefore, Minister, you do not have a choice. The data you have belongs to the state. You cannot withhold it and you are out of order. (Applause.)

MS NAMUYANGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the local governments, all health facilities compile data regarding health issues, be it immunisation, patients or even treatment. On every seventh of the month, health facilities submit this data to the department of health at the district. This is then compiled by a statistician for onward transmission to the Ministry of Health. Therefore, I believe, like my senior colleague has said, they have the data and will be able to submit it.

DR ACENG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. At the time that we met the committee, I clearly told the committee that we did not have the information at that time but there were people moving around collecting data; if the data was required, then they would ask for it. I will upload data on the Members’ iPads. They will have it. 

On the issue of the Shs 3 billion, I would like to state here very clearly that it was accounted for and the accountability is available with the Ministry of Health and Ministry of Finance. I would like to encourage the House to request for that accountability so that it is provided. 

This Shs 3 billion was a supplementary, part of the Shs 11 billion that this august House appropriated. The Shs 3 billion was received one week to the end of the financial year at National Medical Stores. Because they have framework contracts, it was transferred to the supplier on the same day and the vaccines were supplied and have been distributed. We have accountability for the vaccines.

There is no money for Hepatitis B that has not been accounted for. I would like to encourage this House to follow up on the money for Hepatitis B - every shilling - to see that we have accounted for it. Madam Speaker, that is what I have to say. Thank you.

MR OLANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister about the treatment. It is true many of our people have tested positive; very many of our people from Amuru are positive but when they go to the regional referral hospital for treatment, the drugs are not there. 

When you were presenting, you mentioned two hospitals, Arua and Adjumani. I would like to find out when you are taking the treatment to all the districts. Also, you have to give us a way forward for those who are positive.

Finally, I would like to appreciate you, honourable minister; my district, Amuru, started getting people immunised this week. Therefore, I am so grateful for that. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: We need to end this, honourable members. However, since your areas are suffering, you may speak but quickly; do not go into many things.

MR GUTOMOI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On several occasions, the minister has been describing some of the apparatus used for testing as being very expensive. Perhaps, she would give us some data on these machines that are more expensive than the Members of Parliament and the citizens of this country.

MS AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the Minister of Health that we heard about the accountability here in Parliament when we discussed Hepatitis B. It was true that you did not account and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Ecnoomic Development was demanding for the accountability. Could you, please, clarify to us if the accountability was only done recently, because the committee did not receive the accountability? 

Other than the accountability for the Shs 3 billion, there was a supplementary vote that you did not use. We are wondering why you did not use the Shs 11 billion. When we debate here, we have it at the back of our minds. You need to clarify so that the committee does not just appear like one that is not serious. We seriously went through this.  

Honourable minister, if you recall, the other day you kept on saying that if you came here, the likes of hon. Aol should help you. However, I told you that it is you, the technical people, who should help us. I am a teacher and not a health worker. Thank you.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you. I would like to seek clarification from the minister on when my district, Agago, being one of those with a very high prevalence, will receive the vaccines. We have been waiting for long.

I also wish to request the minister that whenever you are carrying out activities especially of critical importance like this, you should furnish the area Members of Parliament with information so that we help you to mobilise people. It is very critical. All Members of Parliament require information so that we can be up-to-date with the right information and also help Government to mobilise. I thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you were not here when we were debating. Please, Minister, answer. 

DR ACENG: Madam Speaker, on the issue of the Shs 11 billion, I think that I have clearly stated that I only received Shs 3 billion. The Shs 8 billion has never been given to me.

I also clearly stated that I have accounted for the Shs 3 billion. I encourage this House to come and confirm that I have accounted for the Shs 3 billion. I will tell my honourable sister again that the accountabilities for the Shs 3 billion and Shs 10 billion are available.

This Parliament last month directed that I be given the Shs 5.4 billion, which was part of this financial year, to be front loaded. I have received that money and it is what I am using to procure more Hepatitis B vaccines. Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Health will provide accountability for these funds.

In regard to the medicine and distribution to the other facilities, we have just received the Shs 5.4 billion and the National Medical Stores has gone ahead to procure these drugs from Quality Chemicals. Tenofovir has been approved by the National Drug Authority while entecavir has not yet been approved. The information we have is that the approval process will be complete by next week and we shall have the drugs distributed to all the regional referrals because they have the specialists who will treat the patients.

Madam Speaker, we shall give a report on the progress of Hepatitis B to this august House. So far, we have distributed vaccines to the 25 new districts and to the 14 original districts, making a total of 39 districts. However, let me say at this early stage that the initial 14 districts only received vaccines for the first and second doses. The third dose has not yet been distributed. The current 25 districts have received vaccines only for the first dose; we shall require resources to procure vaccines for the second and third doses. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I would like to assure you that your sector has the biggest support in this House. We have done very many things to support health and I would like to encourage you to continue working with the Members of Parliament. We even depleted the Contingency Fund so that we could support your sector. Please, work with us and give us the necessary information because we will help you do your work.

Honourable members, we wanted to discuss the issue of Makerere University. However, I have realised that we do not have a framework of what we want at the end of the debate. It is, therefore, not good to just quarrel with ourselves and then go home. 

In line with that, I am directing the Clerk to sketch a framework of what we want to achieve at the end of the debate, which we can do on Tuesday or Wednesday. We can have a resolution that is focused. Thank you very much. The House is adjourned until 2 o’clock on Tuesday.  

(The House rose at 7.18 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 22 November 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 

