Monday, 19 November 2012

Parliament met at 11.35 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)
 
The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Thank you very much for coming early to start business. The business of the day is the pending Bill that we have been working on for a while. Members who have been sitting till late in the evenings, I want to thank you again for the sacrifice you made to push this Bill forward.

Bank of Uganda has organised a residential workshop due to take place at the Imperial Resort Beach Hotel, Entebbe, on Friday, 23 November 2012. All chairpersons and deputy chairpersons of standing and sectoral committees are invited together with the members of the following committees:

1. 	Finance, Planning and Economic Development
2. 	National Economy
3. 	Natural Resources
4. 	Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises 
5. 	Budget Committee
6. 	Legal and Parliamentary Affairs  
7. 	Public Accounts Committee

The topics to be discussed are:
1. 	Role of the central bank and the essence of its independence. 
2. Monetary policy formulation and implementation in an inflation targeting regime.
3. 	Financial regulation and financial inclusion.

Please note that the check-in is on the evening of Thursday, 22 November 2012. Committee clerks of the above listed committees should endeavour to attend and inform their members accordingly. Thank you.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

11.37
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Ms Irene Muloni): Mr Speaker, I have a request to recommit clause 9.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The rules allow you to move that request. You can recommit the whole Bill or you can recommit just some clauses of the Bill. You are making reference to clause 9 only but clause 9 has implications to some of the other clauses we have stood over, from 55 to 59. So, you cannot only recommit clause 9 and yet there are clauses that have the same effect, which have not been passed. So, maybe we deal with those other clauses and then at an appropriate stage you can make your application for recommittal and then we go into that. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, our rules provide for the recommittal but as you have guided, there was a lot of ground covered on clause 9. We virtually came to a standstill and we could not proceed. Does this therefore mean we shall have to revisit the entire Bill? 

Also, if this would emanate naturally from the Bill, from the discussions, it would be understandable. But for the minister to immediately shoot up as if there has been some revelation, which was not known to her before – (Laughter) – doesn’t it endanger the spirit of the debate and the consensus that was reached by this House? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As I have said, honourable member let us finish with all the clauses. When we come to report, before we move to that stage you can move your motion and the House will be able to take a decision on that. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We conceded to many clauses in the Bill thinking we had already covered ground on clause 9. In case clause 9 is to be revisited, then I am sorry I must say we may need to revisit quite a number of clauses that we have already even passed. I think the minister should be aware of this. In case you think you are going to revisit or you are requesting to have a second look at clause 9, then some of us will have many other clauses which we had already passed which will have to be revisited. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Let us go to the next item.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

Clause 3

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, there was a proposed amendment to have a new definition of a landowner. The proposal is to define landowner as follows: “A person who holds or occupies land in accordance with the Land Act.” The justification is: to take care of those who rightfully occupy land in accordance with the Land Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If that is the position, I put the question to that. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 37

MR WERIKHE: Under clause 37, powers to borrow, the amendment proposed is as follows: “The Authority may borrow money from any source as may be required for meeting its obligations or for the discharge of the functions of the Authority under this Act in accordance with the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003.” 

Justification: for clarity, since the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 gives detailed provisions on the authority to raise loans. The Act also provides for the need for parliamentary approval before the Authority can raise loans.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that amendment takes care of the concerns we expressed in the past. I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 54

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, clause 54 is supposed to remain as it is in the Bill. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the circumstances were explained where situations of direct application would arise.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Clause 54 was in respect to direct applications and we expressed strong reservations. That is the reason why it was stood over. We wanted to know the circumstances under which there could be direct applications. Even under emergencies, there are appropriate laws that can take care of emergencies. 

MRS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Honourable colleagues, you recall we discussed this matter and we shared with you the various circumstances that can arise, which would necessitate direct application. I would like to repeat the information that we shared last time. 

One situation is where we do not have applications received in response to the invitations for a bid. In this circumstance, if we have an area we advertise and there are no interested parties, one, two, three times, and an interested party comes on board, under such circumstances we ought to approve or accept direct applications. 

The second instance is where we have an existing licensee on a block but the next block is not licensed and underneath, the bulk of the reservoir is on this existing licensed block. It implies that if you grant the adjacent block to another party, they would be drilling from the same reservoir. So, under such circumstances where you have a reservoir extending into a neighbouring block, this would qualify for a direct application because it would be difficult for you to grant a new licence on a reservoir which is under an existing licensed block. 

A third scenario is the promotion of our national interest. Under this, we are looking at our own national oil company. Although colleagues here expressed concern that our national oil company should be as competitive as the international ones, you will appreciate where we are coming from. This is a new company that we are going to set up. So, such circumstances may arise where we need to deliberately support our own national oil company to get a block so that it can embark on business. Those are the reasons I want to give.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, you will remember that this law is meant to cure any abuse that may arise out of the licences being given directly. This is subject to abuse. 

In the policy we have, we do not intend to drill all the oil at ago. In the circumstances that a response has not been received or there are no applications received, we are not hurrying to go to the moon; we intend to build capacity. We want to have the licences given and within that period, the country can gain capacity; more advanced technology can be utilised as we plan for the next well. This appears like we are in such a rush to ensure that we offer licences and have the oil drilled as if the world is ending tomorrow. That is not the spirit of the policy. 

Even then, let us take into account the minister’s concerns. All of us are interested in nurturing the national oil company and everything can be done to that extent. However, I would rather we propose that instead of saying “the Minister”, since the Minister and the Authority are all part of Government let us put this within the ambit of the Authority. I say this with a lot of pain because I know that under our laws there are enough avenues within which we can help the national oil company, as you saw the provisions on the national oil company. 

With a lot of pain, in allowing this to stay as it is can we detach this from the minister and put it within the ambit of the Authority? So, it should be, “Notwithstanding section 53, the Authority, with the approval of the Minister...” Since the reasons you have given us are those that are holding, then the minister should not be involved in the nitty-gritty issues of assessing why a well has not been licensed, why no applications have been received, etc. We would be neater in giving it to the Authority with the approval of the Minister because the Authority and the Minister will be one and the same. I may reluctantly agree to the proposal, but let us put it in the technical hands.  

MS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. While I appreciate the concern of my brother, hon. Ssekikubo, as a check to avoid the abuse of this provision an application received directly is subject to clause 55. It is published in the Gazette 15 days after it is received, and it can be inspected at the offices and an objection to the said licence can be lodged.

Further to that, clause 11 clearly indicates that on the approval of licences and the agreement, the Authority will advise the minister. So, your concerns are very much catered for under clause 11 because it is explicitly stated that in all this process, the Authority will be advising the minister.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Any other concerns before I put the question to that?

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In the spirit of what we passed under clause 9, the amendment being sought by my colleague, hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, is in line with what we passed. Under clause 9, we said that matters of licensing be vested in the Authority with the approval of the minister. So, I beg my sister to allow this amendment to be moved so that we can move on.

MR WERIKHE: That being the case, it seems clause 9 has a bearing on this clause. In the circumstances, I would like to pray that the minister requests to have it stood over. I am saying this because when we resolve clause 9, this will apply.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The information being given by the minister is very presumptive that we are going to agree with her on the recommittal of clause 9. That is quite unfortunate because we have already taken the decision that licensing and negotiations should be in the hands of the Authority with the approval of the minister. 

The argument you are raising is about the Authority advising you, which is contrary to what we have already taken a decision on. If we vote on this, we will indirectly be amending the decision we have already taken on clause 9.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the only amendment is to have the approval of the minister. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I thought that the last time we had canvassed the various positions on this clause 54 in respect of direct applications. There was also broad agreement that even in those clauses that we already passed which depended on clause 9, there would be consequential amendments anyway. So, I do not think it is necessary to debate it again. However, in clause 54, on direct applications, whether it is the minister to approve or not, for him or her to do that they would be approving obviously what we have passed in clause 9 or what exists even now because that clause says the Authority will grant and the minister will approve. 

The substance of a direct application is: where you have had no response, can you solicit and interest someone to apply, should the law allow that possibility or not. In two, which she explained – and I hope there is no argument about it – where there is a reservoir, which goes beyond the licensed block into a block that is not yet licensed, the existing licensee should handle the whole well. It is obvious to me. I do not see why we would have an argument over that.

On the question of national interest, in addition to what the minister said, of course there are other interests and not only the oil company; it is national interests. Those interests could be coming from a security angle, from geo-politics or they may be national interests in the context of world politics. 

How can a country not have interests and therefore handle its strategic resource in its interest? We must have interventions at that level in order to promote our national interest and not to simply leave it to the market forces to determine it. I think we would be the only ones doing that in the whole world. Even the most capitalistic or even the most laissez-faire countries have something called “national interest” and it is the state that intervenes to achieve it. 

So, I would not have the worry which is being expressed because the way it is formulated now, it takes care of what we have already passed and will also take care of the formulation that we will have. In any case, we all know that if at recommittal the substance changes, obviously there are bound to be consequential amendments. That is obvious, as the shadow attorney-general said.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, do we have any disagreements on the principle of direct applications?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, it is excusable because when we were giving these powers to the Authority, the Prime Minister was not here. However, what we agreed on, in principle, was that this licensing process is a procurement and we do not want to see our ministers getting involved in it. 

Even on a reading of sub clause (2) of clause 54 - “For the purposes of subsection (1), exceptional circumstances include...” – definitely, it is not a conclusive list from what we have in (a), (b), and (c). So, what is it that is going to stop the minister from widening the list of these exceptional circumstances?

The point, Mr Chairman, is that if we provide for this kind of direct application, it will be a vote of no confidence in the Authority. You know that this Authority is appointed on the basis of competence, professionalism and statutory backing. So, for it not to have the foresight, vision and the necessary capacity to handle certain applications, that is not good.

The Prime Minister has said there may be situations of national interest. Are we saying that it should be only the minister or Cabinet to champion this national interest? I thought the Authority will be acting under the operation and policy guidelines issued by the minister and actually under the direct supervision of the minister.

I am of the humble view, Mr Chairman, that we leave out this thing called direct applications going to the minister. These applications, whether competitive or otherwise, can go to the Authority.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think we are now mixing up two principles here. There is the principle on whether we accept that there are situations that can warrant direct applications. The second one is who should do it. I think the “who should do it” is dependent on clause 9, which I now think the minister wants to bring for recommittal. We already passed that clause 9 saying that it is with the Authority. So, that is not debatable now.

The question is, for example, block A is licensed to company X and block B is not licensed but then there is a situation where the reservoir from block A runs into B, would you want to subject block B to competitive bidding or can company X apply for B under direct application? Would that principle be acceptable? I think that is it. There are two levels. We will come to the issue of who will receive the direct applications and other matters, but for now let us deal with this one, the principle.
 
MR AYENA: Mr Chairman, in principle, it would be acceptable to have direct applications under certain circumstances but not on these three circumstances. The example given under (b), which you have explained, would definitely call for direct application. Here you want to only improve a situation where the licensee has already got the licence but because the deposits run into another block, they have got to be expeditiously handled. In such a situation, the principle of direct application would be plausible. 

However, Mr Chairman, when you now begin to consider who should handle this, I have not been convinced by the explanation of the minister on the grounds that: One, if you looked at (a), it says, “Where there are no applications received in response to the invitation for bids.” I do not know the magical formula that the minister would have, which the Authority would not have. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, that second leg we said is already dealt with. We passed clause 9. So we would now read this as “the Authority”. It will not be “the minister” unless at the recommittal you change the substance of clause 9. So, this one is finished. If you are arguing the merits of (a) or (c), whether there should be exceptional circumstances under (a) or (c), I would understand. As to who, that one is resolved as for now. Okay? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I will start with the exceptional circumstances under (c), promotion of national interest, which is lifted directly from the Constitution, Article 8A. I have no problem with that. It would qualify to be an exceptional circumstance for accepting and processing a direct application for a licence.

I, however, have problems with both (a) and (b). Sub clause (2) (a) reads, “Where there are no applications received in response to an invitation for bids”. You bid internationally and you get absolutely no response and then all of a sudden, a person turns up and says, “I am interested in this block; you must deal with me alone.” Where were you when the bids were being run? Can that be taken to be good faith? Isn’t this subject to abuse? Must we allow this? I would actually think that the alternative would be that when you get no bids, you re-advertise. I think that is a natural consequence. You do not invite people and deal with them behind closed doors.  

I also have a problem with (b), Mr Chairman. It says, “application in respect of areas that are adjacent to an existing licensed reservoir.” A block must on its own be economically viable. A licence to that block must indicate its acreage and studies must be done to determine what resource you are going to license. The licensee knows this and the licensing authority knows this. That means the adjacent block on its own is also economically viable and can be licensed as a standalone block. Now, except if we are arguing that we are licensing what we do not know, then the argument that they would be drawing from the same reservoir would perhaps hold water. 

The second problem I have with it is: how elastic are these licences going to be? If we sit here and say you can apply for every adjacent block which is not licensed, we are basically saying the licences will be extremely elastic. So, any other day you can wake up and say, “That one is not yet licensed and it draws from the same reservoir, please give it to me.”  We shall not attract competition in this sector. I submit, Mr Chairman.  

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I find the argument of the honourable minister, that she is trying to give the national oil company an edge over others in doing business, self defeating. For heaven’s sake, why should you take the infant company to a block which you know is not economically viable? By the fact that all other companies have chosen not to do business there, there are high chances that it is not economically viable. Now you want to take this young company, in national interest, to dump the little resources that we have. Why don’t you spare this young company to do business only in areas that are really viable and make business sense? Why don’t you give it at least a better block than this neglected block? 

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to clarify on the issue of sub clause (2) (c). It is not that we are going to promote a national oil company to do business in a neglected block, no. I would like to explain the circumstances under which the committee agreed on this. Before I do so, I would also now want to agree with hon. Odoi on the circumstances in sub clause (a). He is right because many of them could connive and not submit and then the country loses out.

On (c), we were of the view that we are forming a national oil company, which we want to grow. We are talking about oil not for 10 years but for 20 to 30 and more years as we explore more. I would like to inform you that we have oil offshore and oil onshore. For blocks which are offshore, this could be part of the national interest, but of course for a viable block; they cannot give an unviable block. 

The member was referring to a non-viable block, which is in sub clause (2). When we have a block with oil, there are two things to discuss here. There can be a block but you cannot just license it in pursuance of how much oil is in it. It can be a block but the reservoir extends to another block. It is not viable to license a company just because you have got this block and the oil extends to another block and therefore it should be called one block. You would then find some companies owning big blocks but you would not be earning from them as a country. Therefore, it is better to license one block, but when you find out that the oil extends into another block then you should open up the licensing.
  
MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Chairman, what is the clarification she is giving?
 
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Mr Chairman, I beg the honourable member not to disorganise me. He should listen to us as much as we listened to him. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you rose on a point of clarification.
 
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Yes, Mr Chairman. Let me hope that he has got what I have been saying, though when I was talking he was also talking and not listening. That is why I was taking a little longer to explain the point which I think is very important for him to understand, so that his point can make better sense to us. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Point taken. Can we move forward now?
 
MR TINKASIIMIRE: Whereas she is giving an explanation instead of seeking clarification –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the honourable member for Kyankwanzi and not just “she”.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Chairman, my submission is premised on good faith and what is most likely to happen. I am certain that what is submitted in (c) is likely to override other issues. If the honourable minister’s submission is in good faith, if we say the Authority, with her approval, should receive the direct applications, we could agree to it.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I have stated again and again that that matter is resolved. It is not the minister; it is the Authority with the approval of the minister. That is the proposition right now. 

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just want to concur with the hon. Odoi especially on (2) (a), when there are no applications received in response to the invitation for bids as one of the exceptional circumstances. Indeed, when there are no applications received, then there is nobody at all interested. So, I am also wondering how this would apply when nobody at all has expressed an interest. 

In (b), I think there is need to define the word “adjacent” in terms of blocks because “adjacent” can be two kilometres, 50 kilometres, and even 100 kilometres. So, how do we define adjacent? That word needs to be defined in terms of blocks. Which block is adjacent to which one and when does it apply to an adjacent block? We need that clarification to be made. 

As I conclude, Mr Chairman, with reference to clause 9, I think there is need for consistency; as you have guided, it cannot be the minister. It has to be the Authority. Thank you.
 
MS KAMATEKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I rise to support the position of hon. Odoi that this adjacent plot should be competitive so that the entire oil business should be seen to be highly competitive. When the adjacent plot is discovered to be with viable deposits of oil, it should be bided for. The decision as to who takes it should then be administrative; the licensee who is adjacent to the block could then be taken into consideration. We should, however, state in this law that it should be competitive. Thank you. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have listened to the honourable members who have been contributing on this and the words that have touched me are “in good faith”. I just want to really share with you whether in good faith, we cannot have exceptional circumstances. If we can, 54(2) (c), national interests, is one of them. I can also see that (2) (a) could also have circumstances where we have shrewd businessmen in petroleum and other minerals who can connive and we fail to get somebody to bid. So, what do you do? So, I would really say that we should, in those circumstances, have checks and balances. 

I can see that clause 55 caters for checks in this case. We are not saying that the minister does it alone, but we can still say that the Authority, with the approval of the minister, and still use 55 for checks and balances. Thank you, Mr Chairman. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In provision 54(2) (a), exceptional circumstances exist especially, as they have explained here, where the resource is not that attractive. In investment, it is not the investors to look for us but for us to package and proactively move to them. These circumstances have happened very many times in many countries when you want to promote a resource. The investors will not come to ask you whether they want to invest or not; you will have to move to them instead. You package and market to them because what you are selling is not very attractive. 

In investment promotion, this is very common. I have been in this field for many years and I know it happens. Many countries do this. When we wanted BIDCO to invest in this oil project, for example, Mukwano in the beginning was not interested and yet this was our initial target. When we advertised, nobody expressed interest, but we had to actively move for BIDCO; we packaged and moved to them, coaxed them with a number of incentives for them to express interest. So this happens, especially in the circumstances as explained in this document. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we need to move forward on this. Exceptional circumstances are provided for under clause 54(2). In clause 55, there is publication of notice of such applications in the Gazette. In clause 56, there are provisions for objections that can be raised about such applications. Because they are published, people who are interested will know and they can raise objections. If the objections are raised and the minister or the Authority agrees with the objectioner, that licence will not be granted. If he or she disagrees with the objectioner, the licence will be granted. If anybody is aggrieved by that decision, that person can go to the High Court under clause 56(5). That person can challenge the decision of the Authority in overruling the objection they raised. Isn’t that transparent enough?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I can see the exceptions; (a) is where there are no applications received, and that one has been ably handled by hon. Fox Odoi. 

Now, one of the two that could be left standing is about national interest. Mr Chairman, it is true that “national interest” is in our Constitution, Article 8A (1), but Article 8A (2) says, “Parliament shall make relevant laws for purposes of giving full effect to clause (1) of this Article.” Now, we are putting a position in the Bill assuming that we have already defined “national interest” and the full effect has been given. Mr Chairman, we do not know yet what is embedded – we do not know the extent of the so-called “national interest”. 

Even then, when you turn to (b), - application in areas that are adjacent - you know very well that with advanced technology, where there is vertical and horizontal drilling, “adjacent” can be two square miles, three square miles away. Once you say “in respect of areas that are adjacent”, if one attains another adjacent area and that adjacent area shall also be adjacent to another adjacent area, it can go on and on until you talk of “adjacent” meaning the entire country. (Laughter) This can happen, unless we have reasons to categorise what we mean by this.

Mr Chairman, why are we expressing concern about this? We have had experiences where in the past, in the name of national interest, which is not really known, we allowed the farm-down, right from Heritage to Tullow, where a transaction of Shs 1.6 billion changed hands. What was accruing to Government? Nothing! We came to the farm-down of Tullow, CNOOC and Total – (Interjection) – Please, allow me the opportunity, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Withhold your interest and allow us to debate this matter objectively – (Interjection) - No, but you do not teach me.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Ssekikubo, you have the Floor. 

MR SSEKIKUBO Mr Chairman, even with that transaction I have just mentioned, as Members of Parliament we wrote – Not to say that we are emotional about this, but we followed it up with our resolutions in this Parliament and we have followed it up in our oversight function. This is a letter we wrote on 4 June 2012 to the Commissioner-General of Uganda Revenue Authority: 

“Tax Payment by Tullow Oil Uganda Pty 
Reference is made to Tullow Oil, CNOOC and Total transaction relating to the farming-down of the exploration and production licences hitherto held by Tullow Oil for Exploration Area 1 and 3A, which was conducted on 3 February 2012. 

The tax obligation due to Government was assessed at US$ 472 million. It has come to our knowledge that this said requisite tax, which was supposed to accrue out of this transaction paid to Government of Uganda through you, US $472 million, has never been paid. 

We further note with deep concern that this state of affairs such as unwarranted delays and uncertainties...” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you now give the relevance of that.

MR SSEKIKUBO: The gist of this, Mr Chairman, is that once you allow the direct licensing as was the case here, our interests as a country – I want to be on record – will be jeopardised. The so-called direct applications end up being abused. In the end, money changes hands, to the extent of Shs 2.8 billion in this case, while this country earns nothing. Here you are again coming back with direct licensing, to lead us to the same fate. This is unacceptable, and I find the grounds listed here are meant to take us for a ride and again we will make the same mistake that we seem to have gotten over.  

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. First, a member said, “when there is good faith”, but we do not legislate for good faith; we legislate against bad faith. Otherwise, if people were to act in good faith throughout, we would not need a law; they would decide in national interest and in our interests because they would be acting in good faith.

Secondly, I thought when we legislate, we make and establish standards. There must be standards and transparency, and the only way you can guarantee this is that every applicant must know what the resource owner needs. If I make my application, I get that. 

Let us go to the inter-contradictions and intra-contradictions in this clause itself. In 54(2)(a), we are saying, “where there are no applications received in response to an invitation for bids”. This is why I said that this is clearly a procurement because you are calling for bids. Now, if there are no bids, the PPDA is in place and caters for such situations. 

It is also a vote of no confidence in our marketing system as a country. You have a business as lucrative as oil and you need hawking because it is not marketable enough in itself as a resource! I doubt if that can be a situation in our country. Mr Chairman, there must be certainty for everyone coming to apply for a business or for a licence in oil. 

I also take the language of the Chair in guiding, when you talked about an oil block and the oil is spilling into another. That is not the position provided for here. The language used here is “adjacent”; now, adjacent from which side? If you have an oil well or a block in Mityana and there is another one in Fort Portal and another one in Kabarole, where do you measure the adjacency from? The block in Fort Portal has an adjacent wall the other side – (Interjection) - You want to give me information? We do not have explanations, Mr Chairman, we have information, but from the Prime Minister if that is what it means, I will receive it.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much for giving way. I hope hon. Tinkasiimire will not turn this Parliament into his committee.

Mr Chairman, you know what adjacent means; it means next to. It means there must be an adjoining part; they must have physical connection. What the minister is saying, and what is envisaged under (2)(b), is that in this situation blocks have already been demarcated, such as block A, block B and so on, and block A is already licensed but block B is not licensed, and the licensee of block A has actually spent money drilling and they have discovered that there is one well for block A and block B. She is saying it makes sense that instead of granting another licence for block B, so that you go through the expenses which are recoverable, which are expenses against the state, this one well should be exploited by the existing licensee. That is what it means. 

It cannot mean that when you have a well in Nakasero in Kampala and another in Kanungu, that the two will be mixed; certainly not. This assumes that in the other place, you have had no licensee at all; nobody has taken it up. If you have two blocks which have already been licensed then 54(2) (b) does not apply.

MR SSEGGONA: I want to thank the hon. Prime Minister for reinforcing the information I have always had about the meaning of “adjacent”. The point – (Interruption)

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, hon. Sseggona submitted that this is a procurement. I do not know whether we are actually subjecting this to PPDA because so far in these Bills, we have not actually come across that provision. So, what do we do? Is this subjected to PPDA rules if it is a procurement?

MR SSEGGONA: I want to thank the chairperson of the committee for seeking clarification. The name of that Act is the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act. Yes, it applies, whether you mention it or not, and I want to emphasise that it is procurement. 

Mr Chairman, we need to understand the procedure because the stage at which we are, the licensee already knows the oil that he is drilling - (Interjections) - Yes, there was an exploration first, you need – (Interruption)

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The honourable member said that there is no mention of the PPDA Act anywhere in this Bill. I would like to refer him to clause 53(4). It says, “The bidding process shall be carried out in a fair, open and competitive manner in accordance with procedures prescribed by regulations or by the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2003 and any other relevant laws in Uganda.”

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, it was amended; even in the report we proposed the amendment of this sub clause.

MR SSEGGONA: We are happy to note there was a proposal. Mr Chairman, I think the PPDA was one of my points and it has been brought out well. I thank the honourable member for Igara.

Finally, I want to re-emphasise the point I made. Sub clause (2) says, “For the purposes of subsection (1), exceptional circumstances include-” and they mention three. According to the English language and drafting, once you talk about “include”, it is not limited. So, they shall include a, b, c - it is a whole list. That is my understanding of the English language and I can tell the Prime Minister I have never had problems with that.

We are indirectly giving the Authority, in conjunction with the minister, powers to amend this list. Even if we agreed in principle, they would be amending this list and do anything which they consider analogous to this. My proposal is that, let us entrust the Authority as we have done. Let the Authority follow the PPDA; where there are no bids, there is a procedure again. 

We have been marketing oil and so many other resources of this country but when you go out marketing, it does not mean you are excluding the procedures provided in the law. Let us do the marketing, let every Ugandan be an ambassador in marketing this resource but the investors that we call in to invest in this area must come and conform to our laws. When we market and call for people to come and invest in this country, do we give them free land? No; they come and acquire land in accordance with the laws of the country.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we seem to be moving on and on but for the record, let us clear the issue of sub clause (2). Sub clause (2) is exhaustive. The drafting shows that there are only three circumstances; it is not extendable. The circumstances include (a), (b) and (c). It is closed, under any interpretation. If it was to say, “exceptional circumstances include but are not limited to (a), (b) and (c)”, that would mean it is extendable, but in this case it is closed.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, the worst mistake this Parliament will be making is to have people hawking around with briefcases selling oil, and this is exactly what this clause does. People will say, “Well, we advertised and we did not get bids” and they will jump on planes with briefcases sourcing for people to come and buy. Petroleum oil is different from palm oil. There are resources you can hawk around on the streets and sell and there are resources you cannot. As the Prime Minister has said, this is the main strategic resource a country has. 

When you read this particular clause 54, it is not talking about searching and yet the arguments you are giving are, “we shall go around saying, ‘we have this oil; can you apply?’”. For a resource like petroleum oil, rules should be very clear in black and white. Whoever wants to access this resource should know the rules. We are not asking for too much. 

The reason why we have taken all this time, and the reason why the country has taken all this time to come up with the policy and the law, is to clearly spell out all the rules in detail. You cannot tempt the Authority or the minister by trying to move things behind the curtain; it is wrong! You are making the Authority or the minister vulnerable. She is going to be subject to temptation. I wonder why even the minister would say, “I want to have powers to receive applications backdoor.” Why should you, under any circumstances? 

The point I would like to make, honourable colleagues, is that this clause is not good for the sector. Whoever wants to come should come on clearly defined and spelt-out rules. I move that we delete this clause.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Mr Chairman, clause 53 lays down the general procedure for licensing. What clause 54 does is to create a narrow window for peculiar or exceptional circumstances.

I have heard two or three reasons that are being advanced for the deletion of the provisions of clause 54. One of them is that there is a likelihood of connivance so that people do not tender. When I heard that reason, a question arose in my mind - why connive when you are going to be subject to all the rules of this Bill? Why would two or three people connive not to come out? What would they gain by conniving? That is one of the reasons that were advanced for the deletion of this clause.

Mr Chairman, as you explained, clauses 55 and 56 provide security precautions for avoiding malpractice in this sector during the licensing procedure. Otherwise, I have not really had a reason for objecting to the provisions - (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The holder of the Floor is the Attorney-General of the Republic of Uganda and he knows very well the command given by the Constitution under Article 8A (2). Before he proceeds to impress the House about the good intentions and how he does not buy the arguments, has he addressed his mind to this Article - “Parliament shall make relevant laws for purposes of giving full effect to clause (1) of this Article” - which is about national interests? 

Have you, in your chambers, ever come up with a law before this House so that we can all be on the same page? Is it right for you to proceed as if you have put together your house and you want us to accompany you? Are you right to proceed without addressing yourself to this? The point you are telling us is abstract; therefore, your assurances cannot stand with this constitutional command, which you have never addressed yourself to in the office and now you want Parliament to accompany you.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Attorney-General. I seek further clarification from the Attorney-General. Can he state to this House one incident where a minister shall, for instance, not work in national interest but continue fulfilling this law or other laws. If that situation is not there and in all circumstances the minister is working in national interest, can we then be so clear and state which national interest we are talking about. If it means security, say it is national security interest. Otherwise, in which situation can we say the minister was not working in national interest but he was fulfilling the law?  Thank you.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Mr Chairman, Article 8A (1) of the Constitution provides, “Uganda shall be governed based on principles of national interest and common good enshrined in the national objectives and directive principles of state policy.”

The Constitution does provide broad perimeters of what is included in “national interest” because it refers you to the national objectives and directive principles of state policy. So-(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let the Attorney-General finish then you can raise the issue.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Mr Chairman, the issue of national interest is defined in broad terms by the Constitution. You have to read the national objectives, and Article 8A does refer to those national objectives. Therefore, the minister did explain the circumstances - (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, it is important that we all move in tandem. I am really shocked. The Attorney-General ought to be the first person to defend the Constitution. The National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy provide the general objectives. Once you come to clause 8A (2), why did you put this here if you knew that it was already provided for in the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy by providing that “Parliament shall make relevant laws”? This is a command to Parliament. If you knew it was covered in the previous preamble of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy - 

Is the Attorney-General in order to deliberately mislead this House and to go on the Hansard saying there is no need to address Article 8A(2), well aware that the two are quite different and it is still a command that is waiting to be answered by none other than the Attorney-General himself? Is the Attorney-General, therefore, in order to mislead and misguide this House that there is no need for us to respond to Article 8A(2) as commanded by this Constitution? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I remember I gave guidance and a ruling on this subject in a previous debate. I said the idea of these national objectives and directive principles of state policy must have been borrowed from the Indian Constitution. In the Indian Constitution, it is actually Chapter 8 inside the Constitution; in Uganda, we decided to put it outside the Constitution. However, by the amendment which brought in Article 8A, national interest, we brought the full force of these principles to be part of the Constitution.

In a separate ruling, I also stated that where there are no direct laws passed by the House in relation to provisions of the Constitution when the House is given the mandate to pass such laws, the directives of the Constitution can be implemented as such, as in the case of Paul K. Ssemogerere and Zachary Olum v. the Attorney-General, which upheld the referendum of 2000 after the law was repealed. The Supreme Court said that such a referendum was held under the authority of the Constitution even if the other law had been declared null and void. 

So, is the Attorney-General in order? Yes, I think so. I think it is right to bring all these things together. But it is up to us to take the final decision and I want us to take that decision now. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, this House should take a decision, and indeed it will take a decision, but we must take a decision from an informed position because that is what matters. We just do not have to take whatever decision. We have a constitutional command under Article 8A(2) and the person supposed to bring that law to this House is the learned Attorney-General.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, is the shadow Attorney-General in order, immediately after the Speaker has made his ruling on a matter, to rise and challenge the ruling of the Speaker without conforming to the rules of this House on how the challenging of the ruling of the Speaker is to be done? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we need to move forward on this matter. You will take a long time to challenge what I have just said because there will be no basis for challenging it. 

The issue is: Can you pass any law under the authority of the Constitution that is consistent with the Constitution? The answer is a straight, “Yes”. The other question is: Is this Parliament limited by laws that it has already passed before, before it can pass any other laws? The other answer is “No; it cannot.” For as long as it is acting within the Constitution, it has the broad framework of passing legislation under Article 78 of the Constitution. That is straightforward. 

What stops us from saying that part of the application of Article 8A(2) is what we are making in this law, recognising that there is such a thing as national interest? Nothing can stop us from that. For now, I think what we are saying is that there are issues with these provisions in the Bill. We should not cite the Constitution anyhow just to make the argument sound stronger when the argument is already sound on its own, even without citing the Constitution, that there are concerns about what is provided under this clause. Can we take a decision on those clauses? 

MR NIWAGABA: I beg to move a motion that debate on this matter be closed and the question be put on deletion of clause 54. I beg to move. 

HON. MEMBERS: Aye!

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I have not put the question, the Member for Lwemiyaga. Honourable members, I am constrained when such a motion is moved to proceed to put the question, but not to the motion for deletion but to the motion that the question be put first. So, the question is to the motion that the question be put. That is the question I am proposing now.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that clause 54 be deleted from the Bill.

HON. MEMBERS: Aye! No!

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I now put the question after all those spoilt votes?  

(Question put)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I am unable to determine by voice. We will go to the next level. We will do these votes by division. All the honourable members who have taken the decision that clause 54 be deleted will move to the lobby on my right and vote from there. All those who are against will vote from the left lobby. It is so directed. But can we first move the motion to go back to the House and then allow the voting to take place and we come back. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

1.04
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

1.05
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill, 2012” and passed clause 3 and clause 37 with amendments. I beg to report. 
 
MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

1.07
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the reason we have come back to the House is to determine the position of clause 54 of the Bill. At committee stage, a proper decision could not be ascertained and the Speaker ordered vote by division. I restate that the voting will be conducted as follows: The motion is for the deletion of clause 54 of the Bill and those in favour of the deletion will vote from my right hand lobby and those against will vote from my left hand lobby. It is so ordered. 

This House is accordingly suspended for that purpose. 

(The House was suspended at 1.07 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.05 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we have some order. I indeed ordered for a division vote on clause 54. However, I have now been informed that the rules were not properly followed. I have been informed that honourable members on some sides picked the lists and started ticking by themselves. 

This is what the rules say about division: If a division lobby voting is ordered, all Members have to exit the Chamber of Parliament, and as I directed, those in favour of the motion will vote from my right hand lobby and those against vote from the left lobby. This is how it is done. The actual voting is done by the actual members themselves but the recording is done by the clerk. The clerk should stand at the entrance to the lobby so that a member votes and then enters the Chamber. It is also only the clerk to hold the list and nobody else. It is only the clerk – and I repeat – it is only the clerk who should hold the list. (Interjections) 

Honourable members, I wish we could listen. It is only the clerk. When a Member comes, he identifies the Member’s name and the vote is marked on the list of Members. That is how it is done. So, for avoidance of any doubt, I am going to appoint clerks – (Interjections) - Yes, we have to redo it. 

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, I would like to seek guidance, given the fact that you directed that we should vote by division lobby, and indeed it was done, but the way it was done left a lot to be desired. In my considered opinion, why don’t we now use the other method where names are read and a roll call is taken and we vote from inside the Chamber here? (Applause)

I want to think that that would be better and time saving. That will also allow only those present to vote and not those who are going to be called from the canteen and the streets. Let us have only those present in the Chamber vote - (Interjections) - I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members! There is no reason for any excitement over this matter. This matter is for the whole country and I cannot think of any Member who thinks the country is more important to them than to all of us. So, let us take it in that spirit, that we all represent people and it is the national interest we are trying to portray here. It is the collection of this vision of our people that we represent here. Therefore, we should not present situations that will make other Members feel like they are more nationalistic than others. We are all the same. (Applause) Really, we all swore by the same Constitution and let us respect that.

Now, a proposition has been made for roll call and tally; would that be the proper way to do it? Honourable members, I want to stick to what I did earlier. Let us do division lobby and this time, do it properly. I have two clerks; I am appointing Ms Martha Kaganzi to take charge of the left lobby. I appoint Mr –

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for permitting me to seek this guidance. Many Ugandans have lost trust in the electoral system of this country. Who is there to observe that this rule is complied with and that there is no rigging? Guide me, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am relying totally on the clerks I am appointing. They are officers of this Parliament. They serve no interests of any political party or any side of this House. They are here to serve the big purpose of this House. Under the rules, I am required to appoint two clerks on each side. Therefore, I am appointing Ms Martha Kaganzi to take charge of the left lobby. Mr Ouma will take charge of the right lobby. I am appointing Mr Bakwega on my right. I still need one more. I appoint Ms Esther Nadunga on my left. The four of you should ensure that as the Members come in, you mark. I am also appointing Mr Opoti to take care of abstentions. Those who are abstaining should mark their names from Mr Opoti. I do not know where they will enter from. When you vote, you come into the Chamber. You do not go outside. So, can we do that.

MR MUWUMA: Mr Speaker, the procedural matter I am raising is that rule 23(3) demands that before any matter is put to a vote, the Speaker shall ascertain whether there is quorum. Isn’t it procedurally right to do so? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have done that previously. 

MR MUWUMA: No, you did not tell us. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is the Speaker and not the House. I have my mechanisms of doing that. So, if you want to be counted right now, you can be counted; there is no problem with that. Can you count. Honourable members who are in the lobbies, please move in. We are going to take this exercise seriously.
 
MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not rise to challenge your ruling and guidance in any way. However, I was looking at the clauses that we stood over and there are quite a number that are not related to this particular one. Would it in any way inconvenience you if we handled the ones that are not very contentious and then we go into this voting business later? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member who is standing there, there are enough seats here. Please come and sit down. The middle here is completely empty. Clerk, can you help me with the ascertainment of quorum?

Honourable members, there is a shortage in our number. I, therefore, suspend the House for 15 minutes and the division bells should ring now and we resume in 15 minutes. 

(The House was suspended at 2.15 p.m.)

 (On resumption at 2.30 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, where were we? Could somebody brief me about where we stopped? Honourable member for West Budama, can you give me an update?

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think we were still establishing the quorum of the Members. That is my recollection; we suspended about that time and we are either about done or almost getting there. Now that we are still establishing the quorum, wouldn’t it be proper for us to proceed with other matters that may not necessarily require quorum? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The only challenge is that all of them were Bills. All the business that was supposed to come today was three Bills – two on oil and one on accounts. So, substantially, we actually do not have any other business to handle today except the Bills.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I would like to suggest that rule 23, about quorum of Parliament, be applied as it provides. Rule 23(4) says, “If on the resumption of proceedings after the expiry of fifteen minutes, the number of Members present is still less than the required quorum for voting, the Speaker shall proceed with other business or suspend the sitting or adjourn the House without question put...” 

My interpretation of this is that “other business” does not necessarily mean the next item on the agenda. What we are considering today are the provisions that we had stood over. We have not generated a consensus on clause 54 and we had said we would come back to clause 9 anyway. Could we go on with the other clauses where we may have consensus and finish that business? If at the end of the day, or even tomorrow, we have the numbers, then we can come back to it if we want to go back to the division lobby. (Ms Atim Anywar rose_) I know that my good friend and honourable Member for Kitgum, hon. Beatrice Anywar, will of course, agree with me.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am the self-appointed Leader of the Opposition now. (Laughter) As you had earlier guided, and reading from the mood of the House, we needed to generate that consensus on the remaining clauses and we move forward. However, seeing that our side is still mobilising for quorum to be realised, and I am sure the whip on the other side is still doing so, it would not be prudent that we skip and proceed to get consensus from one side for the remaining clauses, knowing that they were stood over because we were trying to generate a consensus. 

Mr Speaker, therefore, I would like to propose that you give us more time to mobilise our colleagues. I am sure that it is not yet too late. If you could suspend the sitting for a while, we could still make it before 5 o’clock. We could get the consensus and attain the quorum and we pass that very important clause. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was a clause on the disposal of decommissioned facilities, clause 112. The contention was on a very small area, the issue of user, owner and all others were contentious and we decided to stand over this clause. It has no bearing on clause 9 or other clauses which are linked. The same applies to clause 125, use of licence as security. There was debate on this. These are standalone provisions, which on their own merit can be discussed. 

I think those two are the only ones that were not linked. Was there any other clause? In my notes I do not see any other. The clauses that were interlinked were 54 to 59 - one following the other - and they are all linked to clause 9. So, clauses 125 and 112 could actually be discussed on their own.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Speaker, you are right. We had clause 83, which also has nothing to do with clause 9. This is to do with the operator. We had clause 87 on suspension or cancellation of a licence. We had the decommissioning fund, that is, clause 110. As you have mentioned, there is also clause 125, which is on the use of licence as security, and clause 112 on disposal of decommissioned facilities. 

We had actually built a consensus and even the report I circulated around was actually a report of consensus on both sides. We thought we could handle that before coming to the contentious areas. 

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, what the chairman has said is true. However, as you suspended the House, the Members went with the spirit of handling this particular clause and others are still mobilising. My prayer is that we should come back and probably continue with other business. I would pray that you suspend the House.

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. The Leader of Government Business rose and referred to rule 23(4), to the effect that, “If on the resumption of proceedings after the expiry of fifteen minutes, the number of Members present is still less than the required quorum for voting, the Speaker shall proceed with other business or suspend the sitting…” You have explicitly guided this House to proceed to handle other non contentious matters. Is it procedurally right for hon. Anywar, who is on the same side that I sit by default, – (Laughter) - to continue circumventing the procedural issue that is purely saving us according to the rules? 

I thought, and I agree with the Prime Minister, that this is put in such a way that it should not hold the proceedings in the House, that the business of the House must continue. Even when others – the Shadow Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is moving out – there is no hope that this other side is mobilising.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this should be shared. The spirit we used in processing this Bill was basically consensus, and we agreed all through. That is how we were able to move this far. If we were to subject these issues to all the details of what should be done, we would not have even done one clause of this Bill, and that is a fact. It was a spirit of consensus that on issues that we do not have very far apart views, we can accommodate and proceed and finish, and that is why some clauses were stood over.

In this particular case, and I said this to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the minister in charge of this Bill, the spirit should continue. If that spirit is to continue, you will know that you have tried to use the power of persuasion and it has not worked, and you have also tried to use the persuasion of the power of numbers and it has also not worked because we have not been able to generate enough people to deal with this business. It might make sense if we revert to our original principle of consensus and certain concessions are made to accommodate the general feelings of the House so that we can move forward and finish this Bill. That is the only way forward I can see with this Bill. 

Even if we adjourn today, tomorrow or the next day, if the spirit is still like this, we might not be able to make any progress. So, if we are able to make concessions - Of course, the law is not cast in stone; there will be time in the future to review this law if it should not be functional at all in those grey areas. So, if some concessions could be made so that it can give us the opportunity to move forward and finish with this Bill, it would be important.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: It is in that spirit, Mr Speaker, and to welcome back the honourable Shadow Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs who had seemed to walk out in protest but now that he is back I am happy, that I want to make a concession.

I think the greatest problem on both sides, and particularly on this side, has been clause 54 on direct applications and the exceptional circumstance where no applications are received in response to invitations to bid. So, I would like to propose a concession, and I want them to listen. Obviously, for the reasons we gave, this is very important but in order to allow us to move, and with possible consequences of what may come, we think this situation may be manageable. At any rate, we do not want to hold our oil industry back any longer. Therefore, Mr Speaker and dear colleagues, we would like to propose that we amend 54 (2) by deleting (a).

MS AKOL: I would like to give information to the Prime Minister and the House. When you read clause 54, it so explicit, and this is the information I think was lacking and the reason we have spent two hours debating. Clause 54 is to do with an exploration licence, not development and not production. Exploration costs, I believe, are 100 per cent borne by the licensee. There could also be circumstances where nobody applies to explore a given block. In such circumstances, we should allow direct applications where none is received to explore a block. 

That is the information that has been lacking, that was not brought to the attention of the House. I think it is the reason that we had all these misunderstandings. Perhaps, we thought it was to do with development and then production, and that is indeed what I had thought. Therefore, in those circumstances where nobody applies for an exploration licence, I think it would be prudent if someone applies directly or we allow, again in consonance with clause 9 - that is the amendment we shall seek later – for the Authority to receive applications directly to explore. After all, the costs of exploration are one hundred per cent borne by the explorer, the licensee.

If such a licensee with such a licence hits a dry well, he could be allowed, for the same reason, to explore an adjacent block. I think that would minimise costs both to the licensee and also to Government and also, of course, promote national interest. It is an exploration licence, there is nothing you lose by allowing an explorer to explore an adjacent well. So, the issue here is an exploration licence, not development and not production. I thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, that is the very reason we have this clause in the Bill. The reason I was proposing deletion of 54 (1)(a) is because I want to go back to a position of consensus in the House. We have voted but it did not work, and we want to move and we were almost there because we have done most of the clauses. We were remaining with just this. So, at any rate, with the formulation that remains, it is not impossible to handle a situation that may arise.

My interpretation of this is that where there are fears about direct application in circumstances of no responses from anybody for bids, which, of course, means that clause 55 will go and all these others which provide for checks and balances, which will not be a welcome situation, still we would use what remains. In the case of adjacent wells and in the case of promotion of national interests, I am afraid that we could not possibly remove these. How can we remove national interest? There is no country that does not have national interests.

Therefore, my proposal is that we delete the first circumstance there, where no applications have been received. We delete 54(2)(a) so that we remain with the special circumstances - Of course, this is only for exploration, because that is what clause 53 is about and clause 54 is a continuation or an expansion of clause 53. So, we remain with clause 54(2) (b) and (c) and then we will have to have consequential amendments elsewhere. 

This is a compromise position, mainly to accommodate the fears of colleagues who had not seen the way we see the usefulness of (a) as it stands. 

I beg to propose and since hon. Katuntu has come, I know that he has seen what I said even if he may have not heard it.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you Mr Speaker, and I want to welcome the spirit extended by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and his team. I agree with the rest of my colleagues who say that we have reached this far by resorting to consensus, and the game of numbers has limitations. My fear is, even when you remove (a), you make it worse, because you read (a) or (2) with (1). Sub- clause (1) is that, “Notwithstanding section 53, the minister may...” - call it the Authority - “...in exceptional circumstances in consultation with the minister receive direct applications for an exploration licence.”

Now, when you go to (2) and remove (a), it means there is not even a duty to advertise in the first place because the advertisement was being brought in, in (a) where there are no applications received in response to the invitation for bids. That is segment (a). 

Segment (b), again, is with this adjacent thing and to an existing licensed reservoir. I have still not found the logic as to why we cannot receive applications even in respect of these blocks or that block that is adjacent to another one which is already licensed publicly.

(3) Promotion of national -(Interruption)

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the colleague for giving way. I want to clarify. There are two things; there is a production licence and exploration. In exploration, the licensee meets all the costs. We are talking about exploration areas and about blocks. Somebody has been given a licence to come and explore, for example, Block X; but after exploring Block X, whether the results were positive or negative - for example, he may have hit a dry well, but there are prospects that in the nearby blocks there will be positive results. 

He might even have got those positive results, but after getting those positive results, there are prospects that the oil is extending to the adjacent blocks west, north, south or east; but it would be prudent enough that this same licensee be given leeway to explore in the next blocks. However, it is illegal for this licensee to explore the adjacent blocks without getting a licence. That is the explanation I have been giving. And, to prevent this from being abused, clause 55 provides that protection from abuse. Thank you.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you. I would like to thank the honourable Member for Kyankwanzi. That is very interesting to hear, but I think the mistake we are making here is reading new things into this Bill where you are saying I assume the oil is flowing - you are anticipating that it flows and goes into the other block. No. We could be neighbours without any linkage and we are talking about blocks that are separate from each other. 

First, why do we want to assume that when someone hits a dry well, he needs compensation by way of circumventing the procedure of applying for the next? Let us have standards because we are not going to keep amending this law whenever we come across a new situation. Let us set those standards and we keep those standards, and people apply. 

Secondly, maybe in the regulations which the minister may make, that could be another consideration because among other things, you are weighing the experience and expertise of this explorer because he has demonstrated capacity in the next and that could be an evaluation process, but when you are making a law, you must be certain.

Finally, Mr Speaker, when you talk about promotion of national interests, you are not setting a standard that is going to be understood by the public. People are applying and everyone will tell you, “I am applying and I intend to preserve and promote national interests.” 

As long as you have not provided the four corners of what you understand by “national interest”, ladies and gentlemen, we are going to end up messing from the word go. This is because somebody will be compromised and we shall say in national interest because anything can constitute national interest. We have given the discretion and we have left that person called the Authority to determine what they have considered to be national interest. Let us set the standards that are clear to everyone; people will apply.

DR BITYEKYEREZO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was again looking at this clause on the problem of a reservoir. I have a conviction that a reservoir has got that oil content under there. Unless in the law it says that the reservoirs are not zoned, then it becomes a problem as far as going to bid in another place within that reservoir. 

What we need to do - I think I wanted clarification from the minister; is a reservoir similar to a zoned place for exploration? Because, if a reservoir means a whole zone, then it becomes a problem for somebody to go and start exploring in another zoned place. But if it is the same place and we know that the costs of exploration are borne by the licensee, then it means that we are completely stopping people from coming to join us to drill oil. Because, if you hit a dry well and you are not given chance to do something within that same reservoir so that you can get a place where the pressures are very high, it becomes a problem. 

Madam  minister, I would like you to clarify, is a reservoir zoned? If it is yes, and reservoirs are within zones, then I would not accept deleting that clause; but if the reservoirs are not zoned and we say it is only a reservoir, which you should not go beyond, then - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, just help us with this. In clause 54(2)(b), you have used the word “reservoir”. Can we have a known reservoir in exploration ? Because “reservoir” is defined in clause 3. That means you have already known what it is. Can you still hit a dry well when you know there is a reservoir? When it is established that there is a reservoir under sub-clause (2), can there still be a possibility of a dry well?

MRS MULONI: Mr Speaker, what happens is that if you have an area zoned in blocks, beneath the ground, you find a pool of petroleum. That pool of petroleum is what is called a “reservoir”. Now, when you set out a block, the licensee drills wells in different places to establish whether there is petroleum underneath, in the reservoir. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words, the licensee will not know that it is there.

MRS MULONI: Of course, it is through the drilling that you get to know.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Initially, you will not know.

MRS MULONI: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, how do you call it a reservoir even before anybody knows there is a reservoir? 

MRS MULONI: When Government carries out the initial data acquisition to establish that there is oil in an area, you then demarcate it in different zones and you license it out. The licensee then goes on to drill further to establish how much and to what extent a pool extends underneath. The circumstances here are that you might have an area demarcated; you have a pool of petroleum underneath, but this pool extends further beyond the boundaries which had been -(Interjections)- I am trying to explain. 

So, you find that this reservoir which is underneath extends beyond the boundaries of the block which you have licensed. Therefore, in such circumstances - because if you then license another party, that party will now have to undergo the same procedure of drilling. That will mean double costs, and remember, when you establish petroleum, you then move to the next level of development and production, and those costs become recoverable. 

So, one way of minimising double expenditure which is recoverable, is for you to use the same facilities which are already located in that zone to be able to extract all the oil, which is underneath in a reservoir, which crosses the boundary you are licensing.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like clarification from the honourable minister. First of all, the operator or the licensee already has access to this reservoir. What will prevent him from getting all the oil using the position he is at? Why must he or she drill in the next block so as to get oil from this same reservoir when he already has access to it? That will help us to determine whether - okay I will not go there. Can we have clarification regarding that one? Thank you.

MRS MULONI: Mr Speaker, once you have this area demarcated and licensed to you, you drill many wells to establish the extent to which this reservoir - the pool of petroleum underneath –stretches, before you start the development and the production. So, we are saying that if you have a licensee, who has been licensed a block and drills various wells and establishes that indeed there is commercial petroleum in a reservoir underneath, but this reservoir goes beyond the area he or she has been licensed, what would be the most economical way of extracting this petroleum from that one reservoir? It is one. It simply stretches beyond. The most economical and feasible way is that you would rather license the existing licensee, so that - because in any case it is one reservoir  - the costs you are going to incur which are recoverable in the long-run will just be from one licensee instead of having two licensees. 

Those are the circumstances. Honourable colleagues, I hope we are together.

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, we had a one-day retreat organised by the Parliamentary Forum on Oil and Gas and indeed, we went through almost all the 105 clauses and the meeting was chaired by the Chairperson, Committee on Natural Resources. Many Members attended and the attendance was an indicator that all Members are united to ensure that we do away with this Bill and move on to other items. 

Since we had agreed on almost everything and we are remaining with very few, I wonder, why are we now backtracking? Because the chairperson is there, we had agreed on many issues, and I believe that the only way forward is to see where we did not agree and we form a small committee which will come tomorrow and report to us, and we continue with clauses which are not contentious so that we can move forward.

Mr Speaker, you informed us that as we are debating this Bill, we are debating it in the best interest of our country, and we should not be partisan. We should debate it in the best interest of our country, and that was the spirit yesterday in which Members forewent their constituencies; they left many commitments and were there the whole day on Sunday. 

So, I am really asking the chairman and the organisers, since we had agreed on many issues, what is the problem? Can we continue with the clauses that we feel are not contentious and then for the contentious clauses, Mr Speaker, as you guided, we really do not want to go into voting. We have done it and it has not yielded any fruits. Let us go back to our initial arrangement of consensus. Mr Chairman, that is the guidance that I would like to seek.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, my recollection from the authority we granted to the Parliamentary Forum on Oil and Gas was that what they were going to discuss was the next Bill. But I am sure they also had an opportunity to deal with this one. So, the 150 clauses you are talking about are for the next Bill. By yesterday, we only had a few clauses of this particular Bill - about 11 - that were stood over. 

This particular Bill had its own meeting which was organised by the same Forum and discussions were made, some harmonisation was done, but when they came to the House, some of those things seem to have fallen through the initial positions people had taken. But they generated a lot of consensus and that is how we are able to move. But when we were zeroing down on finishing the first Bill, some issues became contentious, and those issues that were contentious are the ones that we are now trying to discuss. And of these, of course, there are others which are not linked. These particular ones, clauses 54, 55 to 59 are linked. But the others are not linked to this.                                     

So, I have already proposed that we need to find the best way, because we cannot leave this one to go back again and start discussing clause 54. Really, we cannot. Clause 54 has taken us a long time to come to; all we need are some concessions from each of our sides and we see how to move forward.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Prime Minister has proposed - and I believe in the spirit that you have suggested - that we need to continue building consensus on these clauses, and he has suggested that we delete clause 54(2)(a). If you look at clause 53, it talks about competition. When you come to clause 54(2)(a) there were some issues to do with transparency on how this is going to be done and that is why I think the Prime Minister is suggesting that clause 54(2)(a) can be deleted. 

Given the clarification of the gentle lady from Bukedea, we now seem to have common ground that there are special cases we would want Government or the Authority to consider,  and one of them is when we are talking about exploration. This is because it is very costly, and it requires a lot of money and, therefore, if we fail to get a competitor, or if we fail to get somebody to do it, that can be considered as a special case. However, when it comes to (b), which I agree can be contained, if somebody has gone in and there is an adjacent well to look at, what do we do? 

I see a few things that we need to clarify to come to a complete common ground from where we can move forward. One, is what is “adjacent”? The Prime Minister has said, it could be the immediate and next well; so that we can decide. When you come to (c), Members are wondering, what are those national interests that we have in this clause? Those could also, probably, in that particular case, could be defined in the interpretation clause and have “national interests” as defined in this particular clause and relating to this particular issue and by doing that, we could find a common ground and resolve this issue –(Interruption)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I have been very reluctant to say anything on this Bill. But as a lay man, you have a licensee for Block A and you realise that the reservoir extends to Block B. Therefore, you think you want the licensee here to have the authority to explore Block B. I have been asking here the Shadow Attorney-General, what stops the Authority from advertising Block B. The licensee in Block A will have an obvious advantage during evaluation to get the authority for Block B, because there is a process of evaluation. You are not evaluating in a virtual area.

Therefore, you do not need this clause here. It is a natural process as it comes. You explore here, you think this one should have Block B, it follows that you now say, let us open bidding for Block B. What is so contentious there; what is so magical there? It is a natural process. Now, do you need an exceptional legislation for such a natural process? You have to take it through natural bidding. 

And that is my point of contention; that this whole debate can actually be shortened if we agree that we proceed in the natural way; then these clauses will not be required. 

When it comes to national interest, let us be Ugandans; we are legislating because we live in this country called Uganda. You will leave this House and people will say, “Ugandans have not had a right here”. Let us find a way of giving some Ugandans some blocks to explore. Mark you, you have given the powers now to the minister, not to the Authority. During the evaluation, normally, all those processes and interests are considered. You are not going to have Philippinos manning the Authority; you are going to have Ugandans. 

Therefore, I think we can build consensus on this because the whole thing about Blocks A and B and the reservoir is uncalled for; it follows naturally. You should advertise through the official channel during evaluation. So, the clarification I want to seek from you is, what is this whole debate about?

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much. But I think we have moved a little further than that stage because now, we are building consensus; we are talking about the issue of exploration as one of the special cases that will require special consideration. 

So, Mr Speaker, we could move by deleting (1), making sure that we are clear of what we are talking about in terms of adjacent, and also probably looking at the national interest we are talking about in this respect.

Then, if we move forward, in the interpretation clause, defining “national interest” regarding this issue, then we would be able to come to a common ground.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Sometimes, when you speak many times on a subject, you tend to bore colleagues, and I am sorry if I am going to fall a victim. I have been on this microphone quite a number of times on this very subject. But let me say this; what do we call “bidding”. When you invite bids, many people apply. Once you receive the applications, you go through a process called “evaluation”; technical evaluation of bids. At this stage, your technical people should be able to identify that a particular block, the adjacent one which has already been licenced, has an overlapping reservoir; at the evaluation stage. That is when you take a decision. 

No person who has ever been invited for bids is obliged to take the highest bidder; none. All bids have that clause; they are not obliged to take the highest bidder. Why? Because they take into account what you are trying to explain in consideration; that this, we cannot, much as your bid is very good, we cannot licence you because the adjacent block overlaps this particular one; and that is technical. That is why bids are evaluated. Otherwise, there would be no reason to evaluate bids. You would just receive them and say, “This is the best,” and you move on. 

Of course, sometimes you could be a bad student and sometimes, I could be a bad teacher. In this instance, I do not know whether I am not explaining properly or the person who is asking is having problems to understand; but whatever it is  - So, good and national interest -(Interruption)

MR PETER LOKERIS: Thank you, my brother. Mr Speaker, this issue of reservoirs and adjacent blocks – when you are advertising for rounds for new blocks – because you need to separate them and demarcate them, and at the time when you are applying and you have not done any exploration, you cannot say, “When you come here, there is a reservoir cutting across the blocks,” because you do not know that, you have not gone there yet. So, you all go to the unknown. That is why I even say, when they say there is a reservoir - it is procurement, I disagree. It is something else. 

So, I would like to inform you that when giving blocks to people, the reservoirs inside are not known. It is after a person has been given the licence to go and explore that during the time of drilling, you hit a discovery, and later during the process, you find that the discovery actually extends across the block. That is when you can develop the idea of saying, “I can apply for the next block”, so that you can maximally drill all the wells that are in that adjacent reservoir. They say, “Do not withhold meat from thy neighbour”. 

So, in terms of reservoirs or blocks, you are not allowed, without applications, to get that oil from across this House, even if it is one block. The reservoir is discovered after you have drilled, not before. 

MR KATUNTU: Can I conclude my point? Honourable minister, I think you need to be fair to many of our colleagues. Once you have applied for an exploration licence, you have reports to submit to the department about the progress and the discoveries. So, the issue of ignorance does not arise, because by law, you have to make reports of progress. For example, the applicant will say in the report that after they applied, they have so far got this and that.

When you look at (b), it is about applications in respect of areas that are adjacent to an existing licensed reservoir. Once the reservoir exists, it means it is known. –(Interjections)– Yes. 

For those of us who have tried to study this situation in detail, we know what we are talking about. Look here, if there are two blocks, but one has been licensed - and the minister explained this – and they have dug wells on it and found a reservoir, but it goes across, their argument is that they now cannot licence that block to another person because the present licensee has an indirect interest, having incurred a cost in the process of drilling. However, if you already have evidence that it goes through, then it will not be about drilling to discover because there are reports saying that there is already a reservoir across in the adjacent block. So, all these – (Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I thank hon. Katuntu for giving way. Let me see if we are on the same page. We are talking about exploration. Licensing exploration means you are only depending on mapping that was done using various methods, for example, aerial surveys and seismic surveys showing you the rock formation and suggesting that there may be hydrocarbons in a place. However, that can only be confirmed by digging, which is called exploration. It is only after you have drilled that you are able to determine, as we did in the Albertine Region, if indeed there is oil or gas and if so, the quantities.

The licensing we are talking about is in regard to licensing someone to carry out that exploration by drilling to determine whether there is oil in that block or not. After they have determined, there is another stage and you know the law also talks about it. Otherwise, this particular clause is talking about a licence to drill to determine whether there is oil or not. That is point number one.

Two, -(Interjections)– yes, I am giving information and, I do not want to make a comment about hon. Ssekikubo today. [HON. SSEKIKUBO: “He needs to be informed as well.”]

Anyway, my second point is about blocks. In this case we are talking about – in clause 54(2)(i) – it is a situation where we have demarcated blocks and advertised all of them, but we have had applications for only one block, and let us assume they are two and adjacent to each other. So, we licence only one and leave the other because no one has shown interest.

Once this licensee drills and hits oil, but this oil happens to be in a reservoir that cuts across the boundary of the licensed block and the unlicensed block, what the law is saying is, for the unlicensed block, the person who discovered the reservoir in the other block should be given the opportunity to apply for the unlicensed block. The reason being that when you are licensed to drill, you spend money, which is called high-risk investment. The existing licensee will have spent money and found oil, but it is one reservoir that cuts across the boundary of two. Should we again incur the expense of drilling the other one as well?

At this point, let me correct the colleague who said that it is the licensee who meets the costs. No, it is the State. Why? Because once the oil is found, then the money spent to drill to discover oil is recoverable. Therefore, ultimately, it is the State that meets that cost. That is the explanation about this and how it happens.

MR KATUNTU: I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Between you and I, you know very well that I actually know what you are talking about. But the point I have been trying to make is that what we call “technical evaluation of bids” takes into consideration all that. What I am saying here is that you do not need to give somebody an automatic right by law. It has to go through an evaluation process and it will be up to the technical people to make a decision, whether to or not to license another person. That could be one option and if they find it very expensive because of the process – it is provided for in the process of evaluation. There is nothing strange about it. 

And when you say you want to delete (a), then there is no value you are adding, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, because it makes the matter even worse. Because it will now cover instances where there are other applicants. So, you might forget these applications and you will receive a direct one. That is the import of deleting (a).

Thirdly, I may be an average lawyer, but if this average lawyer is having legal confusion in his mind about this animal called “national interest”, I am sure many people would be equally confused, because there is no law that clearly defines “national interest”. That is why we are saying this generality of “national interest” will, one, cause confusion; two, it does not guide the licensing Authority on what parameters. It is in his general thinking, to say the Constitution talks about common good, national objectives - you cannot do that. 

The licensing Authority would be accused – sometimes falsely by the way - that he did not really act in good faith because the law is not clearly giving him the yardstick he has to use to exercise his powers. It is vague. That is why in the opinion of the constitutional makers; they thought Parliament would have come up with a specific law to guide this creature called “national interests,” which as of now is not there. And since it is not there, you just fall back to the generality of Article 80(a) under national objectives and the Constitution. There is nothing partisan about this. There is nothing like interest about this. I believe that we all want to make a good law and to make this strategic sector more transparent such that we do not become victims like many other African countries. This thing called the “oil curse” is real. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, is there no other way for providing for these exceptions rather than providing for them in the Bill? The suggestions are that these criteria could be evolved in the evaluation mechanisms through the checklist that you use to determine who takes the bid.
 
The other one that was suggested earlier was that the responsible institution of Government can develop criteria which would explain in clearer terms, circumstances under which people can qualify to apply directly. 

The question now is, should clause 54 be in the Bill or should it be in the evaluation criteria or in the regulations? This is the question. Should it be in the Bill here or can it be provided for administratively in the evaluation criteria or in an instrument issued by the Authority or whatever. The minister should, after a wider consultation, come with what will make business sense in terms of what is anticipated under clause 54?

3.41
MR PATRICK NAKABALE (NRM, Youth, Central): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I have keenly listened to all sides in this debate and I would wish to clearly state that primarily, that acquisition is by Government. Government uses the data to define the sizes and again demarcate areas to be licensed. We are talking of a scenario where Blocks A and B being adjacent to each other and interestingly, matters of national interest and matters of strategic resource have been talked of. However, we are seemingly faraway from agreeing.
 
My view, directly to your question is this; one, by business equation, of course, the honourable minister is waiting for our position, given the fact that these are recoverable costs at the end of the day and we are looking at stability. However, when we go to the argument by the Prime Minister that, for example, we delete clause 54(a), we are now running into speculation and we are causing more of a functional conflict in the sense that we are talking of a real scenario that happens in the generally acceptable principles. 

It is very possible not to get applicants for a given resource for reasons that may be beyond what the honourable minister termed as “exceptional circumstances.” Because here we are talking of an underground resource with a natural limit in the sense that as you are given the opportunity to work on the first field, you may not see what is within the adjacent block and it happens that the adjacent block has been found to have some oil stretching into the other block making it a right. If we are to go by the very argument we have on the Floor, whether to advertise or not so as to get other interested parties, of course, in business sense, it is prudent to give the first rights of approval to the existing licensee in Block A. 

However, the fears come in to defeat the argument of the Prime Minister that if we delete (a), the risks now become open that the speculation  we are talking about in here would defeat the arguments on our side, for example. This is because here we shall be making this resource prone to manipulation and conflict of interest in that we are now not clear what we mean by the essence of “national interest” in such a manner that we are now blocking the other applicants. 

So, I would like to implore colleagues that in this scenario, if we are to go the right way, we need to stay the clause. There is no need to delete it.
 
However, I would wish to seek more clarification from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister; if we he means to delete clause 54 (a), then he is giving room to functional conflict and more so manipulations, which is making the other side to look at it as, “What is then the essence of national interests?” 

3.45
MRS JANET MUSEVENI (NRM, Ruhaama County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am sorry, because I do not know whether what I would like to say would answer your question, but I wanted to say something about what we are all battling with. I am coming from the fact that we all agree that it is taking us this long because all of us are trying to get the best law for this national asset. Having listened to many people, I just wondered, if we are talking about this existing block which has a reservoir that runs into the other next block, and someone suggested that at that point, bids should be invited for the next block so that we do not have direct application. 

However, hon. Katuntu also said that nowhere - he used the words to say, “no one ever takes the highest bidder,” meaning that if there is a necessity to give this opportunity to somebody else, that can still be done. I thought that that was supposed to mean that if we have this person who is already in the existing block, and now we find that the next block has a reservoir that runs across both, even if they invited the bids and, for example, a bidder who is not the one in the existing block wins - you just said the highest bidder does not have to win - and so the opportunity would then go to the one in the existing block.
 
That brings the question in my mind; what would that help? It would be a long process which would still do what direct application would have done. Why don’t we then agree that if we are still sure that direct application with consultation of the Authority will really give us what we all need and ensure that it is not the minister alone who is making this decision? Why don’t we agree that whatever means we take, in this case at least, we will still come to the same application by saying a person who is already in the existing block will be the one to take the next one, if the oil runs into it? I just want you to think about that, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.  

3.49
MR GABRIEL AJEDRA (NRM, Arua Municipality, Arua): Mr Speaker, I would like to build on the First Lady’s argument and for your information, honourable members, I have had the opportunity to evaluate many tenders. I do not think there are any tricks of the trade that I do not know in procurement, and specifically, in evaluating tenders.
 
My argument is directed towards hon. Katuntu. We have two blocks, one which is known to have a reservoir and somebody has invested a lot of money to discover that reservoir. You open it up to the whole world and you say, “Please, come. There is a block which is next door.” And information will be there that there is oil already in the block that is adjacent. If you had to go through the procurement process that you are talking about, the question you need to ask is, are you going to do the evaluation based on least cost methods or on quality cost based methods or is it going to be based on price? I will give you the argument; because if it is a question of issuing a licence to the person who bids the highest, the mere fact that I know that there is oil in the block where I am, will make me give a high price.

Secondly, if you are going to use the least cost method, because I am already established, my equipment is all at that site, I am going to give you the least price. Because I do not have to import equipment from elsewhere; I do not have to mobilise; and I do not have to do anything else. So, the question is, if you want to go through the procurement method, you need to determine which method you are going to use. And either way, I can still guarantee you that the person who is seated on that block where there is oil, will win it.
 
There is nothing by the way, even if you went through that process that this person here could not win it. I will tell you why. Tender documents have been tailored in the directions of those who have specific interest, and it happens here in Uganda, by the way. I will not give you the project, because at some point, we have participated in that tender process. And when I went through the tender documents, I knew it was being tailored towards a particular company. So, when you advocate that you want to open it up to the whole world, there is no guarantee whatsoever that you are going to get somebody better than the person who has just struck the oil. 

I thought the argument here is because this person has invested so much money already in this block and it has struck oil, you would shorten the whole process by saying let us have a direct procurement.
 
MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, the point the honourable minister is at pains to make us understand is really not as mysterious as he is articulating it. Honourable members, apart from one owning one well or an exploration area and the question of an adjacent one arises, is not limited to only this. For any authority to prepare for the oil sector, it must have this in mind. 

I can even give you the circumstances. There are areas that are adjacent and once advertised, different entities emerge and they all win. Now, in the process of their drilling, testing, extended testing and all that, they all happen to hit oil at the same time. Though initially, it was not foreseen, but in the process of drilling and exploration, and extended testing, they discover that actually, they are sharing the reservoir. 

Even in that circumstance, there are modalities where even if you are different companies and different entities, there are areas and formulae where you even sit. So, for us to say that because there is – you sit down and there is a formula where you can even share that reservoir of oil because you are different entities, but in the course of your drilling, it has happened that indeed, you are sharing a reservoir. So, even here, there is no magic whatsoever. I have even taken you, honourable minister, to that extreme.(Mr Lokeris rose_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. He is giving information. Please, keep giving the information.

MR SSEKIKUBO: So, what I am saying is that in the oil industry, the adjacent aspect was analysed and we said, what adjacent are you talking about? With the advancement in technology, being adjacent can mean four kilometres, five kilometres and so on, but what is needed here is, once we have an Authority or have a system to manage this oil, it must meet the scientific criteria. Therefore, for us to make the new area to be a bar and in order for us to pass this Bill is not a good reason for you to advance. Even in the circumstances where the two areas meet, they can always sort themselves out. 

MR AJEDRA: Thank you very much for that information. I thought there was a statement which was made that exploration expenses are recoverable. And if they are recoverable –[Mr Katuntu: “They are recoverable only on discovery.”] - Yes, but we have a reservoir. That reservoir will already have been discovered. Somebody must have drilled to discover that there is a reservoir there. You cannot talk of a reservoir when you have not discovered it. The discovery would have been - that yes, you have sunk in money. 

Now, if you are looking at minimising your costs as Government, to minimise the cost of this discovery then the option will be to give the licence to the person who has struck oil in that first block because we tried to minimise the costs. And that is why I asked a question –(Interjections)- let me build my case. That is why I asked a question; when you do the evaluation process, are you looking at the least cost method, or are you looking at the price aspect? It cannot be both. You must only use one system in the evaluation process; either the least cost method or the price which determines. For your information, the technical aspect comes in, whether you are using the least cost method or the price method; the technical aspect must be there. So, you can say, “This is the firm that is technically competent to do the exploration.” 

Let us assume that X, Y and Z all have the technical capability but X is already seated on that block. I can guarantee you that his price – if you are using the least cost method – is going to beat the other two because X does not have to mobilise. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are back to beyond square one. (Laughter) And I do not think it is helpful anymore. But maybe, we could solve it step by step. If this person is going to have an advantage in terms of bidding, you can equate it to the issue of sitting tenants – it may be a bit different – but a sitting a tenant has the first rights to own, but it is subject to meeting the market price. That means there has to be a process that can establish the value of that property at the market rate. (Applause) If the market rate is established and the sitting tenant fails to meet it, then he loses that right. That is it.

And if you look at the regulations made under the PPDA, they are about three times bigger than the Act itself – to take care of all the other details, of things that cannot be provided in the Act. If the details cannot be provided in a way that can be comprehended properly in the Act, can it be provided in the regulations? Attorney-General, please advise us.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Mr Speaker, you did pose that question, as to whether the provisions of clause 54 can be provided in the regulations or the rules. When this Bill is passed, it will be the principle legislation in petroleum exploration. And when you look at the provisions of clause 53, they lay down the general principles of licensing and tendering. Clause 54 is providing for an exception and it is an “escape clause” as lawyers say. There is clause 53 which provides for licensing, but there may be peculiar circumstances that would make it impossible for one to follow clause 53 and hence, clause 54 is providing an escape route for that.

Mr Speaker, you cannot put the provisions of clause 54, in subsidiary legislation, because that would be like trying to use subsidiary legislation to amend the principal legislation. Once we have agreed here, that exception has to be in the principal Act, not in the subsidiary legislation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I run the risk of engaging in the debate on this matter. But let me just give some guidance. Where the details of a particular provision cannot be comprehensively handled in the main Bill, you state the principle only and you give the minister the authority to explain the principle in detail. The PPDA regulations, for example, create exceptions that are only explained by one word in the main Act, and then you have huge provisions explaining the details of the exceptions. You can say, for example, following from clause 53 that, “certain circumstances may not have been captured, the minister can, by regulations, deal with those circumstances that may not fall within the auspices of clause 53.” I do not want to do the drafting, but the point I am trying to suggest is; can you, for example, say, “There may be situations that cannot be dealt with by clause 53.” 

The minister shall, by regulation, make provision for processes that can be taken outside clause 53. And those regulations can come back to Parliament as we have always been doing so that there is a better explanation in the bigger provision that gives the details of what qualifies in that area. And because of those details, they can also go into the evaluation document which they use later, when they are now applying the law. You can state the principle of the exception without elaborating what the exceptions are in the Bill. - Then they go and examine it properly and come back to Parliament with it. That might be a way of moving forward; capturing the exceptions and giving the authority to look at more details and come back to the House with it. That might be the way of moving this particular clause forward rather than having a five-hour discussion on this particular clause.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Mr Speaker, I want to demonstrate the point I am making by quoting the provisions of clause 53. I am looking at sub-clause (1): “The minister shall, with the approval of Cabinet, announce areas open for bidding for a petroleum exploration licence under this Act.” This sub-clause does not lay down the procedure the minister has to follow in doing that. Therefore, when you are making rules, you can give the details which fall in line with sub-clause (1). 

However, when we talk about these exceptions, they are varying – the provisions of clause 53 – and it would be the clause of the principal Act. Now, if you put the provisions of clause 54 in subsidiary legislation, it would be like the subsidiary legislation trying to create a window or to vary the provision of clause 53.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to speak in respect to clause (2)(b) with regard to your guidance. It would not be proper not to mention this sub-clause and refer it to another auxiliary law. One thing, Mr Speaker, which I think we are not getting right is that we are over dwelling on a legal principle, but we are not balancing it with a scientific principle. With petroleum, we have to balance legal and scientific principles in order to be able to balance the equation.

The Shadow Attorney-General talked about what the technical evaluations will handle to cater for it. But there is no way technical evaluations will balance scientific equations. We are dealing with petroleum; if the technical evaluations were enough, then we would not go for exploration; why go for exploration? It is because the exploration must satisfy our equation. Murchison, for example, much as technical evaluations thought there would be oil where Neptune went to explore, the results were negative; they have packed up and the blocks have been reverted to Government.

In such a scenario, where you have fought so much and found a company to come and explore; they have explored, but the oil block extends into another block. By the way, while they are exploring, they need to even bring out the data; what makes up the centre of the oil well so as to determine how far the reservoir extends.

In this scenario, this is the well, and it is extending into another block. When the results are positive, we are going to pay recoverable costs, which will be deducted when the production begins.

Why we think this is important because they are direct applications. First of all, we would save as a country; two, the procedures for this other formal bidding would be a little bit longer, but this is a person who has gone to explore, has got positive results, but wants to complete by giving you full data of how much oil is in that reservoir. It would be only prudent enough - because this is only exploration.

I agree with the fears of the Members, but I would hope when we go to the production licence - because under clause 69, there is specific care given to production licences for such scenarios, just in case. But we are talking about exploration whereby if the results are positive, then we can go to discussions for production and there will be recoverable costs; but where the results are negative, definitely – 

I also want to refer Members to the issue of capital gains and taxes. We would like to be guided by the minister or the Attorney-General. When an oil well extends - the reservoir extends into another block - and we do direct licensing applications, would the company pay capital gain taxes? I know the answer is yes, but it will of course reduce on the costs for the country thereafter, and therefore, increase our shares. That is what I needed to clarify. 

I would agree with the Prime Minister that (a) can be deleted and for (c), we can define it further so that it does not look as ambiguous as it is, so that it is not abused.

MS KWIYUCWINY: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to start where my colleague has just ended, because I also support the fact that clause (b) – “application in respect of areas that are adjacent to the existing licence reservoir should remain.” This is giving an opportunity to the licensee to explore more. It is also good for us as Government, that once an exploration is taking place, it should be comprehensively done so that the economic value we are all looking for is obtained. So, this opportunity should be given to the licensee and I think this is the best area for this clause to be. If it comes to production, like my colleague said, it has been covered very well under clause 69 because here, the licensee will have established that this is the economic reservoir he needs and, therefore, he can now go into production. It will have been evaluated, it will have been appraised and all of us would be happy. So, I want to support that (b) remains as it is and in this particular clause 54.

4.13
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Mr Speaker, I think we have had a lot of debate on this subject and by now, we are aware that a reservoir can go beyond one block. Two, that you cannot determine the extent of the reservoir until you drill. This has been explained; it is not true that even at technical level - evaluation level, you can determine the extent of a reservoir, you cannot; until you start drilling.  

After you have started exploring and you realise that a reservoir is beyond one block, what do we do? I think that is the import of (2)(b), and I would like to convince colleagues that it is in our interest as a country, to have this provision. Because, when the minister receives these licences, are you going to sit in your boardroom and just issue? If you receive these applications, I believe there will be a thorough evaluation with her team, including the Authority, to get the best deal. We may even get a higher price if we decide to use somebody who is already there because some of the fixed costs will have been covered.

Therefore, I would like to support the view that clause (2)(b) should be retained. Then you put the question; Members seem to be in agreement that we retain (b).

Mr Speaker, this being a technical area, some of us may be discouraged. I took time to study this area in detail, including the Bills and some of these provisions are in our interest as a country if we are going to balance all the interests. For example, if you are talking about (c), can I propose even a (d) where the minister is allowed to come up with regulations to bring this particular clause into full effect? Because, we cannot say there will be regulations, when they are not provided for in the mother Act.

Honourable members, the issue of promoting national interest, the debate has been that it is not defined; it does not stop Parliament from defining it and even to come up with a Bill. I remember very well, hon. Katuntu came up with a Private Members’ Bill to operationalise Article 41 of our Constitution and eventually, Government took over that Bill and it has since been passed into an Act.
 
Therefore, if the worry is about the national interests - if you think there is a gap, why don’t we, as Parliament, come up with a Private Member’s Bill to operationalise? Let us not hold back the passing of this Bill into an Act just because - all of us know anyway, that there are national interests for Uganda and Ugandans. Even hon. Ssekikubo and hon. Tinkasiimire know that. We cannot just leave our house  -(Interjections)- Yes, we are all aware; we cannot just leave our house wide open. I would like to support the view that we retain (2)(b) and (c).

4.19
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to say that technical evaluation of bids has nothing to do with the amount of oil that will be down there in the ground or the extent of the reservoir. It is simply an assessment of which one of the bids will be the best and will give you the best option in case of exploration or development. 

Earlier on, I had reservations, because in my mind, I was confusing exploration and development. I have since come to terms with my mind that this is simply exploration. At this stage, we are talking only of exploration and it will be in the best interests of the licensee to declare the total amount of oil that he has discovered because that will determine how much he earns from the venture. I was worried that in case he discovers oil in the first field, he may cover up and then say maybe, he had not discovered much so as to be given the adjacent field. This is simply exploration and this person has put in his resources and he can only recover his costs from the amount of oil that he declares. Therefore, on that basis, Mr Speaker, I would like to convince my colleagues that we should allow this clause to stand. I thank you.

4.20
MRS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As an individual, I see this as creating a leeway for corruption, for theft and for unfairness in this country. How will we find out? How will the Authority or the minister find that this block here did not have oil but the other one had and oil flows from this block to the other one? What criteria will be used? First of all -(Interjections)- yes, this is my independent view. 

First of all, are we not creating a scenario whereby someone can produce from Block A and then convinces whoever will be there that they did not get what he or she expected and is automatically given chance to go to Block B? That is something very technical.

Secondly, I also want to concur with the Prime Minister by deleting (a), but in (b), we need to make some amendments. It should not remain the way it is because I have lived in this country for quite sometime, and I have some good years.  I know how ministers are nominated. We may be lucky today that the minister we have is experienced in this field but the way ministers are nominated is not based on their academic qualifications. It is based on whether someone qualifies to be an MP or not, that is having O and A ‘level. 

So, I am now debating for the future. We are saying that if a licensee should apply directly to the minister, what happens if the minister is not technical in this field? Even if we say, “Like in the above, in consultation with the Authority...” but then where are we putting the permanent secretaries of the ministry? If the Authority is not consulted, what will take place according to what the minister said? 

I want to just re-echo what the minister said. The minister said that applying directly to the minister would mean kind of sympathies because maybe, they did not get what they wanted in Block A and they want to go to Block B, in order to minimise the costs. Sincerely, this is very unfair; unless we amend it and maybe add something that may also regulate the minister and the Authority.

Thirdly, in this country, we have three Arms of Government - the Judiciary, the Legislature and the Executive. In the interest of all Ugandans, we are putting all this to only - I can say the biggest percentage - one Arm of Government, which is the Executive. I am saying this because it is the minister now who is going to have this and maybe take it to the Executive. 

I also want to say that this country is represented by Members of Parliament here both in the Executive and those who are not part of the Executive. So, where is the role of Parliament here? Where does Parliament come in? Therefore, I need such guidance. Thank you.

4.26
MR ROBERT KASULE SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, as I make my contribution, I would like to thank the Members who persisted last week. We made inroads into this Bill. Otherwise, if we had moved like this, we would not have made any inroads, but for those who were here last week, I thank you very much. These things are not simple. They can be legal in as far as they can be technical, but please, Members, let us move at the same pace. 

Uganda has already made progress in exploration and I think we have taken advantage of the earlier explorations, such that in the near future, outsourced blocks will not be as big as the initial blocks you issued. This is because we had made discoveries, and we had seen the extent of the reservoirs, and now we are going to be even more cautious when we are allocating the blocks. 

Mr Speaker, you asked if we could put these provisions elsewhere or in the regulations? I think we can, but at least, we must state the principle here in the Bill. We must state the principle of exception and if everybody agrees that there is an exception as far as direct application is concerned, then let us agree as Parliament that there is need for direct application. 

Then for those areas, we accept that there shall be direct application, and we qualify them by putting provisions for control or monitoring. Last week, we even used Parliament or Cabinet. We can qualify these exceptions. If need be, and the minister has to seek a licence where he has not had any response, then we say bring it to Parliament. Parliament debates it, takes it back and then after the agreement, you process the application. 

Secondly, in as far as adjacent blocks are concerned, if somebody makes a discovery in a block and suspects that there might be a reservoir extending into another block, then we can also put some control that Parliament or any other authority is consulted such that somebody is not seen as a minister taking unilateral decisions without consulting. 

So, I beg this Parliament to use the earlier process we used last week. Let us go step by step, we eliminate one by one, vote on each clause we propose and then we go forward. Otherwise, if we debate the merits of the whole clause, we may not move for the next two days. 

Therefore, I propose, Mr Speaker, that you can even put the question on the need to have an exception. We agree with that motion, go clause by clause and we process the whole clause together. Please, I beg this House to move on.
 
4.29
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will break my presentation into three parts. The first one will be a history of legislation, the way I understand it. The second, clause 53 and the last one will be clause 54, which is related to clause 53.

The oldest recorded legislation can be found in the book of Genesis; the second oldest, is the book of Exodus. When God created man, He gave him only one piece of legislation: Do not touch the fruit. And in a couple of days, of course, man broke that commandment. God became wiser. No.1, He lost all trust in man. This takes you back to the basic reason why we legislate. We legislate out of suspicion. We do not legislate out of trust. We do not legislate in good faith and that has been said over and over again. 

By the time we get to Exodus, one piece of legislation had multiplied into 10: The Ten Commandments. “Thou shall not covet another man’s wife” - “commit adultery” and the 10 basically regulated every aspect of life.

What clause 54 seeks to do is to give a safety valve - an escape route - as the Attorney-General said, to the provisions of clause 53. But what is contained in clause 53? We must go back to that to understand whether or not clause 54 adds any value. And I will say from the outset that clause 54 does not add any value to clause 53. In clause 53, what did we pass? 

No.1, that the minister shall, with the approval of Cabinet, announce areas open for bidding for petroleum exploration licences. It is your function to announce areas open for bidding. On what basis do you announce areas open for bidding? It is on the basis of research; on the basis of survey. How is that done? You find that in clause 53(2) the announcement referred to in sub section (1):”…shall be published in the gazette and in newspapers of national and international circulation and in other electronic and print media. And shall (a) state the area open for petroleum exploration; (b) stipulate a period of not less than three months for making application; (c)- which is critical here - “contain such information as the minister may consider necessary.”

So, when you are making this declaration, you can state as a matter of fact, that this is Block B, but it has a reservoir that extends to Block A. You can state that for a fact. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are off the microphone.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I am sorry, Mr Speaker. This is against the confusion that I need to probably address from the outset. Mr Speaker, first of all my understanding of 54(b) is that there are two licences referred to here: An application in respect of areas that are adjacent to an existing licensed reservoir. The first licence is a licence in respect to a reservoir. That cannot be an exploration licence. You do not explore a reservoir. You do not give a licence to explore a reservoir. A licence in respect to a reservoir can only be a development licence or production licence. That is No. 1

No.2, the licence being applied for in the adjacent block can be the one for exploration. (Interruption) 

MR PETER LOKERIS: Thank you, my brother, for giving way. I think we have moved quite far. We are now talking about how to handle the issue of – first of all, you get your exploration licence for a block and the only thing they tell you is, “This place has the potential for oil,” then you apply and say you are going there. They give it to you. You go there and make a discovery of oil. Then through testing, they discover it stretches across to the other block. It is the treatment of this block that we are now after. 

One, you might find after the bid value that the next bidder after you who has applied, you hon. Fox Odoi, you are now seated, you are fine, it is here, it is stressing. The next bidding round could be in six months but for you, you had put all your investments here. You want to proceed, but you cannot proceed just because of this discovery. Should you not be given time or even a chance to apply for the next one so that you proceed? Others who have applied with you might have not made any discovery anywhere and for you, you see this and nobody has even applied for it. Should you just wait? What if this happens? Does an applicant just have to wait for the next six months when there will be another bidding round so that they apply? If you are being serious, you will say now we want to get a way out by reporting to the authorities, “I have made a discovery and now I want to move that it stretches there. What do we do? If we give this option, then this person can apply for the next block so that we will be able to access the reservoir on the other side so that you pump out oil maximally because when you make many wells, you will be able to inject water in order to release more oil. You will be able to put safeguards according to how the technical people will advise you.  This is what we are haggling about. Thank you. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable minister for that mouthful of information that I find very relevant. Clause 53(2)(iii) states, “The minister may in the announcements stipulate as a condition for granting a petroleum exploration licence that the licensee shall enter into agreement with other licensees on terms and conditions specified”. 

This interpreted in a very broad way also permits the minister to even state in the announcement that the person holding a particular block will have an added advantage. I was talking to hon. Oboth that if you put up an advertisement for the job of Member of Parliament, the only thing you would be required to say is, qualification is A’ Level, but a degree is an added advantage. 

In this particular case, knowledge in exploration matters is the qualification you are looking for, but holding another licence is simply an added advantage. It must not be an automatic right of grant. 

Honourable colleagues, reading the principles we set up in clause 53(4), we stated that the bidding process shall be carried out in a fair, open and competitive manner. These are the three operative words. Whatever we do, we must not depart from a fair process that is open and competitive. You cannot have a competitive process where only one person competes; what kind of competition would that be? I beg to move that we delete clause 54 because it does not add any value. (Applause)

4.40
THE MINISTER OF WORKS (Mr James Byandala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Dear colleagues, this is the time for us to work together and to trust one another. I have heard people here saying that the minister is like this and that. But whoever is in this House is a potential minister. Are you trying to say that the moment one moves to the frontbench, the character changes? What you think the minister may be doing is exactly what you would also be doing if you were in their place.

Secondly, this clause 54 is helping us not to close ourselves out completely in clause 53. Whenever there is a ventilation that would make things move, then it should be a welcome strategy. We should also remember that when we started our oil industry, what we are talking about was not there. Nobody wanted to come here; we never advertised. But we are all interested in the oil because we went solo. Now everybody wants it. We went solo because people were not interested. They told you that they advertised and nobody applied; should we sit there and not do anything? Honestly, is this how we are going to run the country? We have taken the trouble to advertise and no one has applied. Then somebody said, “Me, I can try”, Let them try. But if we waited for other advertisements, nothing would have been done up to now in the oil industry. 

It is true, you may be worried about the minister, but we have said it is done in consultation with the Authority; there is an Authority working with him or her. He or she is not alone. So, there are some values, assuming the minister does not have the credentials you want –(Interruption) 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. Honourable minister, the information I would like to provide is that deleting clause 54 is intended to avoid fights, which you are already experiencing in UNRA where there is an outstanding board decision and a wish of the minister, and a desire of an officer who wants to become an Executive Director of UNRA. This is what we are trying to cure. If there is an open system, these issues will not arise. By deleting it, we are saving the minister. Tomorrow, these things may turn against the minister and you will say, “Byandala gave the job to Ssebanakita and he was given so much money.” 

ENG. BYANDALA: I thank my colleague, hon. Tinkasiimire, but when I was a young man joining the university, one of the things I found at Makerere College, it was not a university then –(Interjections)– yes, it became a university while I was there. They told us that if you do not know something, it is always better to ask other than making statements. 

Hon. Tinkasiimire is talking about something without the necessary facts on UNRA. I wish he had asked me to give him the information before he made judgement. The issues of UNRA have no relevance here and what he has said is totally wrong because this is going to be investigated and the truth will come out. 

I was saying, what we are talking about in clause 54 is on exploration. We are not even extracting the oil yet, we are just exploring. When we get there, then we can become as serious as you want. But let us let somebody come in to tell us whether there is oil or not. We are not saying that the minister will give company ‘A’ permission to extract our oil and take it. 

I, therefore, appeal to my colleagues that we should leave a window for us to manage this oil. The exceptional cases have been made very clear; we have not received applications. Anybody in their right senses can see it. If you have not received applications, what do you do? You have to move on - application in respect of ways which are near. And this is common, because no big company would want to come very close to their neighbours. If there is somebody who is daring enough to come, let them come and explore, and if there is oil, then we can go to the next stage of extraction, which to me is more important than just exploration. 

Therefore, I appeal to all of you colleagues - hon. Katuntu - I appeal to you with all the other colleagues to support this clause; let us retain it. It does no harm. It is a window for us not to be idle if there are no responses to the advertisements. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.50
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, in light of the extensive debate we have had, and the fact that we have not quite – I think we have made some progress from where we were at the time we went to vote, and what is happening now because I can see there is a spirit to find a solution from the contributions of all those who have spoken.
 
Therefore, may I suggest that in light of the lateness of the hour and the consensus that we should find a formulation, which accommodates everybody’s interests, you adjourn the House, we go back and between now and tomorrow morning, we consult with all the interested parties to see whether we can come here with a common position tomorrow to present to the House for adoption. And if we do not, then we should really come ready to finalise this matter tomorrow because we think we have given it adequate attention and debate. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I agree with the position of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that we have made some headway on this matter. The proposal is –

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I was obliging to your guidance, but when the minister gets so personal with me, yet I was rising on a procedural matter –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the last person to hold the Floor was the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and I am going by the record. Honourable member, please resume your sit. Let us make progress on this –

MR SSEKIKUBO: But his neighbour was really by infection – (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we still have 11 clauses to complete. Six of these are actually related to clause 54. That means, the moment we get done with clause 54, we will have dealt with the rest. The others like clause 83, which is on the issue of the operator, we had discussed extensively and reached some consensus. But there are also the following pending clauses; of course, that clause 83; clause 87 on suspension or the cancellation of a licence; clause 110 on the decommissioning fund; clause 112 on disposal of decommissioned facilities; and clause 125, which is on the use of a licence as security.

I have seen a document on the harmonised positions in regard to those particular 5 clauses. The other six, as I said, are dependent on what we decide on clause 54, which will make our work easy to finish.

I, therefore, would like to consider the suggestion by the Rt hon. Prime Minister that we stop here. But what time do we resume tomorrow? Okay, 10 O’clock and I always owe it to you.

Before we close, I have an announcement to make. On a sad note, I wish to announce the death of the father to hon. Deogratius Kiyingi, the MP for Bukomansimbi County, who passed away yesterday, Sunday, 18 November 2012. Burial is tomorrow, Tuesday, 20 November, 2012 at Bukomansimbi. For further information, please contact hon. Godfrey Kiwanda, the Chairman of the Buganda Parliamentary Caucus. Our condolences to the family.

Please look at the remaining clauses and we see how we can move forward. In drafting legislation, we used to say that Bills are made to pass like razorblades are made to sell. So, a Bill that cannot pass cannot meet that taste. So, you have to structure it in a way that it can be passed by the consensus of the Members. We cannot keep pushing it.

I, therefore, urge the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to look at this again and we see how to make progress. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 10 O’clock.

(The House rose at 4.53 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 20 November 2012 at 10.00 a.m.)
