Friday, 8 November 2013

Parliament met at 2.25 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this special sitting to bid farewell to our colleague. I am sure now you are just waiting to laugh at me because it is two months ago when the hon. Member sat in the gallery when we were paying tribute to the late Arinaitwe, and I struggled to pronounce his name and he looked well. So, I have been practising his name again since morning and I hope I am going to pronounce it right. 

We are here to honour the late Deusdedit Bikwasizehi. I have got it right this time; you can see that I have been practising. He has fallen; this colleague of ours! I think we will bring the body in and then we will move from there. 

(Entrance of the late hon. Deusdedit Bikwasizehi)

National Anthem (Three verses)

East African Community Anthem (Three stanzas)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have condolence messages and they are many. So, I will not read them but will just recognise where they are from. I have one from hon. Jane Alisemera Babiiha to the family. I have one from hon. Margaret Nantongo Zziwa, Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly and one from Members of the East African Legislative Assembly, signed by all of them and led by hon. Bernard Mulengani who was the Chapter Head of the EALA Members in this House. 

I have a tribute from the Office of the Government Chief Whip signed by hon. Richard Todwong who is holding the portfolio of Government Chief Whip. I have one addressed to the Speaker and signed by hon. Nusura Tiperu; I have one from Web Advocates and Solicitors signed by hon. Lydia Wanyoto Mutende. I have a condolence message from the Parliamentarians Savings and Credit Cooperative Society Limited signed by the chairperson, hon. Mathias Kasamba. I have one from Tangiziva Farm; it is a condolence message to the family and signed by Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo. Those are the messages I have got so far. They are all addressed to the family with one addressed to the Speaker.

We also have, in the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery, former members of Parliament. I can recognise a former member of this House who is now a member of the East African Legislative Assembly, hon. Bernard Mulengani. I have hon. Lydia Wanyoto, I have hon. Ojok B’leo, hon. Baguma Isoke, hon. Sarah Nyombi; another one with a difficult name, hon. Kubeketerya; I have the former member for Nakifuma County, hon. Joseph Mugambe. I have hon. John Livingstone Okello-Okello, former member for Chwa. I have my friend Pereza Ahabwe, former member for Rubanda; I have the former member for Bunyaruguru, hon. Gaudasio Kabondo; hon. Ngabirano, former member for Rwampara; hon. Herbert Sabila and hon. Nsubuga; I have hon. Silver Bihande and hon. Balyejjusa.

I think I have tried my best to promote my vision here. Thank you for joining us in this moment of sorrow. Let us now move to the next item. I will be recognising the others as we get the names. Let me also recognise that we have the family members on the technical bench right behind me here. 

Laying of wreaths

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE BIKWASIZEHI K. DEUSDEDIT, FORMER MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT, BUHWEJU COUNTY

2.47
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, I rise under Rule 50 of our Rules of Procedure to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Bikwasizehi Deusdedit:

“WHEREAS the late hon. Bikwasizehi Kihuka Deusdedit was born on 23 July 1953 in Bushenyi District, Western Uganda; 

AND WHEREAS the late Deus Bikwasizehi’s tireless quest for knowledge saw him join Makerere University, graduating with a Bachelor of Science Degree in Agriculture;

NOTING that the late Bikwasizehi Deus had a distinct career in agriculture that spanned many years, starting in 1983, serving as the agricultural officer in charge of the Coffee Rehabilitation Programme for Mubende, Masaka, Kasese and Bushenyi districts; and later joining the seed production unit of the Uganda Seed Project as the Seed Production Manager between 1994 and 2001;

FURTHER NOTING that after noble service in the agricultural sector, the late hon. Deus Bikwasizehi joined the Parliament of Uganda in 2001 to serve the people of Bushenyi, specifically standing as the Buhweju County parliamentary representative from 2001 to 2011;

APPRECIATING that the late hon. Deus Bikwasizehi honourably and exemplarily served in a number of capacities in Parliament, including serving as the Chairman of the Committee on Agriculture in the Eighth Parliament;

FURTHER NOTING that the late hon. Deus Bikwasizehi contributed to the strengthening of Uganda’s agricultural sector, having been board chairman of the Cotton Development Authority;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:

    1. That it collectively conveys its deepest condolences to the bereaved family, friends and the nation as a whole upon the loss of this illustrious son of Uganda.
    2. That it takes cognisance of the distinguished service rendered and contributions made by the late hon. Deus Bikwasizehi both at local and international levels.
    3. That the Almighty God sustains the bereaved and grants the late hon. Bikwasizehi Deus eternal peace.”

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, the Government Chief Whip, the Minister of State for Karamoja, the Member for Buhweju County, the Member who likes to be called the Member for Kyankwanzi - he prefers it that way - and the Commissioners of Parliament. 

Please, would you like to justify your motion?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, it is with great sadness that Government, and most especially the National Resistance Movement Party, learnt of the demise of the late hon. Deus Bikwasizehi, which occurred on the morning of Thursday, 7 November 2013 at Nakasero Hospital. You will recall that just two months ago, this new district of Buhweju lost its pioneer woman Member of Parliament at a young age after battling a long illness. Today, we are again congregated here in this august House to pay tribute to another great son of the soil of Buhweju District, the late hon. Deus Bikwasizehi. We send our heartfelt condolences to the people of Buhweju for the double tragedy that has befallen them.

The late Deus Bikwasizehi was born on 23 July 1953. He made it through the academic ladder up to university level where he graduated with a Bachelor of Science in Agriculture from Makerere University and a Master’s of Science in Management in Agricultural Development from the United Kingdom. He also acquired a Certificate in Organisation and Management of Seed Programmes, which he attained in Germany and a Certificate in Plant Genetic Resources Conservation and Utilisation which he got from Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. All these qualifications set the pace for his long career as an agriculturalist. 

The long career of the late hon. Deus Bikwasizehi can be traced back to the many positions he has worked in, especially in local government. He started out as an agricultural officer in Mityana sub-district between 1979 and 1982 and then as a district coffee officer for Mubende from 1982 to 1988. Between 1988 and 1989, he worked as district agricultural officer for Bushenyi before being transferred in the same position to Masaka where he worked from 1991 to 1993. In 1993, he was appointed project manager, Legume Seed Project where he worked until 1994 and after that he was appointed as seed production manager, which position he held between 1994 and 2001. 

The late Deus Bikwasizehi then embarked on a political career in 2001 which saw him being elected to the Seventh and Eighth parliaments, representing the then Buhweju Constituency in Bushenyi District. 

The late Bikwasizehi was a hardworking leader who always had his people and Buhweju at heart. From the time he served the Eighth Parliament as a representative of the then Buhweju Constituency from the greater Bushenyi District, he strongly advocated for delivery of services to his people. In parliamentary debate, he always emphasised Buhweju as one of those places that Government should have considered as one of the hard-to-reach areas owing to the physical landscape of that area. 

It is indeed from this perspective that the late Deus Bikwasizehi embarked on lobbying for the elevation of Buhweju County to district status. Indeed, after his tireless effort of making a case for a district, Buhweju was finally considered by Government for elevation to district status. He was, however, not able to make it to the Ninth Parliament even after having delivered the people of Buhweju to their promised land.

Mr Speaker, it is a well-known fact that Buhweju is one of the highest producers of tea in this country. The late hon. Deus Bikwasizehi always promoted the growing of tea as a major cash crop for the people of Buhweju. Tea is the leading cash crop in Buhweju District with about 700 square kilometres under cultivation. The late Bikwasizehi is one of those people from the area that lobbied a lot for Government to establish a tea factory there. It is because of this effort that the Uganda Government decided to contribute towards the establishment of a Shs 20 billion tea factory because tea was Uganda’s third foreign exchange earner, after coffee and fish. During the financial year 2010, Uganda earned $83 million in foreign exchange and tea continues to be among the ten priority enterprises to be supported in the agriculture sector. 

Development Strategy and Investment Plan: The government continues to take $7.7 billion while the rest was footed by owners of Igara Tea Growers’ factory. The establishment of a tea factory in this area has also translated into the extension of electricity in the area, and creation of jobs especially for the youths. 

The late hon. Deus Bikwasizehi had already left politics after he was defeated in the NRM primaries by the current holder, hon. Ephraim Biraro. From then on, he was appointed chairman of the Ugandan Cotton Development Authority, a position he held until his death. 

I take this opportunity, on behalf of Government, to send heartfelt condolences to the family of the bereaved, the people of Buhweju, of the greater Bushenyi and the country at large, for this great loss. May God rest the soul of the deceased, hon. Deus Bikwasizehi, in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Seconder – 

2.58
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (MS WINIFRED KIIZA): Mr Speaker, I rise on behalf of the Opposition in and outside of Parliament, the people of Rwenzori region and the people of Kasese District to second a motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Deus Bikwasizehi.

Today we, once again, converge on a dark day in the historic pages of Parliament to send off a decent, clean and transformational leader who has served his country above self. All his life, he has been a straight-forward advocate for the ordinary farmers; he has believed that ordinary persons can be transformed through improved agriculture. 

I personally worked with the late in 1998 to 2001, when he was working as production manager of the seed project in Kasese District. The late was a humble man – but really not very humble because in his humble way, he could move things. He was a man who did not believe in antagonising the people he worked with. He believed in building consensus on each and every matter and when he left Kasese to go and contest in Buhweju, Deusdedit said “Bye” to all of us. We bid him farewell and we wished him good luck. He went to contest and we were happy that the people of Buhweju trusted him.

I want to report to this Parliament that if Deus had chosen to contest in Kasese, we would have given him the vote because he had worked for the people; he had shown them that he cared and Kasese being a community of farmers, they all loved him. I know the people of Kasese – wherever they are – feel the loss of this great man lying before us. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that he would have defeated hon. Yokasi Bihande?

MS KIIZA: Yes, he would have. But at that time, the hon. Bihande was the District Chairman. So, they would have worked together and I know they worked together and they still would have worked together if he had become Member of Parliament there. He would have actually contested with Muranga by that time.

As earlier on stated by the mover of the motion, hon. Bikwasizehi was the Chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries in the Eighth Parliament, a position where he truly and dedicatedly championed the interests of the farmers’ movement, as a professional agriculturist in practice and he believed it was and still is the engine for social and economic transformation. He was a transformational leader whose focus was to transform ordinary persons of this country.
 
I would wish to ask all of us here assembled; do we all believe that if we needed to transform this society, if we wanted to transform our country, the beginning would be the transformation of ordinary persons? That is what hon. Bikwasizehi believed in. 

You will all recall that we are signatories to the Maputo Declaration where we appended our signatures and said we shall give 10 percent of our national budget to agriculture. Until he left this Parliament, the late was always reminding us of our commitment to the Maputo Declaration and I think if we really wanted to show our commitment to the Maputo Declaration, the National Development Plan highlighted the need for the country to put a lot of emphasis on agriculture but it has remained on paper rather than action. 

Why, as a country, must we leave the more than 23 million people of Uganda whose livelihood is dependent on agriculture sector to food insecurity? The colleague before us is a graduate of a Master’s of Science in Management of Agricultural Development. As a country, is agriculture being given the attention it deserves as is stated in the National Development Plan? Sincerely, why should we abandon the ordinary person whom the late has all along been fighting for? As we send him off, we should see how best we can put more emphasis on agriculture. 

Mr Speaker, the colleague we are sending off today was a charismatic leader. The hon. Bikwasizehi sometimes would make me laugh. I remember in 2009, when the President of this country said that he saw nobody with a vision to take on from him and I met him on the door steps of Parliament and I asked him, “Hon. Bikwasizehi, don’t you think you have that vision to lead the people of Uganda to the promised land?” He told me, “You know, Winnie, I think leaders must emerge and I would say that that system should be created that enables leaders to emerge.” 

Mr Speaker, if you make leaders to emerge, to make us realise the dream of hon. Bikwasizehi, then we should re-instate the term limits in our Constitution. Uganda is the only country in the East African Community that has not considered the term limits aspect and yet, this has been a proved fact that for security reasons and for stability as a country, we must let leaders emerge. We cannot let them emerge when we want to cling to power. Our honourable colleague played his part in this country. 
Deus, your candle is burnt out; you have left behind a generation. You struggled to plant a tree for that generation, you tried to water it, but alas, the seedlings were stolen. That generation still lives and hungers on; you fought a good cause and your cause will not just die in vain. The struggle will continue and we will always live to be inspired by your unwavering dedication to pure service to the people of Uganda. 

To his family, take heart, the Lord who gave you Deus is the same Lord who has taken him away. He has been an inspiration to all of us his friends, to the people he works with; the Lord who gave us has taken him away. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, both the mover of the motion and the seconder. Hon. Members, allow me this time to recognise in the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery again the hon. Susan Nakawuki, Member of the EALA. 

I also have received two condolence messages: one from the Parliamentary Pension Scheme signed by hon. Sarah Nansubuga Nyombi, member of the board of trustees and a condolence message from the district MP, Serere, who is also the Secretary-General of the Forum for Democratic Change, hon. Alice Alaso.

Hon Members, the motion before us is that this House collectively conveys its deepest condolences to the bereaved family, friends and the nation as a whole upon the loss of this illustrious son of Uganda. 

That the House takes cognizance of the distinguished services rendered and contribution made by the late hon. Bikwasizehi Deusdedit both at local and international levels. 
And the third one, which I want the Clerk to take note of – there are some changes because the original text had some difficulty. So, the current text we are going to debate is that it collectively prays that the Almighty God sustain the bereaved and grant the late hon. Bikwasizehi eternal peace. That is the motion before the House. 

The House will rise at 5.00 O’clock; so let us see how we go. I will not put any time frame for this debate but be conscious of your friends’ contributions as well. So, the debate begins now. I will start with honourable member for Bunyole East. We will not put a time limit, just bear in mind that we are rising at 5.00 O’clock.

3.09
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in paying tribute to our fallen colleague. I also wish to extend my condolences to the members of the family, and the people of Buhweju whom he represented in this Parliament for two terms.

Hon. Bikwasizehi, while he was in this House, was a very sociable character, who associated freely with every Member of Parliament, irrespective of the side that he belonged to. But above all, the thing that we are going to remember about him most is that he had a passion for agriculture for the people of Buhweju, especially in the issues that affected them. 

I first went to Buhweju in the Sixth Parliament when the hon. Bantariza was the representative of Buhweju and you would see that there was a conspicuous difference. Although Buhweju was part of Bushenyi and Bushenyi was referred to as one of the most developed parts of this country, you would see that Buhweju was purely different. It was a very hard-to-reach area; accessibility was very difficult and the topography was very difficult. Even the economic status and the level of agriculture were poor.

The late hon. Bantariza tried his best but when the late hon. Bikwasizehi came to this Parliament, he spoke with passion about tea growing, about accessibility and about electricity. He came to this House and spoke for those three things. What surprised me most is that even after he had delivered the district - like the Rt Hon. Prime Minister said that he had delivered them to the promised land – I do not know whether that is the promised land – at that time he was not re-elected. You would have expected that hon. Bikwasizehi would have reacted with bitterness - that is one area where he defeated me.

He told me, “Dombo, I worked for these people but they have voted a friend of mine. So, I am going to work with him and tell him what I had not completed.” That was unusual in times like these ones. I, therefore, want to pay tribute and recognise his good heart and pray that other politicians try to emulate it in circumstances like this. May his soul rest in eternal peace and may the members of the bereaved family be comforted. I thank you.

3.11
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the people of Gulu District, I would like to convey my heartfelt condolences to the family of the late Deusdedit. The late, indeed, was a very humble man. When you talk about humility, he was and he could cooperate with anybody. I remember we used to pray together in the Catholic Chaplaincy; he was a regular church-goer and the way he related with us – he did not undermine or underrate and you could see that he was a man who was down to earth. We are here also walking to that promised place where all of us will have to end.

How are we walking? Are we on the right path? The late really – you know, calling colleagues “honourable” sometimes we do not know people’s names. It was until today that I started trying to pronounce his name because I would just call him “honourable.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Aol, would you now like to pronounce the name in full?

MS AOL: The name is Deusdedit – that is the Christian name but for the surname, that name – (Laughter)– Members, this is not the first person to have passed on through non-communicable diseases. This could be already in this Parliament, even if he is not a Member of this Parliament. In this Parliament, he could be the sheep. That means that there is need for us to emphasise non-communicable diseases in our health centres and hospitals. Many of our people actually go without noticing they have diabetes. We have lost our people to cancer – these are all non-communicable diseases! 

It is an eye-opener that here in Parliament, we are a target of non-communicable diseases. What should we do? Are we going to turn our eyes away? The technical people in that area of health should really help us. We need to plan better for the people of Uganda. Well, he died in Nakasero Hospital. How many people are dying of non-communicable diseases without even being attended to? He is just, I think, 61. Someone aged 61 is a person who has a lot to do for this country; with the knowledge that he accumulated, we still needed him very much. 

Maybe the technical people will help to guide us: what should we do to avoid getting hypertension? Maybe cancer is very difficult but when we have some measures of control maybe it is not going to be all of us dying of diabetes, hypertension, stroke. I think we really have to focus on that. 

Yes, he walked his way and now he is gone. We know sometimes we Catholics say that for you to reach Heaven, the door is death. Let us pray that at least humble as he was, he is already there with the Lord. That is our prayer. And for the bereaved family, we say, take heart. He did his best. He loved the people of Uganda. People who work for the grassroots people are people who love to see that everybody prospers but people who are capitalists – we also have capitalists here in Parliament – they are people who do not care so much about the grassroot people; people who try to accumulate everything for themselves. He worked very hard for the grassroots people. He advocated for them; he did so well in agriculture. You should be grateful that he really lived a good life. 

We pray that the Good Lord who took him should console you so that you also accept that he is gone and you will one time meet him there. May his soul rest in peace. I thank you.

3.19
PROF. KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Mr Speaker, I want to pay tribute to the late Deus and also pray that the family remains strong in this trying moment. I worked with Deus in the Seventh Parliament on the Committee on Agriculture for the entire Session and as he is described, he was very knowledgeable and very calm. 

I remember one of the instances - in the Seventh Parliament the Committee on Agriculture was more or less a technical committee because it had many professionals in the various disciplines in that field - when we were confronted with a very controversial Bill, the National Agricultural Research Organisation Bill. The minister was pushing and pushing but the likes of the late Deus, Prof. Latigo and others stood our ground despite the pressures and made sure that we saved NARO because that Bill was intended to dismantle the National Agricultural Research Organisation. We stood our ground with all the information and the knowledge people had and we saved NARO. So, Mr Speaker, I want to pay tribute to the late because he left a big mark in that field. 

The late shared freely all the vast knowledge he had with others and he was not selfish. And, therefore, as others have said, if only the Ministry of Agriculture had utilised and listened to some of the information he had, the sector would be in a better position today. He was instrumental in shaping many Bills in that committee, as I have said and as colleagues earlier said.

If any person listened, much of the contributions he made were on Buhweju – tea in Buhweju, a factory for tea in Buhweju, electricity for Buhweju and the roads. He was very passionate about the area he represented and of course the factory was put there; power has gone there and the people of Buhweju will certainly remember the late Deus because of these things. 

Recently, he called me and he introduced me to his son. His son is an engineer and he has got work extending to Kibaale. He said, “Kasirivu, you must know my son because he could make a mistake and you bump into him and cause chaos.” Here was a parent who was really making sure that his children do not get unnecessary problems by entrusting them to his friend. 

So, Mr Speaker, I pray that the Almighty sustain the bereaved family and may the soul of Deus rest in eternal peace.  

3.22
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of West Nile and the people of Terego, I want to convey my heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family upon the loss of my senior colleague with whom I have been in this Parliament since 2001.

The late Bikwasizehi Deusdedit – many of you may not know what this name means but for a person who went through the seminary, and as a Catholic, Deus means God; Dedit, given by God. And indeed Bikwasizehi was given to us by God. 

I closely got in touch with hon. Deus – as I used to call his name in short form – in 2003, when I chose to go and serve on the agriculture committee, which committee I have remained on to date. The late Deus was very particular when it came to the issues of agriculture. The hon. Dr Atwooki with who I have been in that committee, touched a bit on some of his contributions. I remember the hon. Dr Kisamba Mugerwa was the Minister for Agriculture – and hon. Sebuliba Mutumba, who was also a member of the committee will be there to bear me witness; when Government came up with a Bill to dismantle NARO; we stood our ground. We said, “We cannot allow an airborne discussion from Entebbe to Washington and back which is going to work to the disadvantage of our people.” 

And the late Deus, as a man who had worked for the agricultural development programme as a programme manager, who is down to earth with extension services and knowing what we would miss if we did away with NARO, and then thereafter with the NAADS, gave us technical guidance. It was on that strength of the technical guidance that we were able to save the present NARO, which is still operating and serving the people of Uganda today. 

The late Deus was a man of self-respect. He served in this Parliament for 10 years. I challenge those who were here in the Seventh Parliament and Eighth Parliament to come and say when Deus ever bitterly exchanged any word with anybody. He never! Even when he was our chair on the committee – we are made up of different personalities; there are those who have got incorrigible behaviours in terms of maintaining order in meetings but here was Deus who would work for consensus. He would want to bring the team together and say, “Let us work together; hon. Member, what is it?” 

Deus led a simple life. For those of you who have been on the agriculture committee, I may sound a little sectarian but I must say what I used to tell the late Deus. I said, “Deus, you do not look a Munyankore.” (Laughter) That is what I used to tell him. A week and a half back, he rang me from his residence at the Wandegeya flats just below Makerere University, opposite the main gate and we had a very loud and long chat. I said, “You do not look like a Munyankore.” I said, “People are in power; they are rich and you are just like this?” (Laughter) I reminded him. Yes, let me tell you what I used to share with him. 

I reminded him and I said, “Do you know the days of President Idi Amin? I was a student but when his government was overthrown, they said, ‘You people have eaten,’” and yet some of us went without sugar.” Gen. Moses Ali is there; he will even bear witness with some of us. (Laughter) We were not well positioned. We went without sugar. We went without soap but we were blanketly condemned that, “You people have eaten.” And I used to tell Deus, “Today, they are talking of “twariire” but tomorrow they will crucify you for nothing. I do not see any eating on your face. You do not look like them.” That is what I used to tell Deus. 

Hon. Sebuliba will agree with me. I used to even go further and say, “Deus because of your good behaviour, even if things went bad, I will hide you under my bed.” (Laughter) “When they are looking for them, I will hide you under my bed.” This is what I used to tell Deus because of that simple life that he led. He was not the arrogant type. 

Let me tell you; we must learn from the history of this country. Those days when Amin was in power, they used to say “Mia moja kumi na moja,” you know those cuts on the cheeks. Then when it came to my brothers in Acholi, they would say “Acholi Otem, Wan keken.” Those things are there. And today we are talking of “twariire” but not all are eating. There are those who are principled, who are good like the late Deus. We must give credit where it is due. I used to say this when he was still alive and he would laugh. This is the man lying in front of us; he was a nationalist. 

I had an opportunity to go with him to Abi Zonal Agriculture Research Institute in Arua and when we were there, I did not know that this man was our muko – our in-law. He has a cousin sister married in Arua - a nurse. This is to tell you how close this gentleman was to me. I got to know all that information because of our good relationship. He was a man who meant well for this country. We shall certainly miss Deus.

Let me tell you honourable colleagues; in the Catholic Church theology, there is what is said in Latin, estote parati – be prepared. The late Deus lying in front of us was prepared as far as his faith is concerned. He never at any one time shied away from his faith. He was a strong believer; a man who would always get time to join his fellow Catholics and be able to worship. That should be the journey that we make. All these earthly contributions we are making in terms of contributions in Parliament; in terms of contributions in our respective constituencies, will all be in vain if we cannot trace our roots as far as faith and belief are concerned. I will want to believe very strongly that the Almighty God will judge Deus very fairly as per the contributions he made while he was with us here. We will dearly miss him. 

As we send him off, I pray to the Almighty Lord that He gives the bereaved family courage and mechanisms to cope in the absence of the bread winner in the family. It is because of his very good outstanding personality that Government thought about him and gave him this appointment of being the Chairman of the Cotton Organisation Authority. You remember honourable colleagues when we were about to go for elections -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Cotton Organisation Authority?

MR WADRI: Cotton Authority Organisation - (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Cotton Development Authority.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, you are always right; that one. You remember when we were about to go for campaigns, we all went to our respective political parties. We subjected ourselves to primaries and thereafter the campaigns ensued. There was a falsehood given to many, “Do not worry even if you lose in primaries, there is a lot of room in the father’s house.” These are the falsehoods we were all given. “Do not worry even when you lose, I will always have some space for you” -(Interjections) - but there is nothing for you Rt Hon. Prime Minister to say, “Careful.” I know what I am saying and I am going to substantiate it. How many who were promised rooms in the father’s house are on the streets? And my colleagues whom you all promised and they are not even near this corner? Yes they are there. You can even see them up there. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as the Secretary-General for NRMO, you can even see them and go home and think about it and see how you can accommodate them. The point I am making is that, Deus was able to secure that appointment because of his personality. I do not know whether it is because the Prime Minister has not decided to allocate some space but I am sure he is taking note and he will be able to provide for them. So, the good behaviour of the hon. Deus Bikwasizehi is what earned him that. 

We shall dearly miss him. May the Almighty Lord rest his soul in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the Member for Terego has not done very well in terms of time keeping. So, I might be forced to impose a time-frame but not yet. Let me try and see if the next people will behave. 

3.34
MR DAUDI MIGEREKO (NRM, Butembe County, Jinja): I too rise to support the motion as moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that this House recognises and pays commendation to the illustrious life and career of our fallen brother, Deus Bikwasizehi. I would like to also register condolences to the family, the people of Buhweju through our dear brother Biraaro, to the NRM as a party, to His Excellency the President and to the people of the Republic of Uganda, over this huge loss arising out of the passing away of our brother, Deus Bikwasizehi. 

The loss of Deus is a very big blow to all of us. But this must be a very difficult moment for the people of Buhweju and for our brother, hon. Biraaro who only recently lost another leader, our sister, hon. Kariisa. 

Mr Speaker, I knew Deus fairly well; we were at Makerere at the same time. We were also fairly close when we started working and he was an agricultural officer, and I was associated with that industry and also the team industry at the same time. But we also met here in Parliament and we used to interact very often and closely. The late was a gentleman of the highest order. He had values. He valued friends and always encouraged people to embrace teamwork.

He had accomplished powers to lobby and he used those powers to lobby for the people of Buhweju. As it has been pointed out, whenever he had the opportunity to put out a word for the people of Buhweju, he would always do so fairly and forcefully but also fairly eloquently. Therefore, the people of Buhweju will indeed miss our brother, the late, just like all of us will.

The late was one of the key pillars in the tea industry in this country. By the time he became a Member of Parliament, Buhweju still needed to plant more tea. But they also wanted a factory. He led the campaign for planting more tea in Buhweju and ultimately they qualified for a factory, which he had been fighting to get for a very long time.

Buhweju, because of its altitude, which is also associated with difficult terrain apparently, happens to have certain advantages as far as tea production is concerned. It produces the best tea in the whole country and for a long time, the people of Buhweju would market their tea through Igara Tea Factory. But when they got the tea factory, this helped the whole country for it to increase on tea production, which had fallen to very low levels.

In the years 1989 to 1990, as a country, we were only exporting about two million kilogrammes of tea. Today, we are exporting approximately 60 million kilogrammes of tea. Obviously, we need to still work harder to compare ourselves to Kenya which is now producing 480 million kilogrammes of made tea. We need to work harder because Uganda has more arable land that we can put to greater use by way of planting more tea. Given the new trends on the market, we would be able to produce superior tea to all other tea in the East African Region and I am sure this would be a long way in addressing issues of poverty in many homes in our country.

Mr Speaker, because of this increase in tea production, the late honourable member played a key role in promoting it – while we had only less than 10 tea factories between 1989 and 1990, today we have 23 new tea factories in the country. Obviously, this goes out to address one of the problems that hon. Kassiano Wadri was raising of “eating.” The NRM has always thought to spread out the “eating” by encouraging projects to come out in practically every part of the country so that all of us can have something to take home, provided we are prepared to work. 

Mr Speaker, I want to say that I also worked very closely with the late honourable member while I was the Minister of Energy and at the time when electricity was being extended to Buhweju. So, I am glad to report that at the time of his death, a new industry is already coming up in Buhweju. That industry is of gold mining and production. I am sure with this kind of spread of wealth, the concerns that my brother hon. Kassiano Wadri raised in regard to what we shall do after we leave Parliament, will be addressed because wealth is everywhere in the country, provided we can tap it and when we do that, we shall all be happy and proud to be in our country. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.38
LT COL (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (NRM, Isingiro County North, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to my late brother and friend, the late hon. Deus Bikwasizehi.

I met the late in 2001 in the Seventh Parliament. I found him a very honest man and a man full of purpose. We became very close and also worked together in the first and second terms. I want to say that the late was exactly the way hon. Kassiano Wadri described him. He had constancy of purpose and never deviated from the cause.

I remember one time when he was planning to have a tea factory in Buhweju, and we were trying to help him at the ministry; he almost spent a week coming to the ministry as we tried to find out where to get the money to assist him in that venture. He was the first man to take me to Buhweju. Although I come from that part of the world and have relatives there, I had never gone there. And while we were there, I became interested to know more about what kind of person he was, only to find out that he was my clans mate from the Bashambo clan.

The late has left a very big gap in the agricultural sector. He had the knowledge and those of you who associated with him know this. Actually, there are several Members of Parliament on the Agricultural Sectoral Committee who we refer to as consultants because we share a lot with them. And the late was one of those. He was not only knowledgeable, but also passed on that knowledge to others. He was very rich and knowledgeable in extension agriculture.

When we had turmoil in the Cotton Development Organisation, which was more of politics than actually technical, we absorbed the late Esele and the cotton sector grew – (Interjections) – yes and the late hon. John Odit but also brought on Sserunjogi. Mr Speaker, I want to inform hon. Kassiano Wadri that actually the father’s house has also been accommodating some of our colleagues.

It is so unfortunate that the late has also died in the same style that the late hon. Esele passed on, because I was in a meeting and they told me that the Chairman of the Cotton Development Organisation had collapsed. Thirty minutes later, we were told he was dead. I really didn’t know that the late had been sick to that extent. Yes, I had known him for being diabetic, but it wasn’t acute. Although he was diabetic, I don’t remember seeing him go down for some time.

Mr Speaker, we have missed a man who was a nationalist and who avoided conflict where necessary. I agree with my colleagues who said that he avoided conflict and he actually welcomed hon. Biraaro. The late hon. Bikwasizehi, up to the time he passed on was very agile; he contributed not only in the agriculture sector, but in anything to do with development you would find hon. Bikwasizehi very useful. 

One time, I was going to Namukola with him for burial. This is to tell you how people can be down to earth. In the night, he had problems and he was no longer going with me. He called to say, “Hon. Rwamirama, am not coming but can you find somebody, particularly from the West so that you can go to Namukola because it is good that people know that Uganda is the same.” You can imagine somebody who thinks like that. So, this is the person we are missing. My dear friend, hon. Bikwasizehi, may the Almighty God rest your soul in perfect peace. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me recognise in the gallery again, hon. Erina Nagudi, hon. Lois Kiryapawo and hon. Alisemera. 

3.42
MR FREDRICK RUHINDI (NRM, NAkawa Division, Kampala): I too rise to support the motion moved by the Prime Minister. I stand to condole and share with the family of the late Deus, the people of Buhweju and Uganda as a whole. 

Deus made his speech and statement while on earth. We are simply re-echoing his nature. Human beings are not perfect but here is a person one could say, even as Members of Parliament, I believe we could all say that he was one of the finest and knowledgeable legislators Uganda has ever had in our time. (Applause)

This is not simply a legislator whom the Speaker could call upon to speak simply because his time had come, but because he had a special contribution to make in the subject matter at hand. But that aside - and I am happy because I was in Church this morning, and his children and his uncle really gave stories of a revealing nature about Deus.

If I were to be asked what legacy he left - had those degrees, he had Master’s, certificates, diplomas, he worked, got the best job, fine children and so on, what legacy, Deus epitomised the principle of “Ubuntu”, that your humanity and my humanity resides in the humanity of others. (Applause) 

In some countries, to mention but one, South Africa, they teach that subject in schools, “Ubuntu”. That level of humility, if we had that as leaders, I can tell you this would be a different planet. You would not steal public funds because you know that their humanity is your humanity. This man lived a frugal life. I know him very well because we finished the university together. He did some very interesting things to earn a living while even at the university.

Some of you who love reading, you need to get a book entitled The power of life and read where the author, for instance, defines what life actually is; that it is that state where you have been stripped of all your materialistic needs and goes into spiritual life. He says that the secret to life is to die before you die and actually, even know that death does not exist. You may wish to think about that.

Deus was identical to his word; he tells you something, he meant it. You would not see any hatred in his face; you would not see anything and by the way, let me tell you - hon. Rwamirama has made his submission, I think it is quite on a rather selfish note. In our nature, the Bashambu clan – because you will be told, you do not need to hire intelligence to find out what I do, what I say, because I tell you. And that was him, either he liked something or did not like it. And he would tell you. You would hate him for that or love him. Period. Mr Speaker, may Deus rest in eternal peace.

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, I too would like to pay tribute to our fallen colleague, the hon. Bikwasizehi, on his untimely death. There are very few people in life you meet and in a short interaction with them, you would know that this person is a person of substance.

Hon. Deus Bikwasizehi was one such a person. He would be engaging, he would be forthright and yet, down to earth. This is a characteristic we find in very few people. A man of substance, yet of humility; a man of great foresight and a man of achievement. This is the person who has left us. 

I met him three weeks ago, on the steps of Parliament. He used to come here regularly. And I had not known that he had become the Chairperson of the Cotton Development Authority and true to his vocation, he followed his love for agriculture. His profession was in agriculture, extension work, teaching farming, multiplying quality seeds - he came to Parliament in the Committee on Agriculture, became its chairman, now towards the end, he became the Chairman of the Cotton Development Authority.

So, I asked him, what are you up to here now in this sector? He told me “God willing, I would like to revive the cotton industry in Uganda. Do you remember Nytil - Nyanza Textiles - where Uganda sold cotton fabrics throughout East Africa? If we can revive the textile industry, we will be addressing the issue of household income in the cotton growing areas. That, I hope to work on and achieve with others.” 

When he was Member of Parliament for Buhweju, he did a lot to promote tea growing, like the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister mentioned in his eulogy. A lot of people in Buhweju are now growing tea. He said that two things needed to be done: One was to get a brand name for Buhweju tea - not Igara tea, not Rwenzori tea, but he said Buhweju tea must get a brand name. So, hon. Biraaro, you succeeded him and there is a task for you to get a brand name for Buhweju tea. 

The new Woman Member of Parliament for Buhweju, I pity you because you were sworn in yesterday and your first function today is to pay tribute to our fallen brother. However, have courage because this is the way life goes on. Take his mantle to get a brand name for Buhweju tea.

Secondly, on the issue of tea production in Uganda, he said it was also his wish for Uganda to establish a tea auction market here. This is because there are other countries that are marketing our tea as if they were the producers. So, I told him that this was a very good idea which all of us in Government and everywhere must take up, so that the tea we export is auctioned from here. 

Just like hon. Wadri said, hon. Bikwasizehi was a muko to those of us from West Nile. His sister is a nurse in Arua and she is married to somebody from there and they have big children. He used to call me a muko too because I am also married to a lady - a very beautiful charming lady - from Buhweju. So, my children have roots in Buhweju while his sister’s children have a foothold in West Nile. What a way of social engineering and integrating this country, which all of you must emulate. 

My brother, hon. Bikwasizehi, rest in peace and thank you for the outstanding contribution you made to this country in the field of agriculture. I thank you.

4.00
MR DAVID WAKIKONA (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Rt. Hon. Speaker, like my colleagues I stand to support the motion moved by the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister. It is a sad day, but sometimes on a sad day we get to say exactly what we feel about people who have left us.

The late hon. Bikwasizehi and I joined Parliament in the same year, 2001. We had no experience of the parliamentary language and when we reached here he would say, “Wakikona, what are you going to say?” I would say, “I am as new as you, but we shall listen to what they say and we shall say exactly that.” (Laughter) 

I am used to hon. Wadri’s words. You remember one time he stood here and said, “What is wrong with Museveni; how can he make an Indian the Minister for Northern Uganda”, meaning me. (Laughter) I said, “Did you want a Sudanese like you to be a minister?” (Laughter) These are some of the things we would laugh about.
 
Deus and I knew each other well. We were joke mates. He used to call me “honourable” in Lugisu, not in English –(Interjections)– No, he knew the word himself. (Laughter) He would say, “How are you, honourable?”, but the word “honourable” was in the other language. We were used to that. 

I used to ask him, “Deus, why don’t we go to Bugisu together since you are an expert in coffee?” Mr Speaker, you know that I also have coffee - You are my son-in-law but you are the Speaker now, so I have to address you as, “Rt. Hon. Speaker”. (Laughter) So, I went to Bugisu with Deus and I showed him the coffee we grow and he gave me ideas on what to do.

I listened to his speech on tea; he almost collapsed arguing for Buhweju tea. Although hon. Migereko gave those figures, we are now working very seriously with the Ministry of Agriculture to auction Ugandan tea in Uganda so that our tea does not appear in Mombasa as Kenya tea when it is actually Ugandan tea. This is something we are doing. Now that we even have the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister here, this is something we must push for quickly so that Ugandan tea is labelled “Uganda tea” wherever it goes. 

One time I asked him how he was and he said, “No, I am alright.” Hon. Chango Macho had just passed on and he said, “You know, death comes like that”. We do not know when we are going to die. Each one of us is like someone in a relay; when you get the stick from somebody dying, you push your hand backwards to get it and run and you do not look at his face, you will never reach the rope. You can see it is not long ago and Deus is the one we are mourning today. 

I have to express condolences to the family and the children. One of the MPs told me, “You look miserable”, and then he laughed and said, “You know, that is the way”. That kind of culture and social way of living is very uncommon today; we lived and argued together and even had tea in the canteen. He would say “Wakikona, let us go up for tea” and we would enjoy ourselves and come down here. When I heard that Deus had died that morning, I asked, “Was he hit by a vehicle?” But this is the world; we do not know what will kill us. We pray that we emulate whoever goes with that type of record and also try to live in that manner. 

Somebody was joking about death; they said, “If I knew death I would run away from it.” But where would you go where death does not exist? This is exactly why we are saying that we should emulate this great man. Hon. Bikwasizehi, now you are gone, I pray that your soul rests in eternal peace. Thank you, Sir.

4.05
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the motion. On behalf of the people of Sheema and on my own behalf, I wish to extend our heartfelt sympathies to the family of the late Bikwasizehi and all the people of Buhweju, particularly my brother, hon. Biraaro, and Oliver Koyekyenga. 

Indeed people have talked a lot about the late hon. Bikwasizehi because he was a rare species in the entire region. Those of us, who come from the greater Ankole region, and particularly greater Bushenyi, are going to miss him.

Hon. Bikwasizehi was passionate about service delivery. I remember even after he left Parliament, whenever we would have debates here in Parliament, he was keen and would listen to whatever contributions we made here in Parliament. He was one of the people who would call and say, “Thank you for having raised that concern; I know that it affects our people.” 

I remember one time we were talking about issues of development in the region and he said, “You know, Rosemary, you need to follow up with the banana project in Bushenyi. Our people in Buhweju are concentrating on tea; you also need to put up a spirited fight so that that factory of Bushenyi works for the people of Sheema who are mainly banana growers.” This was someone who lived in Buhweju but he was concerned about the development of another district that is next to his district. We know, of course, when Sheema sneezes, Buhweju catches flu and when Buhweju sneezes, Sheema catches flu. So, this man actually, was concerned about the development of the region and not necessarily Buhweju alone.

Mr Speaker, I managed to see the late Bikwasizehi when he was in Nakasero Hospital. Actually, I bumped into him. I had gone to see hon. James Kakooza’s relative and they were both in intensive care. When I went there, hon. James Kakooza said, “Your friend is also there.” I asked, “Which friend?” He said, “Our man from Buhweju is lying there in intensive care.” When I went to see him, I could not recognise the late hon. Bikwasizehi. 

Mr Speaker, the two had similar cases. Like my sister said, non-communicable diseases are becoming rampant. We have always mentioned all these issues here in Parliament and we are also victims of non-communicable diseases, maybe because of the nature of the work that we do or maybe because of everything that we go through. We need the health system to begin paying attention to non-communicable diseases. Dr Bitekyerezo will tell us about that because he is an expert in this. We realise when it is too late. 

Even our medical personnel, our medical officers, when you go to them and ask to be checked, they say, “No you are not sick; go back.” What can we do? Now, this is at our level. You go to a health facility and ask for a thorough check-up, they will say, “No; do not waste our time because you are not sick.”  That is how these non-communicable diseases keep on accumulating. By the time we get to know our health status, we are already down, we are already sick. So I want to call upon Government to pay attention to these non-communicable diseases, which are actually becoming the No.1 killer diseases in our country.

Hon. Deus Bikwasizehi was a selfless man. I remember during our elections - I had the toughest election in the region and he had lost - when we were getting into the real thing, he kept on calling me and saying, “Rosemary, you need to stand firm. We know you are struggling. I have lost but I know you can go to Parliament and not only speak for Sheema but for our greater Bushenyi.” 

He was a courageous and selfless man. He wanted new leaders to come up, like some of us who are here now. We are going to miss him. No wonder he kept on following the debates in Parliament. We are going to miss him. I know the people of Buhweju are going to miss the late hon. Bikwasizehi. He was pro-development. Throughout his life, he thought about developing Buhweju and helping the region. We are going to miss him. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

3.42
MR ODO TAYEBWA (FDC, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Bikwasizehi Deusdedit was a good friend of mine. In 1999, I was the technical coordinator of greater Bushenyi Uganda Coffee Development Authority. He was a district councillor of greater Bushenyi and I was the chairman, production and marketing sector in the council of Bushenyi. 

At the time Bikwasizehi Deusdedit was working in cotton seed production in Kasese, he came to my home on a Sunday morning and he said, “I want to start a coffee nursery.” I was the one in charge of inspecting the sites and then making recommendations to Uganda Coffee Development Authority. He drove me in his pick-up and we went to Buhweju. I told him that he did not have land to start a good nursery. He said, “I will provide my land.” He provided half of the compound of his house where we established a coffee nursery. People of Buhweju know this, even the children. We started a coffee nursery, which was the best in greater Bushenyi.

In 2001, that is when elections were going to start, the people of Bushenyi wanted good leaders, not party leaders. I sat with the vice-chairman of LCV then, Mr Bamuyaga, to look for somebody who would lead Buhweju. We agreed that Deus, being young at that time, well educated, and a man who liked development especially at the grassroots, would be ideal to come up as Member of Parliament for Buhweju. 

Because he was my friend, I was assigned the responsibility of talking to Deus. When I talked to him, he refused and said he wanted to remain in his sector, agriculture. I went back and told the vice-chairman, Mr Bamuyaga, and he sat with the other councillors from Buhweju - the Tutankunduras - hon. Biraaro knows them - and we met Deus. Deus still refused. We tried to convince Deusdedit until he agreed, but he gave us conditions. He said that he would stand but he would not campaign, that the councillors should go and campaign for him so that he could be a Member of Parliament for them. I remember for his nomination he came with only three people - the seconder, the proposer and the one who nominated him. That is what happened for the people of Buhweju to get hon. Bikwasizehi. From there, he started working for the people of Buhweju. 

This was a very assertive man but friendly. There is no way you would annoy Deus. Whenever I met him, he was always the Buhweju man. When the tea industry started, I told him, “You would have got your tea industry long time ago, which was Butare.” This story was told by the late Tiberondwa. Butare, which was supposed to be in Buhweju, went to Kyamuhunga. It annoyed Deus so much. It is on record because even the funders who are from the Netherlands came and found that the Butare of Buhweju had been taken to Butare of Kyamuhunga. I want to assure you that it annoyed Deusdedit so much that we had to struggle to make sure that that factory of Buhweju was established. 

To the people of Buhweju, especially hon. Biraaro and hon. Oliver Koyekyenga - today we shared lunch at the same table – he has left a challenge for you and even for government. I was there campaigning for my FDC candidate and we got 9,000 votes. Whenever he would come up and talk at any rally, we would leave women crying. Why were they crying - One, because of the bad roads; two, the hospitals which are not there and even dispensaries; and education. 

The challenge I want to give this Government is that if you loved and believed in what Deus wanted, as the Government of the Movement and even as the people of Buhweju, make sure that what he wanted done in Buhweju is done. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are here and Rt Hon. Speaker, you went there for a fundraising and you saw that place. Two months ago when we were burying hon. Kariisa, hon. Biraaro actually rang me and said, “You are the one going to bring the Rt Hon. Speaker to Buhweju, make sure she passes through Burere and she sees that bad road and the area”, and I did it. (Laughter) 

This is the area that needs to be developed. If you do not do it, I am warning you right now, next time you will not get any vote for the Movement. It is crystal clear. There are many issues. So, Prime Minister, make sure we develop Buhweju. We are not here for party politics; let us develop Buhweju so that we can actually remember what hon. Bikwasizehi Deusdedit wanted. May God rest my friend, my brother, Deus Bikwasizehi, in eternal peace.

4.17
MS BETTY MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubirizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to talk about my father in politics. 

By the time the late Bikwasizehi became MP, I was teaching in Nyakisoko Secondary School and I almost campaigned for him but I was not a voter. I became a PO and we voted properly and he won and became an MP. He has been an MP for the Buhweju people. He has been our MP and we will live to remember him because he did very many things for us. 

Yes, the electricity that is there has come during the tenure of hon. Biraaro, but it was hon. Bikwasizehi who worked for it and left it in the pipeline. When we were young we used to walk barefooted up to Nsika, but last time when we were there campaigning for hon. Oliver Koyekyenga, there was a change. Hon. Odo Tayebwa, there was a change and that is how change comes.

How will the people of Rubirizi remember hon. Bikwasizehi? He started the struggle to divide Bushenyi into other districts. He put up a tough war against Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire. In fact, Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire said, “over my dead body” but he managed him until we managed to get our district and that is why I am here. If he had not put up that fight, maybe I would not be here because I would not have contested with hon. Karooro; how could I start? (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, the late has been the chairperson of the Uganda Cotton Development Authority and Rubirizi is one of the cotton growing areas. During his term as chairperson, he visited Rubirizi about five times. During our campaigns, a kilogramme of cotton went up to Shs 3,500 and when we came in, it went to Shs 1,200; you can imagine that range, but he encouraged people to continue growing cotton and he had promised them many things. I hope the Government will fulfil them. 

As the people of Rubirizi, and the whole of Uganda, we have lost him. As my sister, hon. Nyakikongoro, has said, these non-communicable diseases are trying to steal one by one. I would like to ask the doctors who are here to go back to their profession and leave politics –(Laughter)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, I have listened to hon. Betty Mbabazi’s submission and as far as I am concerned, and as a specialist physician, what could have killed this great man here is what you call drug-induced hepatotoxicity because of a probable intake of metformin, which is a biguanide. Now, if I was not here, how would you know that? (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, is it in order for the Member of Parliament from Rubirizi, who is a teacher and teachers’ children are failing every day and you know it - even Rubirizi cannot produce a first grade - to tell a physician to go back to Mbarara Municipality? That is an abuse to the people of Mbarara Municipality. (Laughter) Is she in order, Sir, to say that we go back? I will go back there after finishing this- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that was a plea to all professionals, that we should go and support our institutions where we were trained. The people of Uganda spent money to bring us up in those specific areas and now there are shortages; so, it is a plea that is reasonable.

MS MBABAZI: Thank you for your wise ruling, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) Sincerely, I am a teacher and I do not deny I will die a teacher. When we were in Bushenyi, they used to say that Bushenyi was performing poorly because of Bunyaruguru and Buhweju, but of recent we are almost becoming the first. That is my effort.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to say this to the family - remain calm. This is the way to go. What matters is time. We are all going there and we will find him. We normally believe that the dead are not dead; even here, he might be seeing us. We wish him eternal life.

4.24
MS REBECCA AMUGE OTENGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister for moving the motion and I do support the motion. 

Mr Speaker, the first time I met hon. Deus Bikwasizehi I agreed with him that his name was very difficult for me to pronounce as somebody from Northern Uganda. I told him that it had three letters, which we do not have at all in our alphabet, and that is, S, Z and H. We, therefore, agreed that I would be calling him Deus. On behalf of the people of Northern Uganda, whose rehabilitation I oversee, I would like to send my condolences to the family and the people of Buhweju. 

I was telling somebody this afternoon that the people of Buhweju have never made any mistake in this House. When Deus was a Member of Parliament, he performed very well. In the short time I knew the late Joy Kariisa, I believed she was a very good legislator. Even Ephraim Biraaro, the honourable member now, I was told was a good legislator and a good person by Deus himself when he lost in the 2010 primary elections. I met him and he told me he had lost in the primaries but he told me that the person coming was his friend and we should give him all the support. It is very rare of politicians. (Applause) I have been watching hon. Biraaro and Deus told us the truth.

Mr Speaker, the first time I met Deus was when he spoke in this Parliament. At that time, we had a very difficult time. There was a hot issue on cotton production. You know how we disagreed on both sides of the House, but he was very professional in the way he presented the report from his committee. I thought to myself that this guy was an authority in the area of agriculture, especially in the area of research. He would talk and present facts and figures whenever he made his contribution. 

You have seen the testimony from the former Members of Parliament who are in the gallery. There are not only senior former Members of Parliament and ministers but very serious former Members of Parliament and ministers in the gallery. It shows you the kind of person hon. Bikwasizehi was. 

He sat me down one time as a Member of Parliament from Northern Uganda and he told me that there is something he had been sharing with the Members of Parliament from Northern Uganda. That is in the area of oil production, seed oil and cotton. He told me that the problem of cotton was not the price but the way we were doing our farming. He said we needed to change and move to block farming, so that we produce more. He told me that with cotton, we cannot get good money if we are farming in those small gardens that we have in Northern Uganda.

Secondly, he said that we could make our niche in the oil seed but from the way we were farming, the land would be destroyed. He said we needed to find out, through research, how we could protect the land and the environment as we grow sunflower. 

I would like to appreciate our colleague, Deus, because he was a nationalist. When he was fighting for the district of Buhweju, I was a member of the Committee on Local Government and Public Service and he approached us one by one. Eventually, we accepted to go to Buhweju and when we reached Buhweju, that is when I got to respect that gentleman. He could have put forward his case differently, if he was a different character. However, he presented the case for Buhweju and from what we eventually saw in Buhweju, actually there was no equity in allocation of resources by Bushenyi local government to areas like Buhweju. That is why they were suffering. It was not because there were no funds going to the local government, but because the people of Buhweju were neglected.

I would like to thank him for doing his work with a lot of respect. I would like to pray that the good Lord rests his soul in eternal peace.

4.29
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to appreciate and thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for moving the motion. I second the motion to pay condolences to the family, the people of Buhweju, the people of greater Bushenyi, the people of Uganda and to Parliament and the nation at large for having lost such a great man.

A lot has been said and purposes of time, I want to summarise in a few sentences. Traceability - everybody who has been standing here has been tracing the good deeds the late hon. Deusdedit Bikwasizehi did in the journey of his life. I would like to thank God for the gift of life he offered to Deus, to his family and to the nation. I am grateful for the great contribution Deus made in as far as moving forward the agenda of this country is concerned. Thank you very much, Deus. 

When all is said and done, Deus had a passion for agriculture. I chair the Committee on Agriculture and allow me to say that we still have a long journey from the time we started tea growing in Uganda. Mr Speaker, we do not have a tea policy. In the Seventh Parliament, we scraped the Uganda Tea Growers Co-operation and we are just grappling with individual initiatives like that of Deus. He did cry and I cried. 

If the Ministry of Agriculture, if the Prime Minister wants us to see agriculture growing, let us put policies in place. If we can have a tea policy in place in the next one year in honour of Deus, we would have done a commendable job. That is when we could talk about having actual tea from Uganda. That is when we can redistribute tea growing in all the tea growing areas and make sure that we have equity resource distribution in this sector that Deus was crying for.

I appeal to Government - Deus was a polished “extentionist”. Whoever has been talking has been tracing his origins of extension work. We do not have an extension policy for this country and that is why we are talking of reforming NAADs. Let us put in place policies which will help this country, so that we help individual initiatives fall into broad frameworks – well done, well stipulated, well planned - so that we can drive the so many smallholders in this country. 

Each one of us represents voters and we want to see those people live better lives. We are crying for improved livelihoods but we cannot cry through individual initiatives; let us put in place an extension policy, coffee policy, food policy, nutrition policy, so that we are able to operate smoothly. We can then have better resource allocation, equity and resource distribution, and we shall have grand plans and master plans, which will help to derive the livelihood that will drive poverty out of this country.

Hon. Bikwasizehi, you have left this world. He has left us a journey to travel. Let us continue to promote the good virtues he cried for. He was in CDO and when he came to interface with us during the discussions on the policy statements, I told him, “You were on this side asking these very questions but now, you are that side; let us work together to improve cotton.” 

We all know how the cotton farmers are suffering; they are slaves and yet we are seated here failing to get even yarn. Every district growing cotton should at least be processing to the first phase of value addition so that we can negotiate for better prices, rather than selling raw cotton which is just shipped to China, India and the United States and our people continue to lament that the prices are low. We cannot influence the price changes whereas we can increase on the value chain in the cotton sector.

I rest my case by thanking God for the life of Deus. To the family, let God keep you; keep strong. To the nation, we lose a distinguished son of this country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have received three messages from the Sergeant-At-Arms; we have a challenge at the moment and her advice is that our continued sitting might be stressful to the members. I need to communicate back to you on how long we should continue with this debate. 

I have been looking at the lady up in the distinguished strangers’ gallery.  I think she is the Executive Director of the Cotton Development Organisation, Madam Jolly Sabune. I was looking but I was not quite sure.

I do not know what we should do. These are three messages from the Sergeant-At-Arms, which means that the situation is getting even worse. So, can we agree that we will now make short comments; in which case, I want now to start with the Members from Buhweju? Let me start with the Buhweju people; if the Sergeant-At-Arms says it is okay, we will move on.

4.36
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker, honourable MPs and fellow mourners.

From yesterday and throughout the whole of today, whoever I have met has asked me what is happening in Buhweju and what is next. First and foremost, I want to assure the whole nation and honourable colleagues that there is nothing suspicious happening in Buhweju. It is really so bad that recently we lost our woman MP and now we are mourning our former MP, but there is nothing suspicious. It is simply bad coincidence that our two Members have departed and almost at the same time. It is only that in Buhweju there are very few prominent people and when you lose one, it is too many. Like hon. Otengo observed, Buhweju was marginalised for long and there are not very many people who are important who have come up. 

Honourable members have referred to me as being a friend to hon. Bikwasizehi and also replacing him as MP. It is very interesting and that is very true. When we were carrying out our NRM campaigns, I just discovered in the middle of the campaigns that the late hon. Bikwasizehi belonged to my clan, and through that relationship my mother was his aunt. 

Before that, from the year 2001, he was my friend. When I was in Bushenyi, I was the councillor from Buhweju representing them at the district. Everybody knew that I was in direct contact with hon. Bikwasizehi, so we worked together all through. During his struggle for the tea factory, I was a director at Igara Growers Tea Factory. He used to refer to me for information, which we used at the national level to get a factory. So in everything that he did, we used to communicate. That is how we became friends.

The late hon. Bikwasizehi was a peace lover. I recall him during our primaries. We were six candidates and many of our candidates were abusing and insulting him. Every evening, he would call me after those campaigns and ask, “Biraaro, who were those insulting me?” He would also ask in a joking way, “Biraaro, do you think you will win elections if you do not abuse elders?” Ironically, he was referring to those people who were attacking him. So, he loved peace.

I have a lot of stories to tell about hon. Bikwasizehi. I was going to miss nominations for my primaries and it is the late hon. Bikwasizehi who rang me two days before the closure of Kyadondo and said, “Biraaro, this time I am sure I am going to win without a contest”. I asked why and he said, “We have been nominated and I understand you have not been nominated; rush to Kyadondo and get forms.” This was a wonderful man. No one can imagine that this can happen with our current politics of undermining and undercutting.

At one time during our campaigns, when the campaigns became tough, he told the people, “If you are disgusted with me, do not forsake Buhweju; if you cannot vote for me, vote for Biraaro.” I did the same in some place where he said I was young; I said, “instead of forsaking Buhweju, vote for Mzee again” and people thought we had a conspiracy. If it was a conspiracy, it was a plan for good.
 
Mr Speaker, you met hon. Bikwasizehi in Kampala. Those of us who knew him from the ground in Buhweju know much about him. In the constituency, people used to call him a priest because he never had any evil plans against anybody. That tells you how good he was. 

There are certain things that he did in Buhweju. When he became MP in 2001, we only had five division ones at primary level. By the time he left his seat in 2011, we had 135 in grade 1 because of his deliberate efforts.

He struggled so much to make sure that agriculture grows in Buhweju. I remember in 2005, he asked me to supply him tea seedlings from my nursery to start his own estate and by the time he died, he had more than 60 acres of tea.

He has been a good person. He has been supporting education. Whenever he was delivering his services, he never knew religion, political party or even tribe; he was a person for all. Hon. Bikwasizehi was known, he has been good and we all pray that his soul rests in eternal peace.

4.42
MS OLIVER KOYEKYENGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you. Rt. Hon. Speaker, MPs, the family of the late hon. Bikwasizehi, I would like to extend my sincere condolences to the family and the people of Buhweju.

This is a trying moment for the people of Buhweju because not more than three months ago we were here grieving for the late hon. Joy Kariisa and now we are here grieving for the late hon. Bikwasizehi. Members, you will agree that this is a trying moment for us, the people of Buhweju. However, there is nothing we can do; we have to keep our flag up.

Hon. Bikwasizehi was my father because he used to call me his daughter. I never called him by name; I used to call him Mzee. When I wanted to start this journey of politics, I called him and told him that I wanted to talk to him. He agreed to talk to me, so I went and told him that I wanted to start my political career. He said, “My daughter, are you ready for the challenges?” I said, “Yes.” He said, “Go and start”.

I must say that hon. Bikwasizehi was my mentor. I started admiring him when I was still young and studying in Buhweju because he was a good man and a charismatic leader. We, the people of Buhweju and Uganda, have lost a leader who is irreplaceable, but we have to keep on.

Hon. Bikwasizehi has done a lot for Buhweju. Considering the terrain of Buhweju, he managed to make it passable. When we were still young, Buhweju was really bad. It was during his term that Buhweju got some roads that are at least passable, although we are still not doing well. Things will change very soon.

Hon. Bikwasizehi contributed a lot to the agriculture sector, especially in Buhweju. It is because of him that we have a tea factory and it is because of him that we have cotton. Buhweju is an agricultural county. He knew that developing agriculture would help the household incomes of the people of Buhweju. So, we will always remember him because he did everything for the development of his area and to improve the income of his people in Buhweju.

Hon. Deus Bikwasizehi will be missed so much. His family will miss him, the bigger family of Buhweju will miss him so much and Uganda will miss him. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

4.46
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, PWD Representative, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to join my colleagues to pay tribute to our fallen colleague -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let us now do two minutes only.

MR KATURAMU: Mr Speaker, I join my colleagues and send my heartfelt condolences to the widow and children of the late Deus Bikwasizehi, whom we have known for a long time. He found me in this Parliament and we worked together very closely. He was a great man and a man of humour.

Mr Speaker, my colleagues have talked a lot about the late Deus Bikwasizehi and, therefore, my contribution will focus on the aftermath of Deus Bikwasizehi’s demise. We know that he was a great academician, a moralist and a great man of humour. So, for us who are still living, what can we do to ensure that there is a positive legacy of Deus Bikwasizehi? 

Mr Speaker, some Members have mentioned that hon. Bikwasizehi was very concerned about the development of Buhweju. We, who come from the greater Bushenyi region, know that hon. Bikwasizehi was very instrumental in championing development programmes and projects not only in Buhweju but in the entire Bushenyi District. Therefore, we can thank hon. Bikwasizehi from where he is resting by doing things that will lift his name and his family high. One of those things, which I would like to propose, is that my brother here, the MP, convinces the Buhweju District local government that as a district with its agricultural programmes - (Member timed out)

4.49
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman representative, Mitooma): Madam Speaker and Members, on my behalf and on behalf of the people of Mitooma, I rise to convey our condolences to the family, to this Parliament and to the whole nation on the demise of the late hon. Deus Bikwasizehi.

He was a hardworking, focussed and development-minded Ugandan who was focussed on the development of the individual, the ordinary person. For us in Mitooma and in the greater Bushenyi region, we will remember Deus for the unwavering effort that he put in the fight for the division of Bushenyi, which was one district at that time. This is because we see the improvements that are coming as a result of the division. The district administrations - now five district administrations - are causing services to trickle down to the ordinary person. 

Members have highlighted how Buhweju was impoverished before and how it is now improving. I can assure you that there are other parts of the former greater Bushenyi which were equally as impoverished as Buhweju, and this includes parts of Mitooma District. So, we will always remember him for that. 

Many people have stood here and paid tribute to the late Deus for advocating for agriculture and the growing of tea in Buhweju. When is this going to stop? Is this the role of the Member of Parliament? Can we have government departments bring up comprehensive development plans that will lead to unified, equitable development of Uganda? (Member timed out)

4.52
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Deus Bikwasizehi. I want to extend condolences to the family, the people of Buhweju and the entire country. 

The name Bikwasizehi, which most of you have difficulty pronouncing, means, “Where are they anchored?” or “Where is the anchor?” Bikwasizehi’s anchor in Parliament was on two things: the agriculture sector and Buhweju. Every time when he spoke, he spoke for the people of Buhweju and also on issues of agriculture, and we shall continue to remember his great contributions in this House.

He spoke as an expert; actually, this House should have professionals. Those who think it should be the uneducated, the mediocre that should come - The professionals like him, like us the doctors, must be in this House to guide the country. That is in response to my sister who said professionals should not be in Parliament. 

He was a very good man, a very humble man. He would not annoy anybody to the extent that at one time when we had an acrimonious debate here in the House on corruption, when we went out he said to me, “I thought you were a Catholic; how can you talk aggressively like that?” (Laughter) I told him, “You are a Catholic of the old times; for us we are Catholics of modern times and we talk aggressively”. He could not believe that we could talk aggressively in Parliament even when we are Catholics. That was the man Bikwasizehi was. 

I want to confirm what hon. Biraaro has said; when we asked him what happened, he said hon. Biraaro was part of his political camp in Buhweju but there was poor coordination of troops and he was happy that hon. Biraaro was elected. He said, “Give him all the support; he is a very good man.” They worked very closely together and he had no problem with hon. Biraaro because he said that he was part of his camp and they would continue with the programmes.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, about the cause of death, I received a phone call a day before hon. Bikwasizehi died. The family wanted Parliament to know that hon. Bikwasizehi was in coma and he was dying. (Member timed out_)

4.54
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues to pay tribute, on behalf of the people of Igara West and on my own behalf, to the family, the people of Buhweju and the country, on the loss of our colleague. It is a very sad moment for us. I would have had a lot to say about hon. Bikwasizehi but let me just briefly say two things we can remember him for. 

Today in church, the MC said, “We are not mourning Bikwasizehi; we are celebrating the successful life of a successful man”. When you do that, there is a legacy that remains after he is gone. Last week, we had a motion for a monument in the memory of the late Chango Macho. For the late Bikwasizehi, I would not talk of a monument; I would follow what hon. Kasamba said in terms of the tea industry. 

It is good he was performing as the board director of the Cotton Development Authority. We also have the Coffee Development Authority and they are doing a good job. In terms of tea, however, we are talking of individual, disconnected efforts in that industry. If we are going to remember the late Bikwasizehi for what he did for the tea industry, we need a tea development organisation or an institutionalised mechanism for the development of this industry. 

Secondly, today he made a statement. Somebody said achievers achieve a lot even in death; today we opened our new parking area and right after the President left, the very first person who parked in that yard was hon. Bikwasizehi, making a statement that the Commission should continue to improve the facilities of Members of Parliament so that we can deliver on our mandate. (Member timed out)

4.57
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on behalf of the people of Ibanda and on my own behalf to pay tribute to the late hon. Bikwasizehi. 

His input in trying to shape the agricultural sector cannot be underestimated. He advocated for the increase of agricultural funding to the tune of more than 10 per cent of the national budget. I worked under him as chair to the agricultural committee for two terms and he inspired me to remain in agriculture and I have been in that committee for the last seven years.  I implore the Government to come up and ring-fence the budget of agriculture for which he fought, so that we can realise the 10 per cent. 

Hon. Bikwasizehi was a very modest man who lived a modest lifestyle. He believed in giving out to many, and I believe he denied himself and at times at the expense of his family. At one time he wondered how I could be a member of the Public Accounts committee and enjoy it. I told him I enjoyed it. He told me, “If I, Deus, cannot account for the money from one of my pockets to another, how can I hold others accountable?” What did he mean? He told me when he comes to Parliament with some money and people come demanding, he gets out the money and gives it out and by the time he reaches home, he will try to add up and wonder how he had spent his money. 

He believed in unity – Member timed out_)

4.59
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I rise to support the motion. Hon. Bikwasizehi was a resident of Mbaguta Cell, Ruharo Ward, Kamukuzi Division, Mbarara Municipality, where I come from.

Two, hon. Bikwasizehi has died a satisfied politician. Hon. Biraaro, I pity you and I join you in mourning Deus because he was my neighbour and he told me he will never disturb you. When you lose an election, sometimes you end up harassing the person who has defeated you, but hon. Bikwasizehi did not do that.

Let me now go medical, so that I can bring professionalism into this debate. It will help you because what has killed Deus can kill me and you. When you have diabetes and it is type 2, you are likely – Fifty per cent of the people who go to doctors go there with complications. Drugs also kill. When you listen to what has been said, it is believed so, and when you listen to the history. Deus rang me last week talking about Kuber and yesterday, I heard the man was dead. That means what killed him was very abrupt and this is likely to be a side effect of a drug called Metformin.

Metformin causes lactic acidosis and liver failure and when the liver has failed – (Interjection) - That is what I talked about when I was trying to explain to that MP who said that professionals should not come here. His kidneys had also failed because, as you know, when you have type 2 diabetes, you can end up with kidney problems. 

Let Members of Parliament be helped with these facilities so that our people do not die. I urge Ugandans, for heaven’s sake we must have regular check-ups and our healthcare system must be improved. If we had good clinics, somebody would have actually explained to him and he would not have died this way – (Member timed out_)

5.01
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here on behalf of the people of Kalungu and especially the people of greater Masaka, where the late Deus stayed for nine years of his life – six years in secondary school and three years working as the district agricultural officer. 

I should have this opportunity to represent the people of greater Masaka where this gentleman, the late Bikwasizehi, served and was brought up. I heard the Attorney-General talking about bringing up children in his clan, but also those people who go to Masaka for their education come back and join the country with different and good character.

I join the chairman of the agriculture committee, hon. Kasamba, in saying that the late had total belief in agriculture. His idea was that agriculture can propel this country to higher levels of development. Even China, which is now a great country, made agriculture its priority as a stepping stone for its development. China is now one of the richest countries. In its reform process, agriculture was placed as one of its pillars. There is no reason why we should not emulate that. 

In the case of the late, he took choices which were correct – Member timed out)

5.04
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kasilo and the people of Teso, this is a great loss. Why do I say so? When we met here as strangers in 2001, I made contact with the late. It is at that point that he told me he worked in Kasilo and specifically in Kadungulu Sub-county in the 1970s as an extension worker. To date, the mark he left in the agricultural sector, especially in the cotton industry, is still visible. 

To us, the people of Kasilo and generally Teso, we knew him well for cotton. We benefitted a lot because of the efforts of the late Deus when he worked there and for the country.

If an individual can make such an impact and we are honouring what he did in that sector, why is the government failing to make a mark in agriculture so that we shall be able to remember when this government is gone? It is high time the Government took this seriously. We talk of unemployment and every day we keep echoing that agriculture employs more than 80 per cent of Ugandans. If you want to reduce the level of unemployment in this country, we need to inject more money in agriculture in order to alleviate the unemployment problem in this country. 

Mr Speaker, death is an overwhelming tragedy. It is not like other misfortunes which strike and you still have hope. When hunger strikes, you have hope that you will have food. When poverty strikes, you work hard and hope that one day you will be much better. But death is an extreme tragedy and a great loss. May the soul of our colleague, the late Bikwasizehi, rest in eternal peace.

5.07
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI): Mr Speaker, I would like also to join the Prime Minister in echoing condolences on behalf of the Government to the family of the bereaved. 

I also stand to add, very briefly, something on the valued contributions of the deceased and the legacy he left with us. A lot of tribute is paid to many of our colleagues who leave us. However, today we have a unique debate in the sense that what has come out clearly is that our brother now in front of us used his professionalism in agriculture to show his love for the people of Uganda. 

He showed his faith, which demands that we have to love our neighbours as we love ourselves. This is because when you talk about agriculture, you are actually talking about the people of Uganda. That means that if we all applied our professionalism as he did, Uganda would be very far in development. We have numerous professionals in this country; we have engineers, lawyers, doctors and so forth.

Today, it has come out clearly that the late was a unique professional who served above himself. He was patriotic and he applied his knowledge to promote love in this country. He also fought divisionism and sectarianism. He was a fighter, without saying it. He fought tribalism and nepotism. For that, Mr Speaker, I want all of us to emulate the unique legacy that our brother has left behind. 

Very few of us practice this. We have several traditions and professions but most of us are sectarian. That is why this country has gone through over 40 years destroying itself. We have so many educated people but why are we always fighting ourselves? It is because we have not applied our knowledge the way the late here did. For that, we should celebrate his legacy. 

His practice must have saved many lives. He was always thinking in the way of love. In my faith, it is said that the good things you do to humanity will follow you to your grave. This is because you do not go with those many good things that did; you leave them behind. Look at the people who plant trees and die or those who establish wells, those who teach others and so forth; when they die, they do not go with these things. They leave these things behind and whenever people use or benefit from what you left behind, they thank you. Even for the knowledge that you might have imparted on people, - like doctors who use it to open people’s stomachs - they thank you so much. These are some of the good things that we benefit from - the works of such people. For that, I believe God will reward our brother for the good things he did and for being useful to the country.

Because of time, I want to stop here and call upon the family to accept this as a reality. It has happened and it is going to happen to many other people. God will strengthen you and we pray that he rests our brother’s soul in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members, for this very elaborate debate. The reflections have been enriching in terms of covering the life that the late honourable member lived when he worked elsewhere, while he was in this Parliament, and after he left it.

I have information about the next set of events to follow, leading to the burial. I have a series of them; I now do not know how to harmonize them. I have information that the body will be kept by funeral services when it leaves here. That is information I have just got now. It will then leave for Buhweju tomorrow morning. The next vigil will be at Buhweju on Saturday evening. However, the bus for those who will be leaving for the burial – I encourage many of you to go – will leave Parliament at 6.00 a.m. because it takes about six hours for such transport to get to Buhweju.

On Sunday, at 6.00 a.m., transport will leave here; I do not know from which gate since this one has been opened. The transport will leave at 6.00 a.m., so, please keep time because the funeral service for the burial at Buhweju will start at mid-day. Please, follow the time so that we can have an opportunity to give our colleague a decent send-off to his final resting place.

Honourable members, the motion we have been debating is that Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, friends and the nation as a whole upon the loss of this illustrious son of Uganda; that it take cognizance of the distinguished services rendered and contributions made by the late hon. Bikwasizehi, both at the local and international levels; that Parliament collectively prays to the Almighty God to give sustenance to the bereaved and grant the late eternal peace. I now put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

East African Community Anthem

National Anthem

(Exit of the late hon. Deusdedit Bikwasizehi)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you for this debate that we have conducted in the memory of our colleague. This should be a moment for reflection for all of us. We should be asking God why we are all still spared. We must face this to find out why we are still alive. There must be a purpose that we have not completed and that is why we are alive. 

Deus has finished his job, he has run his full race and the Lord is satisfied with him and has asked him to go. Why are we still here? Let us find that purpose and work hard to fulfil it before God calls us. We should reflect on this and see how best we can live to fulfil God’s purpose when we are still live. 

This special sitting is adjourned but Parliament still stays adjourned to Tuesday at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 5.20 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 12 November 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 
