Thursday, 26 November 2015

Parliament met at 2.50 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to the 16th Sitting of the Second Meeting of the Fifth Session of Parliament, which as I indicated earlier, will be the last before we come for the Budget session. I know that there are a lot of items that we need to handle, but let me hope that we shall all apply ourselves today and complete them because some of them are time-bound. Thank you very much.

2.53
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to raise three issues.

The first issue I would like to raise has to do with the management of Hepatitis B in this country. As you recall, this Parliament gave over Shs 10 billion to the Ministry of Health. To date, no vaccination is taking place, at least in the region I am familiar with. There is no awareness. The reports I am getting from West Nile, Teso and Acholi all indicate that this money is not being put to the use for which it was intended. Unfortunately, the cases continue to increase.

Madam Speaker, I would like Government to tell us whether the money has gone into a bottomless pit or whether they intend to save Ugandans who are suffering from Hepatitis B.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I would like to raise an issue concerning whistle-blowers in the case now commonly referred to as the “pension scam”. As you are aware, we went through a period of hearings as the Public Accounts Committee.

The complaints we are getting from these whistle-blowers is that one, they have not been given the necessary protection. After they gave vital information, which is now being used to prosecute the people who are involved in this case, Government and the relevant agencies have abandoned them. Actually, one of them reported that he no longer lives in his home. His children have been made to flee; they cannot go to school. They are trying to hide for their dear lives.

Secondly, there are obligations and commitments that we made to them that if people raise such important matters, we will give them some appreciation. They have been abandoned and their lives are extremely hard.

Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the relevant minister to tell us what has happened. Are they taking care of these people or they want their lives to end up in jeopardy yet they have saved this country and highlighted a very important matter?

Lastly, I have also received a complaint as Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee to do with the veterans in this country. As you know, Madam Speaker, we voted in money and Government started paying the benefits of some of these veterans. However, the majority of them are being defrauded.

Madam Speaker, there is a racket of people in this country and they include: Apar Bua Idi, Dembe Okumu Kenneth and Geoffrey Okwir Gunya. That racket has defrauded veterans. I will give you a few examples: 

There is a veteran from Serere called Charles Ajuk. This racket works with people in the Directorate of Pensions in Bombo. The moment the money is processed there are some people in that directorate who give information to this racket to follow the veterans.

Charles Ajuk was supposed to get Shs 10 million. Once the money was sent by EFT, Apar Bua and others followed him, brought him to Kampala and took advantage of his ignorance. He filled in the forms and they gave him Shs 4 million only. The Shs 6 million went to Apar Bua and his team. 

There is another veteran called Engwenyu. Officially, they paid Engwenyi Shs 10 million. This group rounded up Engwenyu, brought him to the bank and gave him Shs 3 million only. They took the remaining Shs 7 million.

There is a veteran called James Ocaa. He was supposed to get Shs 12 million. They rounded him up and brought him to Kampala, made him fill forms and gave him Shs 3 million. They took away Shs 9,000,000.

There is another veteran called Okwii. They took away Shs 4 million from him. 

This racket operates in Lango, Acholi, West Nile and Teso. When this racket was reported to the RDC in Soroti, the RDC got them apprehended. They were taken to the military detach because I think they bear a semblance of soldiers – they are not good people and should not even be our soldiers! 

However, somehow under mysterious circumstances, Apar Bua just disappeared from the military barracks. This matter has been reported to the CID headquarters but these guys are not being apprehended. The poor veterans and widows are being left in a very desperate situation. 

I would like Government, particularly the Ministry of Defence, to first of all investigate the directorate. There is no way a nobody from nowhere can get to know that money has been processed. Therefore, there is a problem at the Directorate of Pensions in Bombo.

Secondly, we would like the Police to produce these guys. They were brought to your hands and you have not done anything yet they continue to fleece the veterans. When I go around campaigning on this matter, you say that I am the one who is the problem. You need to rescue the veterans of this country. I have given you the names. We would like them apprehended and we want the veterans to get back their money. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.00
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, the matter raised by my honourable sister, Alaso about Hepatitis B is very serious. Our people in the villages continue to die of Hepatitis B like flies. The level of infection in our area is alarming. 

As I speak, it has reached a high level and the country is just watching. The Ministry of Health is also just watching. Our people continue to be infected yet we have passed money here for our people to be vaccinated. There is no vaccine. Our people are poor and yet they are now being advised to go for private vaccination at Shs 35,000. Our people in the village cannot afford this so they are now worried. They are just waiting to contract Hepatitis B and to die. As leaders, we are here watching. 

I would like to appeal to the Office of the Prime Minister that this is a serious matter. We need those voters as we go for elections. How are we going to get the voters when they die before the election? 

Madam Speaker, in Dokolo we bury 20 people every day including the young and old as a result of Hepatitis B. Due to their low immunity, they do not eat well. They are poor and they can easily contract Hepatitis B. 

Therefore, why don’t we give them vaccination? As a country, we can afford to vaccinate our people. The Leader of Government Business should actually stand up and respond to this matter or tomorrow -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, hon. Felix Okot Ogong for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give my colleague is that early this year, Ministry of Health officials made it very clear that in the first place, they did not have money to buy vaccines. They made an appeal to WHO, who in turn was willing to come and provide vaccines.

However, the problem is that Government felt embarrassed to extend an open begging hand to WHO to receive support for vaccines. Therefore, the onus is on Government to come up and say, “Look, we have failed to provide vaccines as a country. Let the development partners come to our aid.” That will be the only way in which we will be assisted. Thank you very much, honourable colleague.

THE SPEAKER: Before Gen. Oketta comes to take the Floor, I am demanding an explanation from the Government. We diverted money from the Contingency Fund, Where did it go? It was for Hepatitis B.  

3.04
MAJ. GEN. JULIUS OKETTA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Alaso for bringing up the issue. This matter has been happening and we have been on the game. We have managed to recover some money from some people. It involves civilians in Public Service and some elements in the Ministry of Defence. 

Last week, I was in Kitgum where 200 veterans were cleared and were being paid. However, you find certain elements from both sides; that is the civilians conniving with some crooks who try to make sure that kind of tendency takes place. 

I would like to humbly request you to give us those details so that we follow it up the same way we have done with the other people where we recovered Shs 18 million. These are people to be fought so we thank you for that. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker and the General. What hon. Alaso has brought up is because of frustration of these veterans. In some instances, they even agree that in case you help them to get their money, they will give you something. 

The clarification I am seeking from you is, you are 10 members in this Parliament representing soldiers where these people came from. Do you take any interest before we civilians come out to present these issues? This is because the moment you do not take interest in knowing those people and how they are paid, frustration makes them believe that the moment they are given that money, they have to part with some of it. 

General, can you help us? I have been here for five years and I have not heard that kind of vibrancy. 

MAJ. GEN. OKETTA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue has been lack of information from the office of the chief administrative officers and the RDC. This is because all data from the Ministry of Defence goes to the districts and the districts should inform the veterans when their names will be due for payment. 

Therefore, this lack of coordination brought a lot of issues. We are currently moving all around the country to make sure that the office of the chief administrative officer and the chairmen of veterans keep the veterans informed of every issue that is vital for them. This is so that they are aware and respond for their payment. 

Every month, there is clearance of a certain number of people who are being paid. However, you find that sometimes in the villages, they do not know that they are being paid. We are trying to make sure that this information gap to the veterans or beneficiaries is reduced to prevent any further mistakes. 

THE SPEAKER: Do that before they die. 

MAJ. GEN. OKETTA: We will comply. 

MR KWIZERA: Madam Speaker, the question has been put to the Government by an honourable member of Parliament. I do not know in what capacity an honourable member on the bench is responding because this question is to the Government. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I am waiting for the Government to speak. The government is here. 

3.08
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank hon. Alaso for having raised these important points. I also want to thank Members of Parliament who have supplemented by giving further information, which we shall use to make sure that we settle this problem. 

If I can make a comment on Hepatitis B, first of all I would like to inform hon. Felix Okot Ogong who said that this is a critical time where we need voters and, therefore, we have to make sure that we solve the problem. I just want to say that whether we are in politics or not, we have an obligation of making sure that we serve all the people of Uganda. Therefore, Government will continue to do so. 

I remember the Minister of Health gave us information that they had started vaccination trials. She said that where a person is found to be infected, you cannot go ahead with vaccination. In this case, you have to make sure that you provide treatment. 

Due to the fact that I do not have my minister from the ministry concerned, I do not want to give further details. I only want to say that since Members of Parliament may not be sitting next week and this information regarding what Government is doing on Hepatitis B is very vital, the Ministry of Health will have to put it in the newspapers. This is in order to inform people of what efforts they are making. 

However, I know that this ministry is on record for having really tried to curb epidemics whenever they occur in Uganda. I am ready for - (Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, it is clear that my people are dying of Hepatitis B and no serious action is being taken by Government. It is also clear that we are burying people every day. In this Parliament, we passed a motion that our people should be vaccinated. We even went further and gave money for that activity, which has not reached. 

Is it in order, therefore, for a minister representing the Prime Minister to stand here and make a statement that they have done everything to avert the problem that we are facing in Dokolo yet the money that we allocated for that activity has not been disbursed? The activity has not started and now she is making that statement. Is she in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this House wants to know: Where is the money that we gave out of the Contingency Fund for vaccination? That is what we want to know. Where did the money go? This is because we handed it in. That is what we want to hear.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, the House is absolutely in order to demand for accountability and I said that if Parliament were to sit next week, the minister was supposed to appear here but because we may not have a sitting next week, how else shall we get this accountability?

I am here to be advised. I am not saying that we should not account. We have to account and I am very sorry that we are losing people because of this problem. I am really very sorry; no soul deserves to be lost.

THE SPEAKER: Let us move on to something else. Can Government make a commitment to the country as to when the vaccination is starting? As for the money, we gave it to them.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I stand here to make a commitment that Government will have to give an accountability of how much money we have used and if the money has not been used, we will inform everybody. Government has to ensure that the problem is handled forthwith.

3.12
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Representative, Central): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to seek information. On the 15 July 2014 a Bill entitled, “Persons with Disabilities (Amendment) Bill” was tabled in this august House. Since then, the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development has been consulting on this Bill. Many of our constituents have participated in the process of consultation. 

It is almost two years now and our constituents are asking us for the Bill or the Act and when Parliament is going to take action on that very important Bill. Very soon we shall be celebrating the International Day of People with Disabilities. Our people will demand to know where the Bill is. 

Madam Speaker, we are seeking guidance from you as to what we should tell our people out there and the country at large. Our people need this Bill passed by this Parliament urgently. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: I ask the chairperson of the committee to give us an update on that issue. Are you the vice-chairperson?

3.14
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Rwakajara Arinaitwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Bill is under our committee and it is in the process. We are almost concluding. 

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, we shall want an update from that committee on 16 December 2015. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE ANTI-COUNTERFEITING GOODS BILL, 2015

3.15
THE MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Counterfeiting Goods Bill, 2015” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Yes, it is seconded.

MS KYAMBADDE: The Bill is accompanied by a certificate of financial implication and I hereby lay it on the Table.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE SALE OF GOODS AND SUPPLY OF SERVICES BILL, 2015

3.16
THE MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Sale of Goods and Supply of Services Bill, 2015” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. 

MS KYAMBADDE: The Bill is accompanied by a certificate of financial implications and I hereby lay it on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, minister. Both Bills are sent to the Committee of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives for perusal and report back. You will note that perhaps no serious work will be done until after the election. However, it is important that we have had it for the first reading.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Sale of Goods and Supplies Bill sounds almost synonymous with the Sale of Goods Act. I am seeking your humble guidance if you would not feel that, that Bill should go to the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. It may have issues that relate to the Sale of Goods Act and other contractual obligations thereunder.

THE SPEAKER: We shall look at it and if the legal committee is required, we will ask it to take it over and you will be informed to that effect.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the distinguished visitors’ gallery, we have the Deputy Ambassador at the French Embassy, Lyno Vinyl. You are welcome. We have Kyrr Holm, the First Secretary at the Royal Norwegian Embassy. Thank you for coming back. We also have Mr Charles Magala from the Embassy of Denmark. We also have the young people of Uganda; pupils and teachers from Watoto Hope Senior School, Mpigi Campus. They are represented by hon. Amelia Kyambadde and hon. Temulanda. The same school has the same name and there is another branch at Bbira. They are represented by hon. Lubega Sseggona and hon. Seninde, the Woman Representative for Wakiso District. Are they here? Okay, you are welcome. (Applause)

LAYING OF PAPERS

    (A) REPORTS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2014 FOR THE FOLLOWING ENTITIES AND PROJECTS

3.19
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table reports of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2014 for the following entities and projects:

    1. Uganda Embassy in Abu Dhabi
    2. Uganda Embassy in Bujumbura
    3. Uganda Embassy in Paris
    4. Permanent Mission of Uganda to the United Nations and other International Organisations in Geneva
    5. Uganda Embassy in Khartoum
    6. Uganda Registration Services Bureau – Liquidation 
    7. Inspector General of Government
    8. Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives
    9. National Agricultural Research Organisation

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.  

B)	REPORTS OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2015 FOR THE FOLLOWING PROJECTS

3.20
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I beg to lay on the Table reports of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2015 for the following entities and projects:

    1. Ministry of Local Government – Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme – Project I (CAIIP I) – ADB Loan No. 2100150017395 and IFAD loans 724-UG/784/UG
    2. Ministry of Local Government – Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme – Project II (CAIIP II) – IDB Loan No. 2100150017394
    3. Ministry of Local Government – Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme – Project III (CAIIP III) – ADB Loan No. 2100150024294 and IDB Loan No. Ug0081 
    4. Ministry of Local Government – Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme – Project III (CAIIP III) – IDB Loan No. Ug0081 Component
    5. Uganda National Council for Science and Technology – Capacity Building of Farmers Based Cooperatives using Information and Communication Technology (ICT) in Uganda, Project Number: 3Z630014
    6. Parliamentary Pension Scheme. 

I beg to lay, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. All are sent to the Public Accounts Committee for perusal and report back.

3.23
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek your guidance. While we were away in those exercises, I could read in the papers that the current and former chairpersons of the Public Accounts Committee were being summoned to appear before the UNRA Commission to answer queries in relation to the work that has been laid.

Madam Speaker, I do not know what action has since been taken or whether Members went and appeared before Lord Justice Bamugemereire Commission and what has been done. From my point of view, I could see that the Members were being summoned for the work that they were entrusted by this House. Some replied, “Yes, we shall get time and come.” 

Now, other reports are being laid; the exact reports from the Auditor-General. To what extent are we, Members protected from appearing like they are the ones who are personally responsible for any errors of commission or omission?

Secondly, isn’t that, by extension, summoning Parliament because they are chairpersons of committees of this very House. Once you summon them, aren’t you, by way of addition and extension, summoning Parliament? 

Therefore, I wanted your clarification, Madam Speaker, are the chairpersons liable for the omissions and commissions of officers in government ministries and departments?

The charge was that they did not take action. Were they being commanded to take action individually or collectively as Parliament? Madam Speaker, I thought that, that would be clarified since the same routine is happening right now. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what you have raised is okay and I know about it. When the summons came, they came to me and I advised that you cannot summon individual members to answer for the work of this House. That is why they have not gone. If they want, they will have to use other means but not to look for Members. 

Even before, there were two other former chairpersons who were being looked for by the Police to give evidence. I said, “No, they were acting on behalf of the House and so, they will not come.” Therefore, they are safe.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am aware of the position you took. What is now arising is that this commission has resorted to blackmailing us in the press. They talk to the press as if we have stolen some money or whatever.  This is a dangerous time for anybody to play around with a person’s name. I do not know whether there is a way we can communicate to them so that they respect the position you have given. In any case, we sit in those committees on your behalf. 

The other day, my name was all over on a talk show in Teso: “Alaso is wanted for stealing UNRA money.” I said, “Which money?” I do not even touch anyone’s money on earth except my little salary.

Madam Speaker, I think you emphasise it to them not to blackmail us. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I will continue with the engagement. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I received that witness summon when I was in Khartoum. What I replied was that all the information that came to me and the Committee of Public Accounts that I chaired then was privileged information. It was information privy to Parliament and if that commission wants information, the best they can do is to serve the summons through the Office of the Speaker and wait for clarification from that office.

I am happy that you have given them guidance. However, as hon. Alaso has said, the blackmail against us is heavy to the extent that I was told that there is a bridge, which collapsed and that the bridge collapsed because my committee (PAC) that chaired those essentials, was compromised. 

By the time a report reaches Parliament, it is post-mortem. We do not access resources. All we find out is, under what circumstances were these resources misappropriated? What is now going on out there is real blackmail against some of us. In any case, once a committee of Parliament has done its work and has made recommendations, those recommendations cease to be recommendations of the committee once they are adopted by Parliament. It is a report of Parliament. Whether thereafter the recommendations are implemented or not is no longer the responsibility of Parliament. It is the responsibility of the Executive to come up through A treasury memorandum and explain to Parliament to what extent they have implemented those recommendations.

I find the circumstances under which the three of us were summoned as witnesses to go and give explanation as to how the resources in UNRA were utilised very frivolous. We are not privy to that type of information. Ours was only to examine what happened and we made recommendations.

Therefore, to add on what hon. Alaso has said, let the commission be professional enough not to taint our image; that we are the cause of shoddy work in UNRA. We are not the cause. We were at the tail end. Our attention was drawn to the fact that something has gone amiss and we were supposed to assist this Parliament in finding out what exactly happened. 

Therefore, we really need that clarification to be given to that commission so that they know what they are doing. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I will continue with engagement. 

Join me in welcoming Mr Owere, Chairman-General of NOTU and Mr Mudiba from COFTU. (Applause) 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2015

3.30
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2015” be read the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Has it been seconded? Okay, it has been seconded.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance. We have seen the honourable Minister of Health on that very hot matter. Is it possible that you reschedule him but before we close business today? We would be very happy to hear the response of his ministry to the issues we raised earlier. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we would like to know where the money we gave to you out of the Contingency Fund, thereby depleting it, went so that you can start vaccinating against Hepatitis B. The peasants are being told to pay for the vaccines. We want answers at the close of the day.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, the object of this Bill is to amend the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005 to prescribe the procedure for elections of representatives of the army, youth, workers and persons with disabilities and to provide for related matters.

As a brief background to this matter, article 78(4) of the Constitution requires Parliament to enact legislation prescribing procedures for election of representatives to Parliament for special interest groups. 

Parliament prescribed part of the procedure in Part V, Section 8 of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005 and authorised the Minister responsible for Justice to prescribe the rest of the procedure with the approval of Parliament. 

The minister, with the approval of Parliament, issued the Parliamentary Elections Special Interest Groups Regulations of 2001 prescribing the procedure for election of representatives of special interest groups to Parliament.

On 29 September 2015, the Constitutional Court delivered its judgement in three consolidated constitutional petitions: 37 of 2010, 40 of 2010 and 48 of 2010, all filed in 2010. The Constitutional Court declared the regulations issued by the minister void since they were not made by Parliament as required by Article 78(4) of the Constitution.

In effect, the declaration of the Constitutional Court renders the procedure for the election of representatives of special interest groups incomplete. Therefore, in order to give effect to the judgement of the Constitutional Court, the Bill seeks to amend the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005 to provide for the procedure for electing representatives of the army, youth, workers and persons with disabilities in Parliament. 

The Bill seeks to amend the Parliamentary Elections Act by inserting specific clauses in that particular Act and to specifically provide for the manner and procedure for elections of representatives of the army, youth, workers and persons with disabilities.

However, in respect to persons with disabilities, it is just cross-referencing because the law for their election was made in 2013. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move.

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2015

3.35
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The report of the Sectoral Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs is ready but before I present it, permit me to lay on the Table a hard copy of the report and minutes of the committee in respect to the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2015. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, the first pages of the report are preliminary issues and the report is about 36 pages. I beg your indulgence to permit me to start from page 6, Item 6.0.

This section of the report states the provisions being amended, the stakeholders’ views on the proposed amendments, a comparative analysis of the similar provisions in other jurisdictions and analysis of the proposed amendment and the recommendations by the committee on the proposed amendments.

Clause 1: Amendment of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2015. The Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005 in this report referred to as the Principal Act, is amended in section 1(1) by inserting the following definitions in the appropriate alphabetical order:
“ a) ‘Region’ means a region specified in the Third Schedule.
    b) ‘Special interest groups’ means the groups referred to in Article 78(1)(c) of the Constitution.
    c) ‘Youth’ means a person aged between 18 and 30 years of age.”

Observations

The committee notes that this is an amendment to the Interpretation Clause to facilitate an understanding of the provisions. The committee recommends that Parliament adopts the proposed amendment. 

Clause 2: Amendment of Section 8 of the Principal Act 

Section 8 of the Principal Act is amended:
 
    (a) In subsection (4) by substituting the words, “in a manner prescribed by the regulations made by the minister under section 100” the words, “in accordance with section 8A”.

    (b) In section (4) by substituting for paragraph (c) the following: “(c) The representative of the youth shall be elected by the district youth councils within each region of representation constituted into an electoral college in accordance with sections 8B to 8E and the woman youth representative shall be elected by a national youth conference in accordance with section 8F.” 

    (c) In subsection (4) (d) by substituting for the words, “in a manner prescribed by the regulations made by the minister under section 100” the words “in accordance with section 8G.”

    (d) In subsection (4), by substituting the words, “in a manner prescribed by regulations made by the minister under section 100” the words, “in accordance with section 8H.”

Observations 

Adopting the proposed amendment would address the lacuna identified by the Constitutional Court. Parliament had previously delegated its powers under article 78(4) to the minister to make regulations in regard to elections with representatives for special interest groups to Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, we make reference to Kasozi and three others v. the Attorney-General Constitutional Petition No.37, No.40, No.48 of 2010 where the Constitutional Court held as follows:
“The wording in Article 78(4) is very clear. To paraphrase the same, Parliament shall by law prescribe the procedure for elections of representatives of the army, youth, workers and persons with disabilities.

This obligation is cast squarely upon Parliament by the Constitution. Its duty under the Constitution was to enact the relevant law that would provide the procedure of election of the representatives of the army. In the constitutional and administrative law, it is a generally accepted principle of interpretation that one cannot delegate a duty that was cast upon him to perform. This is what is often referred to as the principle of delegatus non potest delegare in Latin meaning, no delegated powers can further be delegated.”

Recommendations 

The committee recommends that Parliament adopts the proposed amendments. 

Clause 3: Insertion of new sections 8A, 8B, 8C, 8D, 8E, 8F, 8G, 8H, 8I, 8J, 8K, 8L

The principal Act is amended by inserting immediately after subsection (8) the following new sections: “8A Representatives of Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces. The representatives of Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces to Parliament shall be elected by the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces Council as follows:

    a) The Commander-in-Chief shall, in consultation with the leadership of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces or any other persons the Commander-in-Chief considers necessary, submit a list of at least 20 and not more than 30 officers or militants to the Defence Forces Council.
    b) The Defence Forces Council shall elect the 10 representatives of the army from persons nominated by the Commander-in-Chief.
    c) The Commander-in-Chief shall not nominate a person to the Defence Forces Council unless that person is qualified to be elected a Member of Parliament under Article 80 of the Constitution and this Act.
    d) Voting by the Defence Forces Council shall be by secret ballot.” 

The stakeholders’ views
 
Law Development Centre

“It is pertinent to appreciate that the Constitution should be read as an integral whole and with its letter and spirit as the supreme law is respected. 

Article 78(1)(c) of the Constitution provides for the inclusion of representatives of the army in Parliament. In providing for the composition of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces, Article 208(2) of the Constitution provides that the forces shall be nonpartisan, national in character, patriotic, professional, disciplined, productive and subordinate to the civilian authority as established under this Constitution.

However, the fact that the serving officers in the forces are Members of Parliament raises constitutional challenges.” Madam Speaker, I am just reporting the views of Law Development Centre. “Whereas they may choose to be nonpartisan by choosing not to participate or vote in partisan proceedings, their presence in a multi-party legislature may raise an influence of partiality.

It may be argued that the MPs are listening posts for the forces so as to ensure peace and security and this may indeed be true. However, the army has the opportunity to read the Hansard and thus be updated as to Parliament activities without their physical presence. More so, the public gallery and the committees are always open for any interested person to be aware of what is taking place in Parliament.”

The Leader of the Opposition

“A serving soldier who intends to contest as a Member of Parliament representing the army in Parliament is not guided on what he or she can do to access the leadership. Importing the army rules into the law violates article 59(1) of the Constitution that gives the right to every citizen of Uganda of 18 years of age to exercise his/her right to vote. 

Also, the same proposed amendments are contrary to article 1(4) of the Constitution that demands that state organs facilitate the people to express their will and consent on who shall govern them and how they shall be governed through free and fair elections of their representatives. 

It is a duty bestowed on Parliament to legislate on procedures of electing representatives of the army not legitimising a process of deployment disguised as army representatives. The proposals in the amendment maintain the procedure of the Commander-in-Chief nominating 20 names, not a member of the UPDF expressing an interest to contest for the same seat.”

The Opposition proposed that clause 8A be amended as follows: “Clause 8A: Representatives of Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces. The representative of Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces to Parliament shall be elected by Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces Council as follows:
    a) A serving soldier interested to represent the army in Parliament shall, in consultation with the officer in command of his/her division, apply for nomination supported by at least one voter to the designated returning officer.
    b)  An aspiring candidate shall qualify for nomination if he/she qualifies to be a Member of Parliament in accordance with article 80(1) and (2) of the Constitution accompanied by the statement on oath stating that the candidate -
is a citizen of Uganda;
ii) 	is of 28 years of age and above;
iii) 	is supported by a registered voter;
iv) 	consents to the nomination;
v) 	is not convicted to any service offence; and
vi) 	is qualified to contest as a Member of Parliament.”

c) 	The returning officer shall publish the list of the nominated candidates to all divisions, headquarters and members of the Defence Forces Council two days after the close of nominations.”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chairperson, you are taking us into the proceedings of your committee, “so and so said this and that.” We do not do that. Please go to your observations and recommendations. That is what we want. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. Permit me to read the analysis on page 15 and recommendations on page 16.

The committee analysis 

Military legislators are generally appointed and removed by the military hierarchy particularly when the soldiers do not enjoy the right to vote in elections as was the case under the Suharto regime - I may perhaps skip that, Madam Speaker, and go straight to the recommendations.

The committee recommends that Parliament adopts the proposed amendment, which is contained in the Bill. The committee further recommends that:

    1. Parliament, in exercising its power to review under Article 78(2), should consider amending the representation under Article 78(1)(c) on special interest groups’ representatives to include all armed forces.
    2. The Rules and Privileges Committee amends the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to require army representatives to have free sitting in the House.
    3. When electing representatives of the army, the UPDF should consider the various ranks and file within the army.
    4. The UPDF is encouraged to progressively move towards gender balance where at least a third of the representatives shall be composed of women.

Clause 8B Youth Representatives

Madam Speaker, permit me to take you straight to the recommendations of the committee on page 21.

The committee recommends that Parliament adopts the proposed amendments in the Bill. 

Clause 8G Representatives of Workers 

The committee observed that the proposed provision of the Bill in relation to the election of workers to Parliament seeks to reintroduce a procedure that was held to be unconstitutional by the Constitutional Court. When a law is condemned as being unconstitutional, it ceases to have legal effect from the moment of the decision and is deemed to have been void ab initio.

How the Government responds to this situation is a matter for the Government, but any response by way of new legislation or administrative action must be in accordance with the Constitution, and must have due regard to the decision in question of the  court. For example, the Government could introduce new legislation on the same subject matter as the impugned legislation, but in a form which does not conflict with the Constitution.  

In the Uganda Constitution, unlike in many constitutions of countries of the Commonwealth, the provisions which guarantee the freedom of association and the right to form and participate in trade unions is unambiguous and very unclear. They are to be found in articles 29(1) (e) and 40(3) of the Constitution.

We reproduce Article 29(1)(e) “Every person shall have the right to freedom of association which shall include the freedom to form and join associations or unions, including trade unions and political and other civic organisations." 

Article 40(3) provides, "Every worker has a right - 
(a) 	to form or join a trade union of his or her choice for the promotion and protection of his or her economic and social interests; 
(b)	to collective bargaining and representation; and 
(c) 	to withdraw his or her labour according to law.”

The Constitutional Court in the consolidated petitions No. 37/2010, No. 40/2010 and No. 48/2010 in its judgment regarding paragraph 44 ruled: “- we now must consider whether or not the said provisions contravene Article 29(1)(c) of the Constitution. The substance of the impugned provision is to create an electoral college out of members of two federations of workers, NOTU and COFTU. Only workers affiliated with the said organisations can participate in the elections of representatives of workers. Non-unionised workers cannot participate in this process.

The Constitution provides not for representation of only unionised workers, but also non-unionised workers by the simple use of the word ‘workers’. Workers who are not members of the said two federations are thus excluded from participating in this process of electing representatives for workers in Parliament. Such workers are disenfranchised contrary to Article 59(1) of the Constitution-”

Madam Speaker, we recommend at page 30 that the provisions contained in the Bill be rejected. We shall propose an amendment to the clause. 

8H Representatives of Persons with Disabilities

The recommendation of the committee is on page 36. The committee recommends that Parliament adopts the proposed amendment.

8J Vacancies not affect election results

The recommendation is on the same page 36. The committee recommends that Parliament adopts the proposed amendment.

8K Notification of Results

The committee recommendation is on page 37 and the committee recommends that Parliament adopts the proposal. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much, honourable chairman and your colleagues. 

Honourable members, the report has been signed by the necessary minimum number of Members and you are now free to make your contributions; two to three minutes each.

3.55
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): I thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would beg to be assisted by the committee chairperson where I go obtuse because I am just back from a campaign trail and I was not following you very keenly.

Notwithstanding, on the issue of army representation in this House – if I heard the committee chairperson and I get the committee position right, I would like to agree with the position of the committee; it is about time that we reduce the number of UPDF representatives in this House from 10 to a considerable number of four, and we give opportunity to other armed forces to be represented in this House. The case in point is the Uganda Police Force and the Uganda Prisons Service. 

Some of us have been victims of police brutality and we need the police to have representatives in this House. The UPDF is a fairly disciplined organisation. They have a very high and streamlined command structure. They are rarely involved in activities that would attract severe debate in this House save for securing the external boundaries of this country.

Therefore, I would strongly support the position of the committee that other than having 10 members of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces in this House, we would have four members of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces, four members from the Uganda Police Force and two members from the Uganda Prisons Service in this House.

This would go a long way in solving certain issues. Let me give you an example; we have so many cases of police officers in our constituencies who have worked – 

THE SPEAKER: Information from hon. Ndeezi.

MR NDEEZI: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for giving way.

I would like to remind the House that a few days ago, the Attorney-General tabled in this House a motion for a resolution under Article 78 of the Constitution which was in fulfilment of the requirement that this Parliament reviews the representation of special interest groups in terms of numbers for the purpose of increasing, retaining or abolishing representation. 

Now, following the presentation by the Attorney-General, this Parliament approved the resolution. The impact of this is that we have already approved the numbers for each category of special interest groups. 

To my colleague, I know that you are very busy with campaigns but it is now too late to reduce or change the numbers for each of the special interest groups. I thank you so much.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you hon. Ndeezi for submitting your opinion. But if you check in the Constitution, the President is the Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces and the armed forces in the Ugandan perspective is not only the UPDF but literally any group that carries arms for purposes of enforcement of law and order. 

So, even if we have already determined the issue of numbers of the representation of the armed forces in this House, I do not think it will be ultra vires for this Parliament to say that of the armed forces, let us have five UPDF officers, three police officers and two prisons officers. When the police are going for operations, they cover their heads like they are going to harvest honey in the day time. They do not even want people to see their faces. So, we want to see them in this House answering certain questions; we want them to campaign and have a human face like the UPDF has, inside and outside this House, so that they are party to this kind of decision-making.

MR RUHINDI: The information that I would like to give my brother, hon. Odonga Otto is in Article 78. In this Article, reference is made to the army and not to the armed forces.

MR KATUNTU: I think that the Attorney-General is right only to add that it is possible if you do not review under article 78(2) but you amend 78(1)(c). This is because 78(1)(c) is the one that provides for the different categories.  Instead of the “army” it is amended to “armed forces” and then it would be possible.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I have no other useful submission after my senior counsel and learned friend hon. Abdu Katuntu has submitted.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, any further comments? Honourable members, I put the question that the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment)(No.2), Bill be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) (NO. 2) BILL, 2015

Clause 2 agreed to.

Clause 3

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 3(8A) as follows: 

1.	Substitute for the proposed clause 3(8A)(b) in the Bill with the following: 
“ (a)	The Defence Forces Council shall elect three representatives of the army from persons nominated by the Commander-in-Chief, a third of whom shall be women.”

Justification is to address the gender imbalance which is in line with Article 21 of the Constitution which gives Parliament power to enact laws that are necessary for implementing policies and programmes aimed at addressing social, economic, educational and other imbalances in society.

2. 	Amendment of clause 3(8F). This is amended by replacing the word “woman” wherever it appears in the provision with “female”. The Bill makes inference to “woman” youth representative and the committee took the position that we need to replace it with “female” to distinguish them from women members of Parliament.

Clause 3 (8G), substitute for proposed clause 3 (8G) in the Bill the following:

“(1)	The five workers’ representatives to Parliament shall be elected by an electoral college constituted by the Electoral Commission as follows:
a) 	The chairman-general, vice chairman-general, secretary-general, deputy secretary-general, treasurer-general, deputy treasurer- general of NOTU and four other persons nominated by NOTU at least one of whom shall be a woman.”  Madam chair, we had agreed that this number should read “two”, “at least two of whom shall be women.”
b) 	The chairman-general, vice chairman-general, secretary-general, deputy secretary-general, treasurer-general, deputy treasurer-general COFTU and four other persons nominated by COFTU at least two of whom shall be women.
c) 	The chairperson, secretary-general, and treasurer of every registered labour union.
d) 	Seven delegates nominated directly to the Electoral Commission by every registered labour union at least three of whom shall be women.
e)	Ten delegates at least three of whom shall be women nominated by the non-unionised workers in each of the following regions: 
    i. Central
    ii. Eastern
    iii. Northern
    iv. Western 
(2)	The ten delegates referred to in sub section (1) (e) shall be elected as follows:
    a) The minister responsible for workers shall convene all willing non-unionised workers at every sub county in Uganda and the Electoral Commission shall organise and manage the elections at the sub county and district conference.
    b) Every sub-county non-unionised workers conference shall nominate ten delegates at least three of who shall be women to the district non-unionised conference.
    c) Each district non-unionised workers conference, shall nominate ten delegates at least three of whom shall be women to the regional non-unionised workers conference for the purpose of nominating the delegates referred to in sub section (1) (e).
3. 	For the purpose of these elections, the registrar under the Labour Unions Act, 2006 shall submit to the Electoral Commission a list of all the registered labour unions.
4. 	The commission shall appoint nomination and polling days for election of workers representatives to Parliament.
5. 	A union registered within six months before a general election shall not be taken into account by the Electoral Commission for purposes of electing workers representatives to Parliament.
6. 	For purposes of this section –
	‘COFTU’ means Central Organisation of Free Trade Unions 
‘Non-unionised worker’ means a worker who is not a member of a labour union 
	‘NOTU’ means National Organisation of Trade Unions.”

Justification: Clause 3(8G) is a replica of the provision in the Parliamentary Elections Special Interest Groups Regulations, 2001 statutory instrument 31, relating to the election of workers’ representatives to Parliament that were declared unconstitutional by the Constitutional Court.

The committee takes the view that our proposal meets the standard expected in the Constitution. I beg to move.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I substantially agree with the proposed amendments by the Chairperson of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. There is only one area in our harmonisation with the committee as far as workers representatives is concerned. We emphasised the need to have a third of those required to be nominated. That one has been taken very much care of in this proposed 8G if you look at (d) three of 10, that is certainly a third.

When you come to clause 3(a) and (b), there is a small hiccup. This is because in (a) they say, “and four other persons nominated by NOTU at least one of whom shall be a woman”. My understanding is that a third of four is one. Two would be half of four. This is why we had wanted to ensure that in (a) it should be one and not two. In (b) it should also be “at least one of the four.” That means one of the four in (a) and one of the four in (b). 

In addition, there is no harm because all the four can be women anyway. However, at least one of the four shall be a woman. If that is corrected, I agree with the amendments moved by the chairperson.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, the problem is this and it is the matter we discussed with the Attorney-General in great detail and the committee feels very strongly about this. More often than not, the chairman-general, the vice chairman-general, the secretary-general, the deputy secretary-general as well as the treasurer-general and deputy secretary-general are all men. I used the words “more often than not”. The only entry point for women is when you come to the four Members nominated by the union. 

However, even if you had some women in the ranks such as treasurer-general and secretary-general, it does no harm having 50 per cent female representation. The committee felt very strongly about these numbers – and Madam Chairperson – I am not about to concede on these numbers.

DR LYOMOKI: Madam Chairperson, I think this matter should not cause this because we the workers’ community have already agreed on “two”. This is because even one is not a third of four. A third of four should be one point something. 

MR RUHINDI: I concede, with all humility.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the clause be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Third Schedule

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, we have a proposed amendment to the Third Schedule. We propose to amend the Third Schedule as follows;
a)- Insert “Amudat” after “Amolatar” under the northern region.
b)- Delete “Amudat” from eastern region. 

The justification is that “Amudat” is situated in northern Uganda not eastern Uganda.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the Third Schedule be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Third Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

Fourth Schedule, agreed to.

Clause 1, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.16
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.16
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) (No. 2) Bill, 2015” and had passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.17
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

 (Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) (NO. 2) BILL, 2015

3.18
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2015” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) (NO. 2) ACT, 2015”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, title settled and the Bill passes. (Applause)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATIONS BILL, 2015

Clause 37 

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, yesterday, when we finished the new insertions, the committee still had amendments to make on clause 36 of the Bill. I beg that you allow us to bring the committee’s amendment. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, please present.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend clause 36 by substituting for the entire clause the following:
“1) 	An organisation shall in accordance with the general accepted standards of accounting practice:
    a) Keep accounting records of its income, expenditure, assets and liabilities.
    b) Within six months after the end of its financial year, draw up financial statements. 
    2) An organisation shall within two months after drawing its financial statements submit to the bureau a report stating whether or not:
    a) The financial statements of the organisation are consistent with its accounting records.
    b) The accounting policies of the organisation are appropriate and have been appropriately applied in the preparation of the financial statements.
    c) The organisation has complied with the provisions of this Act and of the Constitution which relate to financial matters.
    3) An organisation shall:
    a) Submit to the bureau annual returns and a report of the audited books of accounts by a certified auditor.
    b) Declare and submit to the district technical planning committee the DNMC and SNMC of the area in which it operates; estimates of its income and expenditure, budget, work plan, information on funds received and the sources of funds.
    c) Submit to the bureau, the district monitoring committee in the area of operation and any other information that may be required.
    4) A community-based organisation shall;
    a) Submit to the SNMC in the area of operation annual returns and a report of the audited books of accounts by a certified auditor.
    b) Declare and submit to SNMC its budget, work plan, information of funds received and the sources of funds.
    c) Submit to the SNMC any other information that may be required.”

I beg to propose. 

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to know from the chairperson of the committee - he proposes an amendment that includes; submission of financial statements and audited books of accounts by a certified auditor.

I was just wondering whether it is not sufficient that the board receives the audited books of accounts rather than receiving financial statements. I think by implication, if they receive the final audited version, they will have looked at the financial statement. I wonder why you would need both. 

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, this is supposed to ensure that the entire cycle of finance management is catered for right from the planning stage. At the time when the plans are integrated at a technical level - at the district or subcounty where he operates from through to the management accounts, which will have been prepared by the management of the organisations. Then also the audited reports which some of them may not necessarily have to be compelled to be audited.

The audit, therefore, sometimes comes much later. This requires that even after the audit report is done, it is also equally submitted. If we only restrict it to the audit report, then we might leave out some other details that may be necessary for the subcounty and district monitoring committees to be interested in that could be submitted along the management accounts. Therefore, both are actually necessary.

MR WADRI: We are not inventing a wheel in terms of financial management. It is a common standard all over the world that once you produce audited books of accounts, then it means it has taken into account all the nitty-gritty and the details of financial transactions. 

Therefore, why would you really need to have more? You either go for the bank statement and you ignore the audited books of account or you go for the audited books of accounts and ignore the bank details. 

Otherwise, I do not know whether we will be inventing our own wheel here as a country. However, that is the international practice.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the international practice does not necessarily stop the demand for management accounts. 

MS ALASO: The problem here, first of all, is that you are asking for too much from the NGO board. They are not going to look at those financial statements. That is micro-management as hon. Fox Odoi says. 

I think in order to show seriousness, you would rather deal with the audited books of account. This is because when it comes to the other ones, even the board does not authorise them. They have not reviewed them. We would like to ask the chairman, hon. Mulongo, to delete the other one of financial statements and we stay with the audited books of accounts by a certified auditor. 

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the committee will concede on this and remove the management accounts. However, we emphasise the audited reports. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the provision be amended as proposed. There is 5(c). I do not know how they will decide what else they are going to give in to submit to any other information that may be required. 

MR MULONGO: The committee feels that this list may not necessarily be exhaustive. There could be other queries that will demand some answers in relation to finance and accountability. Therefore, that clause covers it. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that the provision be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

 (Clause 36, as amended, agreed to.)

MR MULONGO: Whereas we have part 10, miscellaneous, the committee proposes to create a new part 10 that will cover offences and alternatives.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Proceed. 

MR MULONGO: We propose that clause 37 on offences and penalties flows as follows:
“ 1) An organisation or a person commits an offence through:
    a) On being required to do so fails or refuses to produce to the bureau a certificate, permit, constitution, charter or other relevant documents or information relevant for the purposes of this Act. 
    b) Knowingly gives false or incomplete information for the purpose of obtaining a permit or other requirement. 
    c) Operates contrary to the conditions or directions specified in his permit.
    d) Engages in any activity that is prohibited by this Act.

    2) Any person who contravenes subsection (i) above commits an offence and shall be liable to a fine not exceeding 72 currency points or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or both, and in the case of a continuing offence, to a further fine not exceeding 15 currency points for each day during which the offence continues after conviction.”

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, sorry that I do not follow. This is because we had clause 37. Therefore, what is the chairperson amending?

THE CHAIRPERSON: He is introducing a new clause. 

MS ALASO: Is it before clause 37 or after? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Before the other 37. 

MS ALASO: Okay. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a new clause be inserted in to the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37

MR MULONGO: Clause 37 on inspection - the committee proposes to amend clause 37 by:

    1) In subsection (i) by substituting for the phrase, “Officer of the secretariat authorised by the board” appearing on line one, with the word, “Inspector” to read: 
    (i) “An inspector may at any reasonable time inspect…”
    (ii) In sub-clause 2, by deleting the entire sub-clause.
    (iii) In sub-clause 3, by substituting for the phrase, “Officer of the secretariat authorised by the board” appearing on line one, with the word “Inspector”.
    (iv) Insert a new sub-clause 4 to read as: “Subject to the provision from this section, the bureau may designate from among its officers such number of inspectors as are necessary for carrying out the purpose of this section.”
    (v) Insert a new sub-clause 5 to read “A person designated as inspector shall be gazetted in the national gazette.”
    (vi) Insert a new sub-clause to provide for notice to be given to an organisation before inspection and to read as: “Notwithstanding the powers given to an inspector under this section, no inspection shall be done without prior notice of at least seven days being given to an organisation, stating the time and purpose of the inspection.”
    (vii) Insert a new sub-clause to read: “For purposes of this section, reasonable time refers to hours of 8.00 am to 5.00 p.m., on working days.”
    (viii) Insert a new sub-clause 8 to read: “A person who (a) without any lawful excuse denies an inspector access to any property, books of accounts, records, returns, documents or information requested for under the section, (b) knowingly presents to the inspector a false or fabricated document or makes a false statement with intent to deceive or mislead the inspector, (c) without reasonable excuse refuses or fails to comply with any order or direction of the inspector, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 24 currency points or to imprisonment not exceeding one year or both. I beg to propose.

THE CHAIRPESON: Honourable members, I put the question – 

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chairperson, I go along with the recommendations of the committee, except in two areas; one, I have difficulties with giving seven days’ notice for inspections. 

Inspections are known management functions determining the character of an organisation; its competencies, its compliance and therefore, giving notice will not achieve that purpose. I, therefore, would like to suggest to honourable members that the requirement of seven days’ notice should not be there. There should not be any notice at all. That is my position.

Secondly, the reference to the purpose of this section, “Reasonable time refers to hours between 8.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m. on working days”. I would like to propose an amendment to define reasonable time as follows: “Reasonable time is the length or amount of time which is fairly necessary, conveniently so to do whatever is required to be done as soon as the nature of the act and surrounding circumstances permit”, instead of limiting it from 8.00 am to 5.00 p.m. 

I think that will be consistent with the tasks involved in inspections of organisations. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPESON: Honourable minister, I think that under the law, we have legally recognised times. For instance, you cannot attach property on a Sunday; you cannot do so at night. So, the question – we cannot just remove it.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I hear the concerns of the minister in respect to notice for purposes of inspection. I would like to reckon that the committee proposes that we give these NGOs seven days’ notice because they have introduced an offence; that offence is failure to provide the inspector with the materials that they will require.

If you turn up at the property of an NGO and you want a list of items, and they do not have it, they will be locked out. You have to give them reasonable notice. If you are not comfortable with seven days, I would rather you propose that we reduce the seven days to two or probably three or twenty four hours - whatever you are comfortable with, but let us at least state some timeframe within which you will be required to give them notice.

Secondly, in respect to reasonable time – honourable minister, your proposal is just ambiguous, as the Speaker has rightly stated; you cannot, for example, serve summons on a Sunday. You cannot serve summons at night; you cannot serve any court process in the middle of the night. It has to be during working hours and these are internationally understood to mean probably 8.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m.

I, therefore, suggest that you concede on those two grounds and we make progress.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I was expecting that I would see a facial expression from the minister agreeing with hon. Fox Odoi, but he seems to be insistent, in which case, I would say that the minister’s proposal of inspecting at any time amounts to raids on non-governmental organisations.

The minister seems to want power to just send people at night, something like at 10:00 p.m. or 3.00 a.m. to just raid the organisation because the officers will not be there. In fact, nobody will be at the station at that time. If we give the minister such powers here, they will be abused, anything before 8.00 a.m. and 5.00 p.m. in the afternoon - the minister will just be raiding NGO offices, when the staff are not there. That is not inspection anymore; I think that should be classified as something else. Let the minister propose a new clause – maybe call it rustling or raiding NGO offices and then we consider it as such.

I also think that the minister is mixing up this thing of notice. Notice of inspection is very important because you want the participation of the organisation that you are inspecting; you want to know - look at their books; you probably would like to see how they are implementing things; you want probably to inspect the premises - that is why notice is very important. If you do not give notice, you will find the place locked.

Will you fly over the walls and land in? I think the minister – even if it were a search warrant, you know how to deliver a search warrant. I, therefore, think that the minister should help us and concede on this matter and we save the time and proceed –(Interruption)

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. The reasoning behind this would be the changing trends of inspection in modern management. Inspection is no longer witch-hunting. 

When you are going for inspection – by the way, before I came here, I served as an inspector for seven years and inspection has changed in many ways - it has changed faces. You go there in order to support the system to deliver. For you to support the system, the people you are going to inspect must know the purpose of the inspection. They must know what you are going to look for and actually this helps to improve the quality of service delivery. As members of the committee, for that purpose, we put that into consideration. That is modern inspection; we thought it is important to give that note.

Secondly, on the issue of the time for inspection, we thought that if we are to inspect and we are looking at improving quality, we have to do it within the working days and working hours. If it is something criminal you are looking for, that ceases to be the work of an inspector; it goes to the police. Honourable colleague, that is the information I wanted to give. Thank you very much. (Applause)

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I have nothing more useful to add after the chair has educated me –(Laughter)- thank you very much.

MS BABA-DIRI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I rise to support the minister – (Interjections)– yes, exactly. Listen to what I am going to say.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order please.

MS BABA-DIRI: Not because he comes from Koboko but these are facts –(Laughter)- Madam Chairperson, I think the NGOs know exactly the standards required of them especially on what to do; accountability, when to do what and so forth. When the inspector goes to see, he wants to ensure that they are doing the right things; some NGOs do not do the right things. So, if you say I am coming, just like you prepare for a visitor when your house is dirty, you begin sweeping so that the visitor finds it clean. But as soon as the visitor goes, you go back to your dirt –(Interjections)– I, therefore, think the issue of inspection is to find out whether you are ready anytime during the working time and to see that you are working without request of the inspection since you know your duties. If you are to give notice, they will be artificially organizing themselves when actually they are not doing the right thing. Let us support the minister.  

These are the same things happening in schools; the inspector of a school does not inform the head teacher when he/she is coming. Otherwise, all the teachers will be there and as soon as the inspector leaves, the teachers will all go away. So, let us give this opportunity for the inspection to be done any time within the working hours so that the NGOs do the right thing at all times. Thank you very much.

MR BAKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I have heard the contributions from my colleagues behind and they agree on the timing. Madam Chairperson, there is something that has come out and we need to think twice about it.

For instance, in schools, in most cases, some schools have failed to set the standards that are required. Whenever our inspectors say they are going to inspect a specific school, they will even borrow from the neighbourhood and put things there as if they are for the school. 

I am looking at a situation; we have been fighting “ghost” teachers and pupils until we changed the system. Once you write to notify them that, I will be in western or northern schools on such a date, you will find the whole school fully packed and the head teacher will be there. When we started ambushing them, we started getting clear pictures that if you do not notify them, you find the actual picture of what is happening on the ground.

I, therefore, do agree that people should not be told and the time should be during working hours – (Interjections) - I am giving a scenario which has been raised already. I thank you.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to support the committee’s position. NGOs are not like schools. Schools have permanent staff, permanent things and they are always there; NGOs are in the field most of the time. If you say you are going to ambush them and get adequate information, you might end up not getting the information that you want since they are always in the field, not only within the country but even abroad. So, if you say that you do not give adequate time, you might even fail to get the person responsible to give you the information. Therefore, giving adequate notice to the NGOs does not mean that they are going to hide the information that you would like to get.

I would propose that we give them notice of some days so that they are waiting for you to come and find out the information that you want to get. However, if you are going to ambush them, it changes the meaning of inspection. 

I would like to concur with the committee’s recommendation but let us give them adequate time; it could be three days. By the way, seven days is okay. I support seven days so that whoever is out and is responsible is given opportunity to come back and wait for the inspector to be questioned. After all, they might not know what issues and concerns they would wish to be inspected on. With all that, I support the committee’s position. Thank you.

MS ALUM: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. I strongly support the position of the committee. Just as my colleague, hon. Nyakikongoro has mentioned, most of these NGO staff are always in the field and even some of them are always abroad. When you just go to inspect without giving notice, you might reach the offices and not find them yet there is a penalty for failing to give information. Are we really being fair to these NGOs?

I propose that - if the minister is still insisting on this, then the issue of penalty should be removed. Secondly, there is some information that is not just at display. They might be at the managerial level and if you do not find the manager around and you expect them - such information cannot be at the door way. I think we are not being fair to the NGOs. I beg the minister to concede on the time and the issue of giving notices. I thank you.

MR WADRI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to appeal to the minister –(Interruption)– to reconsider his decision and look at what he is proposing as supportive supervision rather than having that mind of witch-hunting NGOs with the purpose of catching them in the wrong. 

I would like you to equate yourself to what exactly the Auditor-General does. If the Auditor-General is going to audit a specific entity, he does not ambush. He writes to the entity to inform them that, “I am coming to your entity on such a date to do a, b, c, d and my checklist is this. Prepare these documents so that I go and sit with you and go through the whole process.” Your aim of going there should be to support the institutions to do a better job.

However, the moment you begin thinking of ambushing them and having that intention of finding them on the wrong footing, then you will not be doing your work. Honourable minister, I would like to appeal to you as a neighbour, to reconsider your decision. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you still insisting?

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think we need a middle position. The minister’s concerns are well understood because if we are living in a transparent world where these organizations act with the level of integrity that is expected of them, there would be no need of ambushing them – I do not think even the word “ambush” is the right word to use.

Madam Chairperson, we know that there are NGO’s that have been registered, for instance, to take care of children. But the things they do – even the NGO world agrees that there are some of these organizations that do not comply with the requirements. I think that is where the minister’s concern comes in.

Yes – we would want to give notice. We also would like that the inspection be supportive but we know that there are a good number of NGOs that do not comply with the law and they are using their premises as a haven for wrongdoing –(Interruption) 

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Jovah Kamateeka. I am seeking a clarification. Hon. Kamateeka, wouldn’t you want to address those issues as matters of a criminal nature and, therefore, you do not really have to couch them under this word “inspection” because the police will descend on anyone of us at any time, for any matter of a criminal nature. They will search when they want, they can proceed and so this segment does not stop them.

As you talked, I was thinking about children’s homes. Some of them are really nasty and for such, you do not want to wait for an inspector. Once you have information, just send somebody. I do not know whether you want to recast it along those lines. Thank you very much.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, hon. Alaso. If we were able to go in and carry out inspection, then we would minimise those cases where the police comes and descends on an organisation and creates fear and intimidation.

Madam Speaker, we need a middle ground where under normal circumstances, notice may be given, but where also we will allow the Government to go in and carryout surprise checks on these institutions. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Before the Prime Minister comes, what is the purpose of this inspection - because it is routine, we could do what the law society does. You know that between January and March, the law society comes to inspect your chambers; all the lawyers in the country know that in these three months, we must organise ourselves, they are coming. If we are not organised, there is no licence.  Why do you want surprises?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Chairperson, I have been following the arguments and in my understanding, NGOs are innocent and they have nothing to hide, whether they are inspected with or without notice.

It seems our colleagues are worried that if you go into inspecting NGOs without notice, you are probably going to find things that you are not supposed to see -(Interjections)- but why are you worried? Assuming -[HON. MEMBER: “Information.”]- sit down, you are not giving me information; I am informed. (Laughter) 

I believe colleagues are worried for nothing because the NGOs have nothing to hide. They can be inspected anytime, with or without notice. It is not necessary to give them notice. People running NGOs are human beings; they are not angels. If there is information about NGOs that they are doing something wrong, why not check them after all, what are they hiding?

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chairperson and honourable members, the same honourable members here were one time complaining about this NGO called COWE, which took innocent peoples’ money and disappeared. If you give such an NGO notice of seven days, they would have fled like they did.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Honourable minister, can you please tell us what this inspection is for? Is it for catching criminality or for assisting these organisations to work smoothly?

MR JAMES BABA: Not necessarily; we want to know whether they are doing the work for which the licence was given and to know whether they are accountable. Maybe the middle ground would be a few days’ notice; we can leave the three days’ notice. I think that is the compromise but there is always an exception to the general rule. 

We have to take care of what hon. Jovah Kamateeka explained, which was extremely useful and she has read my mind. We can live within three days for which this notice can be given. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Honourable minister, even us here in Parliament do go out in the field and carry out spot checks on institutions. Why would we not want to carry out spot checks on NGOs and other organisations? 

Honourable minister, you should not concede. It should not be notice of three days. Under normal circumstances, we can give notice of three days but the provision for spot checks on these NGOs should remain. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, having worked with the Uganda Revenue Authority where we had some stubborn taxpayers, this is how it is still being handled. First, there is a provision in the law where you must give notice to a taxpayer that you are coming to do an audit inspection, it was always two weeks’ notice. However, there were stubborn taxpayers we would go and not find. For such, we would make an abrupt visit and if you do not find them, you seal off the premises and they can only open it in the presence of an officer because they would have defied the two weeks’ notice.

For those who defy the notice, we would go without notice and seal the place but it should be opened in the presence of the URA officer. There will be a penalty if he opens it without the URA Officer.

If we can borrow from that and formulate a clause around those lines, it would help us. The notice of three days is too short, why can’t we have a weeks’ notice because they also need to prepare. You may communicate and say two or three days yet the managers are not there. It would be good if we had a maximum of two weeks’ notice. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I thought the question you asked was pertinent and would have helped us to debate and make decisions. Why do we inspect? What are you looking for? Do we inspect as a regulator, as an examiner who wants to find faults or a regulator who wants to find compliance? 

Inspection can be categorised differently, for the Ministry of Education inspectors, they want to find fault but they also want to give quality assurance because you cannot expect where you have not inspected. The minister needs to help us, are we going to give you permission to go to these NGO offices to inspect as an investigator, as a regulator or do you want to inspect as somebody who wants to find compliance? That would form the basis of whether you need days, a week, or you need to do as the Uganda Law Society and other regulatory bodies do. They set a period in which to inspect every law firm.  

In the mind of my uncle, hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo, he is seeing you, since you are also the Minister of Internal Affairs, with policemen going to World Vision either on suspicion or no suspicion to invade at 2.00 a.m. Just clarify whether you want to go and inspect as a regulator or you want to find compliance.

MR JAMES BABA: Hon. Oboth and your neighbour and uncle, these NGOs will have applied for a licence and will have been granted it. The licence will permit them to do certain activities whether in the health or education sector and they would have been given a licence to operate either nationally or in a district or region. Therefore, the purpose of the inspection would be first on compliance. Secondly, whether they are doing the activities they meant to do to support communities; that is why we need to go and check on them, that is the purpose of the inspection. 

In many government institutions that are in place, they do not give notice. The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Affairs is here; when they inspect factories, they do not give notices. In the immigration department, we go inspecting work places to see whether these guys have work permits or not. We do not give notice and if you give notice, they will just disappear. 

I agree that the NGOs are well-intentioned and are here to work with us, but we know there are some whose intentions are not good and we need to have a check on them despite giving them licences. I think the middle ground is that we should have some notice, but also exceptional cases where we can inspect them without notice. If we can get a middle ground on that, I think we will move.

MS ALASO: I would like to propose that we create under that provision for notice - I do not remember which one - another subclause (b) to read something like this; any Non-Governmental Organisation failing to respect notice of inspection twice will subsequently be inspected without notice. That allows you to if they fail twice.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I think the middle position already exists in our legal regime. Under the Police Act, for example, if the police suspects that you are about to commit a crime or you have committed a crime, they will turn up at your premises and do a search. 

We must separate these two pieces of legislation because if an NGO is involved in the commission of a crime that is a police issue, it is a criminal matter. You do not need to fall back to the NGO Act to deal with them. Fall back to the Penal Code and the Police Act, unfortunately, you are the minister in charge of police, prisons and now you will be the minister of NGOs. (Laughter)

Honourable minister, we are not in any way limiting your policing powers. This law will in no way limit your power to turn up with policemen at COWE because they have defrauded the citizens of Uganda –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Just to reinforce that, he is still using the experience where you and I worked. When you suspect a taxpayer has smuggled, you do not give notice; you just arrive at his office and confiscate things. There were those exceptions, but they used that law to deal with it. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, the reasons for this particular law and we have had discussions back and forth, is to help you build the NGOs by way of cooperation, build their trust and work with them and make sure where they are at fault or in breach, you correct them, and where they have committed crime, prosecute them and you have a legal regime to do that.

Honourable minister, just concede and withdraw your proposal. Give them notice and inspect, but where they have committed crime, stand up and lock them up. You have that power.

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The information I would like to give the honourable member is that the purpose of inspection is not only to witch-hunt and find fault. There are certain organisations which are very exemplary. The minister can even see, approve them and tell others to come to see what they are doing. Therefore, it is not only witch-hunting but also to see how fair they are as an example. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, now that hon. Baba Diri has conceded, I am also withdrawing my earlier proposal so that we stay with the committee’s position. Thank you.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the committee considered a number of models of legal regimes that our country can follow and the ones we considered were that of cooperation and partnership and we would like to see that fostered. We have similar challenges facing the population and we have different approaches by the government and NGOs to solve them. As such, we are supposed to work together as partners. 

Therefore, the question and the spirit behind this section, Madam Chairperson and honourable colleagues, is to separate criminal suspicion from routine matters of compliance because as you can see, we are talking about issues of books of accounts, records, returns and some information of routine nature and if you do not give notice, you may not find the relevant officers to provide the information you need.

However, this is different from criminal suspicion. If the government has information on intelligence that NGO X or Y are operating criminally, the penal code and other laws like the Police Act give authority to police to pounce in the premises and find their way to inspect to find what they want. 

This other information which is here is of an administrative nature and I would like to request that my senior colleague concedes on this, except for the issue of notice of the days that can be reduced. I would like as a committee to agree to the three days because it is “at least”; it can be 10 days but at least three days.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 37 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 38

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I wonder why we should have clause 38 stay as part of this law, given the very robust provisions and amendments that have been made earlier on. In fact, I think that if we retain clause 38 as it is, we are giving a lot of room for people just to walk into organisations and you know in a world of extortion, somebody just walks there and has a lot of immunity under this law and you cannot even follow through. They will say that they were protected and any act of commission or omission – whether you have even been sent - they just walk there and sort out personal vendettas and extort money and intimidate people. 

My view, Madam Chairperson, is that clause 38 be deleted given the express provisions that have been put in clause 37. I would like to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you can become liable for acting on order from your board. So, what this one is saying is that if you are acting on the instructions of the board, you should not be personally liable.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I wish to agree and also add that this appears to be the standard principle in drafting – they need protection against personal liability. The phrase there is that it is done in good faith and it is the duty of the aggrieved party to indicate that whoever walked in had a personal vendetta. For example, if a one Oboth working with the board goes to Serere Women’s Group because he had a grudge with hon. Alaso. The protection against personal liabilities is standard drafting and I think that it is good practice to leave it untouched. I would implore my honourable colleague. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 38 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40

MR MULONGO: The committee proposes to amend clause 40 by:

    1. Paragraph (a). Redrafting the paragraph as follows: “Not carry out activities in any part of the country unless it has given copies of the permit to the DNMC and the local government of the area of operation;
    2. By deleting paragraph (d);
    3. By deleting paragraph (f);
    4. In paragraph (g), by deleting the words, “be non-partisan”; and
    5. By deleting paragraph (h).

The committee believes that the information therein the paragraph is already dealt with in earlier provisions.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that –

MR JAMES BABA: As the sponsor of this Bill, this is the heart and soul of this Bill for us. If we delete these things, then we remain “naked” and we go home with nothing. We would have spent all this time for nothing.

I would, therefore, like to implore the House and the Members that what is contained in clause 40 be maintained because if we delete (a),(d),(f), then these NGOs will not have any more use for the district and sub-county authorities. We will not have a way of assessing their contributions to development at the localities that they will be working from if we delete those sections. How will we ensure that there will be compliance with the laws and bylaws if we delete them?

We are talking of shared responsibility and partnership but now you are saying that we should let these sections go away.

We can go ahead and redefine what being non-partisan means but we know what is happening with some NGOs running around de-campaigning candidates, involving themselves in politics and so forth. We must send a clear message that this is not an area for them. It is a no-go area for them.

Honourable members, I implore you that this section is maintained. To me, this is the soul and heart of this Bill and without it, I will have nothing. I thank you.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I think that the honourable minister should assure us because there are some NGOs that are really political in nature. They engage in political activities, they fundraise for political activities. Yes, they are not supposed to be partisan and take for instance the International Republican Institute here whose work is to support political party activities and I am very aware that they do so across party lines. 

These NGOs raise money and train all of us –(Interjections)- sorry? Yes, they are non-partisan but when you introduce fundraising, how do you expect them to carry out political activities without fundraising the money for political activities? That is why the minister should help me so that I can understand that such organisations are not the ones that we are trying to deal with here because they are healthy and help us grow our democracy. They train youths across political lines, women from NRM and FDC among others and now you do not want them to fundraise?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I need the minister to clarify because the preamble of the Bill talks of building mutual partnerships and corporate relationships.

However, what the minister is telling us is that we are sort of warning the NGOs that they should not be involved in certain activities and yet they are not involved. In other words, you are already suspicious even before you approved what you are suspicious about – that you should not be prejudicial to anything that compromises security or is against the interests of Uganda.

How do you start accusing them before you have even found them guilty of that? Let us separate the two issues and this has been talked about before – that where an NGO has committed a crime or is about to commit a crime, there is a law to take care of that. However, when an NGO is operating normally in accordance with the law, there is absolutely no reason as to why you should tell that NGO to act in accordance with the interests of Uganda because they should be acting in accordance with the relevant laws which protect the interests of Uganda. Why do you have to say that in the law?

Madam Chairperson, I think that the minister has not quite told us of his fears. We would be able to help you if you told us what your fears are because we would advise on how we can deal with your fears. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yesterday, we did pass a provision dealing with the application. In the application, those who want to do political work will indicate what they want to do. Therefore, let us have the provision and when they apply, they can negotiate whether they can do this or not. To me, this is okay.  

I now put the question that clause 40 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41

MR WAFULA: Madam Chairperson, NDI works here, IRI - they are partisan organisations. They are organisations of parties but they work here. Are we saying they are not going to work here?

THE CHAIRPERSON: They will say what they are, what they do and their sources of funding. They will include all that in their application.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the committee had proposed that instead of a requirement to seek approval of the District Monitoring Committee, the requirement should be that of sharing because they would have already got permits. 
You have a permit from the headquarters and you want to operate in a district, it is only necessary that you share the permit information with the district. But this one required that they are approved by the district.

Therefore, our proposal was not to carry out activities in any parts of the country unless it has given copies of the permit to the District Monitoring Committee and local government of the area of operation. We believe this is better.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Didn’t we pass a provision saying that you must indicate your area of operation, your focus? We did that already.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, by the time this NGO gets the permit to operate, it means it has fulfilled these other conditions. You are subjecting it to second level approval; that is what the committee is expressing reservation about. 

In my view, the committee would rather that since this NGO already has a permit, let it go and present its authorisation by way of that permit to this committee at the district. It does not require another approval in which case for us we would be happy with the modification of (a) as proposed by the committee.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I beg to defer with the committee. My reading into this (a) is the specifics not the generality of the permit. Here we are talking about not to carry out activities in any part of the country, unless it has received the approval of the district and the local government of that area, and it has signed a memorandum of understanding with the local government to that effect.

Local governments are supplementary. You cannot get an NGO, say Oboth foundation, to go to Kamuli or Koboko and do what Ruhindi foundation is doing in the same area. It is not just subject to another layer but to really cause the activities to be harmonised with that of the local government considering other local governments. I am speaking with some idea as somebody who has helped NGOs in some of their operations.

You find -(Interjections)- The MoU cannot come in when you have not agreed on the activities you are going to carry out. They usually sit and agree. You could be having a licence to do health, water etcetera but in this particular district you are intervening in the area, if it is Tororo, about safe water and that is all you are going to agree with that local government to do. However, in Kamuli you are sponsoring children like Plan International. Let us not confuse the approval of activities and the approval as another licencing requirement. I think this is not the licencing here.

This is my reading into this. We would leave the Bill as it is proposed in the original draft.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 41 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 42

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend clause 42(3) by deleting the word “reputable” appearing on the second last line. This is because it is presumed that all banks in Uganda are reputable because they will be operating, they have active licences. Those which are not reputable will have been closed. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Say again what you really want; I am on page 31 of the Bill.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, in clause 42(3), there is reference made to the word “Reputable” appearing on the second last line. The committee felt that when you are saying “Reputable bank”, it is like there are those which are presumed not to be reputable. Therefore, the committee proposes that the term “Reputable” be deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Of course we assume that Bank of Uganda would issue a notice of which banks are due for closure or not for closure.

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 42(b) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 42 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 43

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that we insert a new subclause to provide for the meaning of affiliated organisations as follows:

(iii) For purposes of this section, affiliated organisation means an organisation which is formally or closely connected to or controlled by an internationally incorporated organisation or group.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I would like to seek clarification whether affiliation in this definition here only relates to international organisations. Are you insinuating in this law or expressly so that local indigenous NGOs cannot affiliate to one another?

What is the purpose of tagging international? You can have an NGO here in Kampala but it is affiliated to some other NGO in Bundibugyo. Affiliation is agreeing on areas of operation; you create a relationship. You may not even be related but that affiliation is such that I accept to do a, b, c, d. Why is it about international, Mr Chairman of the committee?

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson and honourable colleagues, the committee was preoccupied with international organisations that are affiliated locally. However, with the information from the learned colleague, we can broaden it to even include local affiliations.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Would you like to say controlled nationally or internationally incorporated organisations or groups? Honourable members, I put the question that clause 43 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 43, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 44

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the committee propose to substitute the current clause 44 of the Bill with clauses 44, 45, 46 and 47 as follows:
 “44. Dissolution
(1) The dissolution of an organisation may be either-
(i) voluntary; or
(ii) by order of court.”

The justification is to provide for dissolution by court. Since the bureau will not have the powers to incorporate, it cannot then dissolve an organisation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to substitute clause 45 to read as follows: 
“(1) 	Members of the organisation may by resolution in accordance with the constitution of the organisation, dissolve the organisation.
(2) 	Voluntary dissolution of the organisation shall be taken to have commenced at the time of passing the resolution under subsection (1).
(3) 	Where an organisation passes a resolution for voluntary dissolution, it shall, within 14 days after passing the resolution-
(a) 	inform the Bureau of the resolution and the reasons for the resolution; and
(b) 	publish the resolution in the Gazette and in a newspaper with wide circulation in Uganda.

(4) 	A resolution for voluntary dissolution shall be registered with the Bureau and a copy sent to the official receiver within seven days after the date of passing the resolution.

(5) 	Where default is made in complying with this section, the organisation and every officer of the organisation who defaults commits an offence and shall be liable to a fine not exceeding 30 currency points.

(6) 	An organisation that has made a resolution for voluntary dissolution shall develop and submit to the Bureau and to the official receiver a statement of its affairs showing particulars of assets, liabilities, names, residence and occupation of the creditors and the securities held by them.”

This is to provide clarity on voluntary dissolution of the organisation.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Under clause 45(3)(b), instead of saying “a newspaper” we should say “newspapers”. Let the organisation choose whether to pick one newspaper or two.

MS ALASO: Under this voluntary dissolution, are we sure that we are capturing every provision of voluntary dissolution in every small constitution of every small NGO? They have it specified in their constitutions that when this happens, they will voluntarily dissolve; so, what happens if what we are providing here does not exhaustively capture what they have the other side?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are they precluded from using any of these? I think all these are available.

MR OBOTH: If I got hon. Alaso clearly, she is talking about the danger of prescribing what constitutes voluntary dissolution. We all know that every NGO has to provide a dissolution clause. However, if we are not careful to cover all the circumstances in these two, (a) and (b), then we are safer just indicating that they should be able to inform. This is one of the ways they can dissolve their organisation. I think that is what she was referring to.

However, if we are sure that all these are circumstances that cover any form of resolution and dissolution of the organisation, then there is no harm providing a standard. This would now be the law - that if any organisation that operates in Uganda wants to dissolve, they would have to do it as prescribed in the NGO Act. We only have to be sure that the circumstances in the law we are making here are exhaustive, which I do not think they are. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Oboth, isn’t clause 45(1) sufficient to cover hon. Alaso’s fears? The amendment of the chairperson says, “Members of the organisation may by resolution in accordance with the constitution of the organisation, dissolve the organisation.”

MR OBOTH: That settles it, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I want to respond to the honourable Leader of the Opposition on the issue of newspapers. Here they are saying “in a newspaper with wide circulation” without specifying any. Let us be cautious because in the past, in one of the laws we made, we said it should be gazetted in the Uganda Gazette and then national newspapers but it became very horrendous. For me, this is sufficient: “a newspaper with wide circulation”. They can choose any; they can choose Bukedde, Etop, Red Pepper.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: It is not really about my Monitor. (Laughter) If we say “newspapers”, it is not mandatory that they run it in all newspapers. They can still choose one depending on their budget. It does not oblige them.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It does not say New Vision or Entatsi.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Precisely! I am just saying that we should leave it open to “newspapers” instead of saying, “a newspaper”. Let them choose to go for one paper if they want, depending on their budget.

THE CHAIRPERSON: They can go for 15 newspapers, but they should choose any one with wide circulation. It is expensive.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: If we say “newspapers”, we are not obliging them to put in all newspapers.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, they choose one; for example, they can decide that the Daily Monitor has very wide circulation and they go for it.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Chairperson, supposing they have resources to put it in two newspapers, a Luganda one and an English one?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No problem. This is the minimum.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: We did not say “at least in a newspaper” but we said, “in a newspaper”, therefore we have prohibited them. We are saying they can only put it in one newspaper yet you can have a vernacular newspaper and an English newspaper.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the concern of the Leader of the Opposition sounds very enticing. However, the danger is that if you say “newspapers”, it means they cannot put in just one; they have to go for more than one. When you say “newspapers”, you can be challenged as to why you put in only one. However, “a newspaper” can be one and even more as long as any one of the many has wide circulation in the country.

MS KAMATEEKA: I would like to give information but it can also be a proposed amendment. Suppose we say “any newspaper of their choice”. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: They might choose one which operates in their sub-county only.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to amend hon. Jovah Kamateeka’s proposal to say, “any newspaper with wide national circulation”. We know there are specific newspapers that are widely circulated at national level. Rather than picking on Etop or Orumuri, people would use New Vision or the Monitor. Thank you.

MS KAMATEEKA: The essence is that “any” replaces “a”. If it is “a newspaper”, it can be limiting. Let it be “any newspaper” with a wide readership and then they can know that it can be one or several newspapers.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think “any” will be giving them leeway. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 45 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, in the same spirit, the committee would like to propose that clause 46, dissolution by court, reads as follows:
“(1) 	The jurisdiction in dissolution matters shall be exercised by the High Court.
(2) 	Any person, organisation or bureau may apply to court for an order of dissolution of an organisation on any of the following grounds:
(a) 	defrauding the public;
(b) 	threatening national security; or
(c) 	gross violation of the laws of Uganda.

(3) 	Where a person lodges a complaint against an organisation under subsection (2) above, court shall inquire into the affairs of the organisation.

(4) 	Where an organisation is found guilty of any of the grounds stipulated in subsection (2), court shall move to dissolve the organisation.

(5) 	Subject to subsection (4), court shall issue a certificate of dissolution. 

(6) 	It is an offence to cause an organisation, when it is being wound up or dissolved, to transfer its remaining assets otherwise than in the manner contemplated by this Act and the laws of Uganda.” 

The justification is to give the court powers to dissolve organisations as stipulated in other laws. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know whether my colleagues can help me; if I give judgement that I have dissolved this organisation, are you saying that we have a standard form which the judge must sign? Isn’t the judgement enough? This would require the Judiciary to design a certificate just for this law. What do they normally do when they are winding up? 

MR KIVUMBI: Madam Chairperson, our humble opinion as a committee was that if you are going to dissolve, then the judge should have the certificate of dissolution. It is not just a mere judgement as the case ordinarily is; it is by order of court and issuance of a certificate. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No; you make the judgement and your orders and then your lawyer extracts the order. I think this is oppressing the Judiciary because we are now directing them on how to do their work from here. Therefore, let us delete (5). 

MR MULONGO: That brings even more sanity in our new law. Therefore, we delete (5), which requires the certificate.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 46 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, in the same spirit, the committee proposes that clause 47 reads as follows: 

“47. Composition or scheme of arrangement
(1) 	An organisation that makes a resolution for voluntary dissolution shall make a scheme of arrangement showing how the organisation intends to deal with its assets and liabilities.

(2) 	The scheme of arrangement shall be submitted to the official receiver and a copy shall be given to the Bureau.

(3) 	For avoidance of doubt, the scheme in subsection (1) shall consider the liabilities in accordance with the constitution of the organisation. 

(4) 	The official receiver shall have powers to vary the scheme where he or she is of the view that the scheme may not meet the needs of all the creditors. 

(5) 	The official receiver or a person appointed by court shall oversee the disposal of assets and liabilities of the organisation in accordance with the scheme or the direction of court.

(6) 	Where the organisation has met the requirements of this Act and the provision set out in the scheme of arrangement, the members of the organisation shall apply to court for a certificate of dissolution.

(7) 	Court shall issue a certificate of dissolution where the assets and liabilities of the organisation have been dealt with in accordance with the scheme of arrangement, the constitution of the organisation or court’s direction.” 

This is meant to give the organisation powers to make arrangements through which it can meet its liabilities before it is dissolved. It is also meant to ensure the dissolution of the organisation takes into consideration the needs of debtors and all stakeholders brought.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I have the same problem with No.7. We are now directing the court on how to do their work. 

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, consequently, based on the earlier position, any reference to certificate of dissolution will be by court order. Therefore, we do not need to require a specific instrument called “a certificate”. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, because they have their own practice directions; so, we delete (7).  Honourable members, I put the question that clause 47 be amended as proposed.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 44 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 44, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 45

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, do you have an amendment? 

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, I have an amendment on the original clause 45 in the Bill. The committee proposes to substitute the entire clause on appeals as captured in the Bill to read as follows: 

“45. Appeals 
(1) 	A person aggrieved by a decision of the SNMC or DNMC under sections 20 and 21 of this Act shall appeal-
(a) 	from a decision of SNMC to DNMC 
(b) 	from a decision of DNMC to the bureau. 

(2) 	Where the DNMC or bureau makes a decision against any organisation it shall in writing inform the organisation of the reason for the decision.” 

That is our proposal to have a new clause 45 on appeals. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 46

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, we propose that the clause reads as follows:
“46. Adjudication Committee 
(1) 	There is established an adjudication committee to handle appeals by persons aggrieved by a decision of the bureau made under section 45(2) of this Act. 

(2) 	The minister shall constitute the adjudication committee by appointing its members to serve on terms and conditions specified in the instrument of appointment. 

(3) The adjudication committee shall be constituted as follows:
(a) 	A chairperson who shall be an advocate of the High Court of not less than 10 years standing;
(b) 	A representative of organisations;
(c) 	A representative of the bureau; and
(d) 	Two senior citizens with relevant qualifications and experience of not less than five years in organisations matters.
(4) 	Upon any complaint or appeal being made to the adjudication committee, the adjudication committee may-
(a) 	confirm, set aside, vary or quash the decision in question; 
(b)	require the bureau to revise or review its decision;
(c) 	make such other order as may be appropriate in the circumstances.

(5) 	A person who is dissatisfied with the decision of the adjudication committee established under subsection (1) may appeal to the High Court.

(6) 	The minister shall publish the general rules and guidelines to be used by the adjudication committee in execution of their functions under this Act.”

Madam Chair, this is meant to ensure that appellate system, which starts from the sub-county level through the district to the bureau, can end as high up as the High Court, and this makes the issues of justice very free and available.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that that provision be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 46, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 47

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Chairperson, clause 47 -

THE CHAIRPERSON: The re-numbering will be done by the legal counsel. Let us just read the provisions. They will be re-numbered consequentially.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Yes, but if that is clause 47 –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we already finished that.

Clause 48

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 48 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49, agreed to.

Clause 50, agreed to.

Clause 51

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposed to amend clause 51 by substituting the existing provision with the following text: “An organisation which existed immediately before the commencement of this Act and had a permit to operate under the Non-Governmental Organisations Act, Cap. 113, may continue to operate but shall submit a certified copy of its certificate of incorporation and permit to the bureau for entry into a database within 12 months after the commencement of this Act.”

Madam Chairperson, we just wanted to remove the ambiguity with regards to the transition of organisations registered under a different law. This will ensure a smooth transition so that the NGOs can operate smoothly when this law is operational. They can have their permit and any other instruments renewed at ease without stampeding the bureau, so that there is a win-win situation on the side of Government and on the side of the NGOs.

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chairperson, I have no serious difficulties. It is true we want organisations that were existing at that time to continue with their work after the commencement of this Act. Therefore, we would like to re-draft this particular area to read as follows: “An organisation or a community-based organisation which existed immediately before the commencement of this Act and to which section 2(1) of the NGO Act, Cap. 113, applied before the commencement of this Act, may continue to operate after the commencement of this Act”.

This would really allow them to continue to do their work after the commencement of this Act. 

We will add (2) to read as follows: “An organisation which incorporated or registered under the Company’s Act or Trustee Incorporation Act before the commencement of this Act and to which section 31(2) applies, shall apply for registration and issuance of a permit with the bureau after the commencement of this Act.” 

They were proposing to deal with the ones, which have been existing, so that they can continue. This second one is for those which were registered under the Company’s Act but now want to be recognised as NGOs under 31(2) to apply at the commencement of this Act. I hope I am clear.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Not quite.

MR JAMES BABA: Let me read the first amendment in relation to the chairman’s proposal: Clause 51(1) would now read: “An organisation or a community based organisation which existed immediately before the commencement of this Act and to which section 2 (1) of the NGO Act, Cap 113, applied before the commencement of this Act, may continue to operate after the commencement of this Act.” I think this is very clear. It is more or less consistent with what the chairman said.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Chairperson, when the committee re-drafted this clause, their understanding was that this would protect the existing organisations; when this law comes into force, they would continue to operate. By doing so, we came up with a very strong consensus that we re-draft this to read as the committee chairperson read, in order to ensure that no organisation that exists can be unduly dealt with when this law comes into force. 

All that we said was that when an organisation is in place and this law has come into force, it should go and submit a copy of its certificate and it shall continue to operate. This is possible because it would have already got a permit. When that permit is due, it will come and seek further approval. There is, therefore, no need for you to change this. Effectively, what you are trying to re-draft is a clever way of going back to the original text, which we think is acidic.

MR JAMES BABA: My colleague, I am trying to spare them the task of bringing certified copies, among other things, for them just to continue. That is all I am saying.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Minister, you said that they will exist up to the time this Act commences. That means that after this Act commences, they will no longer exist; they would have to re-apply until after their licenses expire. Should I understand it that way?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes. Honourable members, we are also just being too wordy. Why don’t we just go back to the original text and say, “An organisation which existed before the commencement of this Act and to which section 2(1) of the NGO Act applied before the commencement of this Act, may continue to operate” and stop there. Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 51 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 51, as amended, agreed to.

MR BABA: Madam Chairperson, I had a second part to take care of those organisations, which were incorporated or registered under the Company’s Act or Trustees Incorporation Act before the commencement of this Act, to also apply for registration and issuance of a permit with the bureau after the commencement of this Act.

MR OBOTH: Maybe I did not understand but I thought we have just passed that –(Interjection)- Thank you for being very diplomatic.

Schedule 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that schedule 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 1, agreed to.

Schedule 2

MR MULONGO: Madam Chair, the committee proposes to amend schedule 2 as follows: In paragraph 1 - meetings of board of directors – substitute the existing sub clauses with the following: 

“1. Meetings of the Board 
(1) 	The chairperson shall convene meetings of the board, and the board shall meet at least once every three months at such places and such times as may be decided upon by the board.

(2) 	The chairperson, or in his or her absence the vice-chairperson, shall preside at every meeting of the board, and in the absence of both the chairperson and the vice chairperson, the members present shall elect from among their number an acting chairperson.

(3) 	The chairperson may, at any time, convene special meetings of the board.

(4) 	With the exception of a special meeting, notice of the board of directors meeting shall be given in writing to each member at least fourteen working days before the day of the meeting.” 

This only provides for clarity on the procedure of convening meetings.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that schedule 2 be amended as proposed.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, we would also like to amend paragraph 4 - decision by circulation of papers – as follows: 

(a) 	In the headnote, substitute the phrase “decision by circulation of papers” with the phrase “decision of the board”.
	
(b) 	Substitute sub paragraph (1) with the following:

“All decisions at a meeting of the board shall be by simple majority of the votes of the members present, and where there is an equality of votes, the person presiding at the meeting shall have a casting vote.”

(c) 	Substitute subparagraph (2) with the following: “(2) A decision reached by the board shall be binding on all members.”  The justification is to make it clear.

Paragraph 6 is on validity of proceeding not affected by vacancy. We propose to delete paragraph 6. It is not necessary to legislate in internal matters of the Board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the schedule be further amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think there will be no changes to the interpretation? Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: Didn’t we do clause 2? We did that already.

Clause 3

 MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 3 by-
(i) 	Substituting the word “Board” with the word “Bureau” in the first paragraph.

(ii) 	Deleting the definition of “certificate of incorporation”.

(iii) 	In the definition of “Community-Based Organisation”, deleting the word, “non-governmental”.

(iv) 	Substituting the word “Board” with “court” in the definition of “dissolution”.

(v) 	Deleting the entire definition of “each region of Uganda”.

(vi) 	Substituting the definition of the word “organisation” with the following: “‘Organisation’ means a legally constituted organisation including non-governmental organisation comprised of natural persons or autonomous collective voluntary organisations whose aim is to provide economic, social, civic, scientific and cultural development and to advocate for public interests of a certain group, natural persons or organisations with the view of promoting the common interest of their members but not for profit or commercial purposes.”

(vii) Deleting the definition of “secretary”.

MS KAMATEEKA: The chairperson is amending “organisation” with “organisation.” He says, “An organisation is a legally constituted organization…” So, I would like to suggest that the definition reads, “An organisation is a legally constituted body” rather than “organisation”. Thank you.

MR BABA: I welcome the proposal by hon. Kamateeka. The only problem I have with the chairman’s definition is that the key principles of what constitutes an NGO have been left out in his definitions. Key principles like the fact that they are mostly private voluntary groupings, they offer voluntary services and are non-profit making. 

In addition to what hon. Kamateeka has proposed, I would like to amend the definition to read as follows: “‘Organisation’ means a legally constituted non-governmental organisation under this Act, which may be a private voluntary grouping of individuals or associations established to provide voluntary services to the community or any part but not for profit or commercial purposes.” That is the new definition I would like to propose for “organisation”, to bring in those key principles of private, voluntary and non-profit.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chair, whereas I appreciate what my senior colleague is proposing, what does he mean by “private”? As we saw, some of these NGOs are actually created by governments from their countries of origin.  

What the middle ground should be is: “legally constituted organisation created by private persons or organisations…” –(Interjections)– It should be private persons or organisations but if you say they are private organisations, we may run into some problems. What is private? Governments can actually create NGOs for purposes of furthering certain activities and we do have some operating. We would rather say, “created by private persons or organisations”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think the minister wanted to capture the more familiar features of NGOs.

MR BABA: Let me read what I want us to consider again:  “‘Organisation’ means a legally constituted non-governmental organisation under this Act, which may be a private voluntary grouping of individuals or associations established to provide voluntary services to the community or any part but not for profit or commercial purposes”.  It is highly qualified.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I wonder why the chairperson of the committee is having a problem with the minister’s proposal. Whereas he is on record stating that there are some governments that do establish non-governmental organisations, when a Government establishes one, then it is still under this Act. It is still a non-governmental organisation and will be controlled and regulated under this. The minister’s proposal is quite hybrid and appealing as always. (Laughter) 

THE CHARIPERSON: Honourable members, he has captured all the elements and features of NGOs; I think let us go with the minister’s proposal. I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed by the minister. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I beg the indulgence of the House; I would like to request a recommital of clauses 16 and 17 on the director and secretary with respect to their tenure. We agreed that the director, deputy executive director and the secretary of the board would be appointed on a four-year-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you do not have to go into those details. Just say we amended from this to this and I will ask you to adopt that. 

MR BABA: Madam Speaker, we amended that the term would be four years and renewable once; my request is that we amend it to read, “…appointed for a four-year term and renewable”. The justification is that it can be renewed once or if those executives are performing well, then their contracts can be renewed again.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are now taking us back to committee stage. Report on what we have agreed. We have passed clause this, deleted this - that is what you are supposed to do. 

MR BABA: Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Non-Governmental Organisations Bill, 2015” and passed, with amendments, clauses 1,2,3 and clauses 36 to 51 and the schedule attached to the Bill. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATIONS BILL, 2015

6.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I am requesting for a recommital of clauses 16 and 17.


THE SPEAKER: Minister, you should have given notice that we are going to recommit when we were there. Please, request that the Bill be read for the third time. (Mr Muwanga Kivumbi rose_)- No! You are not the minister, I want the minister. (Laughter)

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Non-Governmental Organisations Bill, 2015” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED: “THE NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATIONS BILL, 2015”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes. (Applause)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION BILL, 2014

6.17
MR FOX ODOI-OYELEOWO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Madam Speaker, taking cognisance of the fact that we have very diligently worked the whole of this week, that we have put in several man hours under very strenuous circumstances; taking into consideration also the fact that the Pope is coming to Uganda tomorrow and that we have got to prepare for the Holy Father and join our constituents, I beg to move that you find it appropriate that we adjourn at this time. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in view of the Papal environment that is surrounding the East African region, we shall stop there for now. However, I just have two announcements to make.

There will be a meeting of the Parliamentary SACCO tomorrow here in the Conference Hall at 9.30 in the morning. I hope you will be there at that time. Members of Parliament and staff who are members of the SACCO are requested to attend in person. There is something interesting; there is a dance in the evening -(Laughter)- this is from hon. Kasamba - to welcome the Pope.

Honourable members, as I had indicated, today is the last sitting of this meeting. The House will be adjourned to the 16th December. I hope nothing happens. There was the issue of hepatitis. Let us hear from the Minister of Health.  

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

6.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and honourable members. Earlier at the beginning of this sitting, Members raised the issue of managing hepatitis B infection, especially after Parliament appropriated Shs 10 billion in the current budget. 

I will start by saying that Government realised that the hepatitis B infection was a big challenge in the country and in 2002 we began immunising children against hepatitis B infection. Therefore, Ugandans, who are 14 years old and below, are immunised against hepatitis B infection. For the last 14 years, immunisation has been ongoing and the major challenge now is among the adults who are 15 years old and above. (Interruption)

MS EKWAU: Madam Speaker, I have a baby barely two years old and I have just had to organise for immunisation of hepatitis B. How is this being done? Maybe you should come out and tell us where to go for this immunisation or advise our people on where to go. 

It is not true that you are immunising children from 14 years old below. Unless you tell us and we verify that information, Madam Speaker, the minister is not telling us what is happening.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to restate that since 2002, vaccination against hepatitis B was integrated in the routine immunisation through the pentavalent vaccines. When your child is immunised against diphtheria, hepatitis B is also integrated in that vaccine; therefore, children 14 years and below in Uganda have been receiving immunisation against hepatitis B. (Interjections) Well, now you know; I am informing you. The challenge is among the adults, Ugandans aged 15 and above. 

It is true that of recent, the prevalence of hepatitis B was found to be high, especially in parts of northern and eastern Uganda, but also some districts in western Uganda have been found to have high prevalence. Some of the data, which we have, for example, indicates that the average prevalence in the general population in the West Nile region is about 18.5 per cent; in Acholi and Lango sub regions, it is 20.7 per cent; Karamoja region it is about 23 per cent; in the eastern region it is about 7.1 per cent, although Teso has a slightly higher prevalence. So, it is a big problem. 

We would like to appreciate Parliament; the last time we considered the budget, Shs 10 billion was appropriated, although the ministry had wanted Shs 39.5 billion, to contain the epidemic in the northern and eastern regions of this country. The Ministry of Finance has so far released Shs 5 billion but we have persuaded them to frontload the remaining amount of money so that we can have all the money, which had been allocated. The ministry releases money in quarters and  this caused a delay in the procurement process. 

However, I would like to say that so far, we have procured over one million doses of the vaccines. We have also built capacity in the health facilities; they are able to make a diagnosis of hepatitis B. Once you go to our health facilities they can detect whether you have hepatitis B or not. We have been having treatment centres in Mulago Hospital and Arua Regional Referral Hospital. However, this has been a challenge because when people are diagnosed with hepatitis B in the countryside, being referred to these centres becomes a little bit expensive for the ordinary Ugandans. However, with the money appropriated by Parliament, we have been able to procure over one million doses and by the end of December, immediately after Christmas, we shall get the balance to make a total of 3.4 million doses of the vaccines.

We have also been able to procure antiviral drugs from Quality Chemicals, which has just manufactured them here. Once you are diagnosed with hepatitis B, you can be managed with antiviral drugs, specifically Tenofovir and Entecavir meant for children. Those are the two drugs, which we use. Right now, the National Drug Authority is completing the process of testing these drugs so that they can be authorised. 

The assurance I would like to give this House is that starting with the second week of December, we shall be able to roll-out testing, treatment and vaccination of Ugandans against hepatitis B in West Nile, Lango, Acholi, Karamoja and Teso. We shall start with the high prevalence districts and we should able to roll-out and cover the entire country. I was in northern Uganda and I even made this pronouncement in Gulu and Kitgum just a few days ago. We shall work with the Members of Parliament to roll-out this programme starting with northern Uganda because that is where the prevalence is high, but with more resources we should be able to extend and cover the entire country. 

The challenge –(Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, you were involved in the ministry getting additional money for hepatitis B. I remember I was fortunate to be there on that day and we literally forced the Ministry of Finance to raise the additional Shs 5 billion, if you remember. I would have expected the minister to say, “With the budgeted figure of Shs 5 billion, this is what we have done and this is what the additional Shs 5 billion has done”, which would have enhanced the capacity which was already on the ground.

However, from the way the minister is talking - Madam Speaker, I am one person who was very concerned about hepatitis B. The minister will confirm that almost every month, I remind the minister that there is no testing and treatment taking place in Dokolo, there is no testing and treatment in Lango sub region. May I know whether Lango is just being left out deliberately or there is some secret place where this exercise is taking place so that we can also help? 

I am raising this with a lot of pain because we are all going to get involved in mixing up with the crowd. None of us is safe because we will be mixing with the crowd. We are not safe in case we have not been vaccinated. You promised that I would be vaccinated in Dokolo when they come; they have not arrived in Dokolo and so I am just as vulnerable as anybody else, and all of us are vulnerable.

Madam Speaker, let the minister tell us why they have not utilised the money. They cannot tell us that in West Nile, they have tested and treated so many people, in Acholi they have tested and treated so many people and even in Teso; those were the areas that were known to be very seriously affected but you have not told us about them. 

Madam Speaker, the minister is taking Parliament for a ride. This is a serious matter; people are dying and I would like the minister to come with a more convincing report than what he is giving us now.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for coming in to respond to this matter. There are three things that the honourable minister should address, at least to help me understand what progress is being made.

First, he said they have bought one million vaccines; have you bought them for storage or what? It is now very hard to convince me that the vaccines are there but the vaccination is not taking place. The people, even some health workers where I come from, have not been vaccinated. How do you convince me that this Parliament appropriated money to your ministry and you bought vaccines and you just kept them wherever. That is not fair to us and it is not a convincing explanation.

Secondly, even the level of awareness is low. People are asking us questions about hepatitis B. You are not reaching out. You are not talking to anybody about this disease anywhere, at least within reach of my ears. Nobody is talking about hepatitis B. People call me and they expect me to tell them about hepatitis B. Madam Speaker, you know I am only a historian; I can only say 10 people died last week but how to manage or stop the disease from spreading, I have no idea. Why are you not going out to talk to the people? That is even a cheaper option. Send a few experts and do a few announcements and let people begin to understand; perhaps they can prevent themselves from getting the infection.

Lastly, this House was told that the money has been diverted for certain workshops. Let the minister tell us whether they diverted the money and we go after those who diverted the money because we really want the vaccines and the treatment.

THE SPEAKER: The minister has not even completed speaking, honourable members. You will speak later. Minister, please complete your statement and remember that the Pope is in the air. (Laughter)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, I did not go into many details because the Pope is in the air. However, if the House wants details, we can provide them a thorough and comprehensive paper.

To answer hon. Cecilia Ogwal, for example, we have screened 33,875 Ugandans for hepatitis B since May. Out of those, 9.24 per cent were positive, which is 3,130. Like I said –(Interjection)- They were positive for hepatitis B. I did say that our health facilities have capacity to test and diagnose hepatitis B using the surface antigen test. So, if you go to health centres up to health centres III in Lango and you want to be tested for hepatitis B, the health workers have the capacity to do that now.

THE SPEAKER: Which health centre level? Health centres IV or health centres III?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Health centres III are the lowest level in terms of diagnostic capacity for hepatitis B. That means that also health centres IV and general hospitals can diagnose hepatitis B using the surface antigen test although we have acquired over 300 machines from South Korea, which we are going to distribute across the health facilities. These are more advanced machines compared to the surface antigen test. However, as of today, we can diagnose hepatitis B down to the level of health centre III.

The challenge has been that if you test positive, our health facilities have not been able to give you treatment. That is why I said for the Government facilities, we have been having Mulago and Arua hospitals. I did have a meeting with the District Health Officer of Kitgum and he was telling me of the big burden where people who test positive are referred to Lacor Hospital because they also have facilities, although the majority of the people cannot afford to travel across to those health facilities.

In Arua, 615 patients have been tested for hepatitis B. I could give you more statistics but because His Holiness the Pope is around the corner, I will not go into details. (Laughter) When we appropriated the resources – (Interjections) - No, we do not have a treatment centre in Lira but the health facilities in Lira can diagnose hepatitis B; the challenge has been that the treatment centres are very far, located in Arua or Lacor hospitals.

MR OKUPA: We could benefit from your information because you only stated about four areas: Teso, Lango, West Nile and Karamoja. If you can get us the figures for Teso, I would appreciate so that when I get back home, I am able to crosscheck. In Teso, the most hit areas are Ngora and Serere districts. So, if you could get us the figures and the centres there, we would be grateful. We have just been burying people who died as a result of hepatitis B.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I can share the information electronically because we have the data. However, if I can repeat what I said, we are going to start with West Nile, Lango, Acholi, Karamoja and Teso areas, the high prevalence districts, in a phased manner. Eventually, we will cover the entire region and then go to the rest of the country in the second week of December this year.

As I speak now, the vaccines are being distributed and NDA is finalising the testing of the drugs because they were manufactured here and –

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude because the Pope is in the air. (Laughter) 

DR BARYOMUNSI: In the second week of December, we shall be ready. I will circulate the information giving the specific details on the districts and the burden of the disease in the various districts and also the few high prevalence districts where we shall start.

The major challenge that we have, Madam Speaker, is that the Shs 10 billion that Parliament provided is not enough. When you look at northern Uganda, the population at risk is about three million people. With Shs 10 billion we are procuring 3.4 million doses and for an adult to be fully immunised, you need three doses. The first dose is at zero time, the second after a month and the third dose six months later. This now means that the 3.4 million doses will cover 1.7 million people for two doses as we wait for additional resources to cover the third dose and yet the population at risk is three million in northern Uganda alone.

My appeal is that we need to increase the budget for hepatitis B so that we are able to cover the entire population and also spread to the other parts of the country. However, we hope that with these resources we shall do much – 

MR OKUPA: As you do that, I think education is very important. If only you can handle it like you handled AIDS and other diseases on radio – radio can reach everywhere - to help people because the spread of hepatitis B could be out of ignorance of some people on how the disease is spread. If you handled that with a message to the people, it would also help as you wait for the vaccination to start. I do not see this happening because radios are busy with people talking only politics.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I thank you very much. The problem was that the resources were inadequate. When Parliament gave us the money, the Ministry of Health sat down with the health committee here and agreed on the activities and we scaled down to procurement of laboratory reagents, vaccines and drugs. However, there has been some capacity building among the health workers who are supposed to be doing the health education. We take the advice seriously and this has to be integrated. We shall also provide you with information as Members of Parliament so that as we go for campaigns, we see how to integrate that message as we move in our constituencies.

I would like to say that no money for hepatitis B has been used for workshops by the Ministry of Health. I would like that on the record. The money that was given to us has been used to procure vaccines, laboratory reagents and drugs but it is not enough to cover the population that we would want to target.  

There had also been a claim that we were using the money to procure vehicles and other logistics, which is not true. It will not happen as long as I am the Minister for Health. We have adequate vehicles in the ministry and so all the money that was given to us shall be used for drugs, vaccines and laboratory reagents to help our people who are affected by this disease. The money will not be wastefully expended by Government. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much, honourable members. The House is adjourned to 15th December and I wish you luck in the meantime with whatever you are doing. 

(The House rose at 6.39 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 15 December 2015 at 2.00 p.m.) 

