

Wednesday, 29 November 2017

Parliament met at 2.04 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Today is different from yesterday. Yesterday, I had this side full and that side not very full; today, I have this side full and that side not very full. (Laughter) Are we changing things? Are you taking turns? You people have almost made me wonder where today is Valentine’s Day. I was wondering why I had not bought some flowers for some people then I remembered it was not Valentine’s Day.

I welcome you to this sitting. Honourable members, by now you already know that death has occurred of the honourable Lady Justice Leticia Kikonyogo. We will be doing the formalities tomorrow. They had requested for confirmation that we will be paying tribute to her tomorrow. Therefore, we will do all the proceedings for the tribute tomorrow. 

This is the tentative programme - As you can see, it is still hand written because the meeting is still going on: Tomorrow, Thursday 30 November 2017 at 9.00 a.m. there will be a requiem mass at Rubaga Cathedral. At 12.00 p.m., the casket will be brought to Parliament and I will receive it here. At exactly midday, the body will be entering the Parliamentary buildings. The body will lay in state from 12.00 to 2.00 p.m. when it will be moved to the Chambers so that Members can pay their respects and debate the tribute motion that will be moved by the Prime Minister.

On Friday, 1 December at 10.00 a.m., there will be a requiem mass at Lweza Catholic Church and on that same day, at 5.00 p.m., there will be mass and a vigil at the late’s residence in Kitende on Entebbe Road.

On Saturday, 2 December 2017, burial will take place at Namulamba in Mityana. Mass begins at 10 o’clock. This is hand written so it is difficult to read but I am sure that I will be able to make formal communication by the close of business today.

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have pupils and teachers of Masulita Child Development Centre. They are represented here by hon. Denis Galabuzi Ssozi and hon. Rosemary Nansubuga Seninde. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

I had Members who had made requests to make some statements. 

2.09
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance that is affecting Adjumani. It concerns the rate at which boda boda cyclists are murdered by strangers and also the rate at which police officers are killing innocent civilians while managing issues.

Mr Speaker, on Monday, a cyclist was knifed several times by a stranger and yesterday, the police shot a cyclist, a student who had just sat for senior six exams and another student from Comboni Secondary School. We are concerned about the shootings by police because the situation on the ground did not warrant this. 

Therefore, the situation in Adjumani is not normal. My prayers are that Government should investigate the circumstances under which the police shot people in Adjumani - the motorcyclist and two other people in 2013 and 2016. Secondly, I pray that immediate disciplinary action be taken against those who killed our innocent people. Lastly, burial and other expenses should be catered for by Government.

The people of Adjumani are mourning their relatives and the entire district is demanding that Government does a thorough investigation and rebuilds the relationship between law enforcers and the community. Thank you very much.

2.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. At an appropriate time when the Minister of Internal Affairs is given an opportunity, he will come and give a statement. Meanwhile, we are going to ask the minister to get in touch with the honourable member and immediately start handling those issues, including investigating the circumstances under which the cyclist was killed and other related issues. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable, on what matter do you rise? 

MR SSEMUJJU: The microphone is new, so I am learning how to use it. Mr Speaker, I rise on a procedural issue. 

On 27 September 2017, I left my home and came to Parliament to represent the people of Kira Municipality but also to perform other duties assigned to me by my party as the Chief Opposition Whip. On that day, colleagues were suspended for what had happened a day earlier. I was not one of those that were suspended but I was grabbed from this Chamber, dragged and thrown on the ground in the room just behind you, Mr Speaker. I was strangled and driven at a very reckless speed in a police van and detained at Naggalama Police Station. 

Because I was in a terrible condition, I had to plead with my captors to allow me to receive medical attention. I was subsequently taken to Naggalama St Francis Hospital where I received treatment because I had sustained tissue injuries. 

As I raise this procedural issue, on 23 October I was one of the consumers of the letter that was in the mainstream media and on social media, which the Speaker of Parliament later confirmed that she had written. In that letter, she demanded to know who the people that had invaded Parliament were. In fact, the letter had the word “invasion”.

The procedural issue I am raising to you, Mr Speaker, is the issue of my security in this Chamber and in Parliament. We have a police directorate of more than 300 personnel with guns all over the gates of Parliament. We also have a Department of Sergeant-at-Arms. The procedural issue I am raising is whether all those organs of Parliament were overrun by people the Speaker does not know and whether it is now secure to sit in this Chamber to deliberate. 

Does this Chamber have the atmosphere where a Member of Parliament can freely sit and deliberate on national issues? Am I not going to be grabbed and injured again? That is the procedural issue I am raising - the issue of my personal security but also the atmosphere under which I am going to deliberate. I have been coming to Parliament here but I leave early. Each time I see military men, I get the feeling that probably, they have come to grab me again. I know some of them are Members of Parliament here but there are also others I do not know. This is because each day I see all sets of colours. 

I was not suspended but grabbed from the Chamber, dragged, strangled and by the grace of God, I am still living. I nearly died that day. In fact, I would like to commend one of the police officers from Parliament because while they were strangling me, she was the one pleading with them. She said, “Please do not strangle”. I thought all of them were bad but I was extremely happy to see that someone was pleading for my life. Even the Commander of Kampala Metropolitan Police who I found outside told them, “Pull by the trouser but do not strangle.” 

All these are witnesses but they may never come to Parliament to say what they saw that day. Up to now, I still ask myself - I was not suspended, why was I treated the way I was treated? Where do I get the guts to sit here and begin deliberating if the Speaker is asking the President to explain why people, who came from the President’s Office, raided Parliament? 

Mr Speaker, that is the procedural issue I am raising.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have had the opportunity to look at the letter that hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju has referred to. It was written by the Speaker to the President of the Republic of Uganda and you have a copy of it. The letter casts doubt - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you see a copy with me? 

MR KASIBANTE: It was copied to the Deputy Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you see a copy with me? You are saying you saw it but I have not seen that letter, not even a copy of it. 

MR KASIBANTE: Mr Speaker, according to the letter, you have a copy. The Deputy Speaker is copied - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am the one talking. I have not seen that letter so speak about what you know not what is within my knowledge. 

MR KASIBANTE: Let me withdraw that statement, Mr Speaker. The point I would like to make is that it casts doubt on the conduct of the Sergeant-at-Arms when the Speaker says that she did not have any prior knowledge of the invaders. It is only the Sergeant-at-Arms here with the powers to allow entrance and exit to Parliament. By saying that she had no prior knowledge of the invasion, the Speaker casts doubt on the conduct of the Sergeant-at-Arms. 

Going by that letter, the Sergeant-at-Arms is a suspect in what went wrong in the Parliamentary Chambers. Are we therefore proceeding well when we still maintain the Sergeant-at-Arms, who is a suspect as per the letter, as the person responsible for entrance and exit in and out of where we are supposed to sit? Are we proceeding correctly, Mr Speaker?

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 27 September 2017, some of us that were inside lost our property. Hon. Odur, for example, lost Shs 10 million. I also lost my new iPad, which was given to me by the Parliament of Uganda to help me carry out my parliamentary work. 

On that same day, while I was in the basement with around seven Members of Parliament walking up to the House, we met a group of about 10 people and they started beating us randomly. We do not know why they were beating us and we did not know where they had come from because all of them were wearing civilian clothes. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, as I speak, we are extremely scared. To my surprise, I was even scared of entering this Chamber. This is my first day to enter here and I see a lot of changes in the House. I do not know how our security is going to be like. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for some of us to continue executing parliamentary work yet we do not have our iPads? Thank you.

MR MWIJUKYE: Mr Speaker, I am terrified - 

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am about to ask which rules we are citing to say “further procedure”. That might not be in the rules but I am trying to be as accommodative as possible. 

MR MWIJUKYE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I am terrified and still very scared. I was not one of those who were pushed out but I saw my colleagues being beaten down on the floor by people who came from behind the Speaker’s seat. I do not know when they are coming back – maybe today or tomorrow - but from the letter that has been referred to, the Speaker also seemed worried that unknown people could enter our Chamber and beat Members of Parliament. She was supposed to protect Members of Parliament but she was not aware of what was happening. 

I am not very sure if the Speaker is in charge of us, Members, so that I can proceed knowing that I am protected. Are we proceeding well when the Speaker says, “I am not in charge of the security of Members of Parliament”? Thank you so much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, let me guide on the procedural points that have been raised so far - It looks like all the people raising the procedural issues are in red; you are not in red so I will not allow you –(Laughter)

Honourable members, it would not be reasonable for me to say that the events of the 27 September this year are not regrettable. I would not be acting in a sincere way. These events were not proper and what happened is highly regrettable. This is the first comment I am making about these things since they happened. I was not here but I saw bits of what happened. Some of you saw the full text of what happened so I am sure you are better off in understanding what actually happened. 

First of all, it was unnecessary and secondly, it is highly regrettable. How I pray that this House will never witness anything like that ever again. (Applause) How I pray that it should never happen again. There are prayers I have uttered to God and I pray to God that this is one of the prayers that should be answered because what happened was regrettable.

In Parliament, we have the Department of Sergeant-at-Arms, responsible for the general security of Parliament. The work of the Sergeant-at-Arms in the Commonwealth, where we borrowed this from, is what we see the Sergeant-at-Arms doing - maintaining the dignity of the House and related matters, and making sure that things happen in the way the rules, procedures and practice of this House permits.

However, in the recent past, we have also created a directorate of the police in this Parliament headed by a commandant, whose name and face you already know because you have all interacted with him. Because of the changed nature - the security definitions of things have changed - there are threats that could not be within the control of the Sergeant-at-Arms. There could be things like terrorist threats and other things like these. Therefore, in the wisdom of Parliament, it decided to invite these people to have a presence of the police in the precincts of Parliament, and it is a recognised directorate of the police inside Parliament. 

Those are the ones I know and they are the ones, I suppose, who are supposed to be in charge of the security of the precincts of Parliament wherever it may be sitting, and the protection of its Members and the institution and its facilities. Anything beyond that, I would not know. I was not here so I do not know. 

However, the security of Members in this House is guaranteed and if anything happens outside that, it would be an exception to the rule that we have a guarantee of security of the Members here. I was not here, so I cannot talk in detail about the nature of this and what actually happened.

Reference has been made to a letter from the Speaker. I have not seen that letter. I have seen it on social media. I have also seen a response purportedly from the President also on social media. I cannot guarantee the authenticity of either of them because none of the purported authors of these letters has confirmed to me that they have written - not the Speaker or the President. Therefore, I cannot say that the President or the Speaker has written because I have not received a formal copy from the Speaker about this. It would, therefore, be for the Speaker to confirm that she wrote and whether she has received a response to it from the President; that would be for her because it is not within my knowledge.

On the lost iPad, I think the issue would not be so much of a procedural one, but lay a claim. If circumstances were such that things could be lost, the people responsible for the losses should be approached and they should make good the losses that have occurred to Members. However, as I said, I was not here so I will leave it to you to follow the procedures to see that whatever was lost, if indeed it was lost, should be given back to you.

Honourable members, let me now make a general comment on this. The first line of defence for the security of Members is us. We are the first line of defence. If we do anything that weakens this line, then we invite things that are unnecessary. I said this the day I sat here before I travelled - I think it was on Thursday, 21 September and these things happened on 27 September, a week later. 

I was in this chair on 21 September and you remember what happened. There was chorus of the national anthem, which was sung. Some people were sitting and yet when you sing the national anthem, I should not have been sitting but I should have stood. However, the circumstances under which it was being sung were not ceremonial so I could not stand. We all remember these things.

I am just appealing to you; whatever happened was first of all unnecessary and secondly, very regrettable. However, I am sure that at an appropriate time - Concerns have been raised and letters apparently written and exchanged and I am sure there have been meetings. The Speaker called me today in the morning. Hon. Ssemujju had approached me yesterday saying that they needed to make a statement and that they had agreed to it. I said, “No, I need to talk to the Speaker and then see what this statement is about and what the extent of the agreement was.” I spoke to the Speaker this morning and we discussed. 

I have briefed hon. Ssemujju about what we discussed with the Speaker. If there is a formal issue that should be raised to address this issue, the Speaker requests that it should be in her presence because she is the one who was here and she is the one who has been involved with all the discussions to try and find a way forward on what has happened in this House.

Therefore, honourable members who have not been in Parliament since 27 September, it is my pleasure to welcome you back. Welcome back. Let us do business of the House. For outstanding issues, we have the capacity to resolve them internally and we will do it in all fairness. We will make sure that those issues are resolved properly.

2.31
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join you in welcoming my colleagues from the recess. 

Like you have said, Mr Speaker, I intend to make a statement at the most appropriate time and at the earliest possible time, under rule 25(2)(k) and rule 52 of our Rules of Procedure, regarding what happened before 27 September, on 27 September and thereafter. 

At the earliest possible time, I request that I be put on the Order Paper so that I can substantively make this statement for the proper running of this House and for the progress of democracy. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Leader of the Opposition, as I said, I had a discussion with the Speaker this morning and she said that that statement will be made in her presence. This is because she was here and she knows what happened. Therefore, we will find time, as soon as it is proper, to have this statement made and then see how to proceed.

Honourable members, we have very little business today. Can we finish with it please?

2.33
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for the way you have handled this meeting this afternoon and the lengths you have taken to calm down our hearts. I must commend you, and I think my colleagues in Parliament must appreciate you for the way you have stood up to these matters. (Applause) You have acknowledged mistakes and said that we all have to move forward as a country.

Mr Speaker, I take your guidance. It is just that it is very perturbing that I was never named but I found myself being bundled up, brutalised and released on police bond at midnight from the police cells at Kireka. The difficulty it brings is that ordinarily, once a Member of Parliament enters the parliamentary precincts they enjoy immunity but imagine being abducted from the Chamber of Parliament for no reason. You are not named and not even a subject of the Sergeant-at-Arms but you are only released on police bond. Can you imagine being abducted from Parliament and brutalised? I lost my shoes and everything.

Mr Speaker, there is a lot of orientation we will have to do for this Parliament to restore normalcy. In the past, even if you were being hunted outside Parliament, once you entered the precincts here you were safe until you exit. However, we are now coming to a Parliament where the reverse is true; you are plucked and abducted from the Chamber. Where is the safety of Members? Under the Commonwealth parliamentary system, immunity is what makes Parliament. The moment you whittle it away, you leave Members of Parliament naked. We, therefore, feel that there is need for soul searching. We take your guidance but more must be done to exorcise this institution. 

I saw some people who purportedly came here to pray and exorcise ghosts from this Parliament. I do not know which ghosts those are. I think those who invaded Parliament were the ghosts that needed to be exorcised. To that extent, more engagements will have to be done so that we resume and take up our rightful roles as Members of Parliament and have the parliamentary system restored. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, you see, there were very many additional points of procedure that I forgot the original procedural point that was raised by the honourable. (Laughter) 

On the point raised by hon. Ssemujju and re-echoed by the Member for Lwemiyaga County regarding what happened to a Member who was not a subject of suspension from the precincts of Parliament, we know how suspensions happen and how they are enforced. If a Member has not been suspended, it would be a grave mistake to do anything to get that Member out of this Chamber because that Member has not been a subject of any ruling of the House about that Member getting out of this House. That would be highly irregular. 

Therefore, the case of hon. Ssemujju, who was not on the list of the suspended Members, and many others who possibly were not on the list of the suspended Members but got affected, is highly regrettable. It is not procedurally correct to do that. They should not have been removed from this Chamber because they were not part of the Members that were suspended. They were not named and so they were not suspended and had the right to stay in the House for as long as business of the House was still on. It was not regular. It was completely out of order.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have given notice of the statement I intend to make but there is one fundamental issue that I need attended to urgently, because I do not know when the Speaker will be around to chair the session where we shall substantially attend to the statement. 

The issue I would like to raise is about the localisation of Members of Parliament. What do I mean by localising Members of Parliament? When we are here, Mr Speaker, I believe we are national leaders and therefore, I have every right to speak about matters that happen in Kaabong, Nwoya, Kabale, Bududa, Kampala and elsewhere in this country. Besides the fact that I am a Member of Parliament, as a Ugandan I am equally supposed to do so. 

When Parliament gave us the mandate to go and consult our people about the constitutional amendments that were before Parliament, we were shocked that the Director of Operations of the Uganda Police Force, Asuman Mugenyi, issued a circular that confined Members of Parliament to their territories in matters concerning the nation. As we sit here as a Member of Parliament, I am no longer sure whether I can easily go to Amuru with my MP from Amuru or if Bahati invited me to a function in his constituency that I can go there peacefully. 

When we went out for many of the meetings that we held, we were welcomed by teargas and told there was a circular from the director of operations who had written to all district police commanders and regional police commanders stopping MPs from being seen anywhere in a pair or more than a pair. You cannot believe it but even in my own district, they wanted to stop me from holding a rally with my fellow MPs in a constituency where I wanted to go because each MP was supposed to consult in their constituency. I failed to understand which one was my constituency. 

I want this matter resolved before we again go into running battles with the police. We want to know whether it is within the rules, the law or within the governance structures of this nation that if I am Member of Parliament of Kasese, I should confine myself to issues of Kasese and if I am invited for a fundraising in Moyo, then I will be crossing the territorial boundaries of my membership. Actually, tomorrow I am supposed to go to Arua and I would like to be guided as to whether I am again going to meet teargas as a national leader because that is not my constituency. That is a matter I thought should be addressed before we even wait for the Speaker to come. 

Hon. Ssekikubo was tear-gassed when he went to hon. Nambeshe’s constituency. Hon. Centenary addressed his rallies with mambas. As Parliament, how are we going to operate in the near future before we even make these statements? Are we going to be confined to our villages so that even when we go into the budgeting cycle I only concentrate on a budget that is about Kasese and I do not talk about other departments because I am not a Member of Parliament for those departments?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, actually somebody told me of an extreme case where a Member of this House decided to hold his consultation at the police station -(Laughter)- to avoid any situation. He decided to call his meeting at the police station to save fuel and other things in case they wanted to come and -(Laughter)- I was in Isingiro District on Saturday and probably they feared my own part of security and that is why they did not attack me.

Honourable members, we cannot resolve some of these things here. The concern has been raised. We will make contact with the responsible people and you will get immediate feedback on those discussions. 

I think let us pause it here, honourable members. We will have time to deal with these issues properly. I will only have one Member now. I do not know the full extent of this circular you are talking about. Was it copied to Members of Parliament? Was it copied to you?

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I wrote to the Inspector General of Police (IGP) in my capacity as the Chief Opposition Whip and notified him that we shall have joint regional consultative meetings before we go to our own constituencies. Although, I did not copy the letter to the Director Police Operations, Mr Asuman Mugenyi, he is the one who responded. I have that letter in my office informing me that yes, we could go but we were restricted to our own constituencies.

However, even within my own constituency, when I went to carry out consultations in Bweyogerere, police stopped me and escorted me to a nearby village. They said I was very close to Jinja Road. I told them that I did not ask Jinja Road to pass through my constituency but they said “No, you need to go far”, and they came with an entire mamba fleet.

Mr Speaker, the matter the Leader of the Opposition is raising is very serious. I saw police kick hon. Cecilia Ogwal - just imagine at her age and with her poor health. I know that I am fairly young and they can strangle me and if they do not kill me, I can recover quickly. However, I saw how they kicked hon. Cecilia Ogwal and I was alarmed.

Mr Speaker, these things are very painful. The beating did not stop here. It appears that the beating was for specific people. When these beatings happen – I remember when we were mourning hon. Nebanda, hon. Kyanjo said, “When people begin misbehaving, they can deal with their own children the same way.” I thought we were the only victims but I also saw them beat NRM Members.

MR MUGUME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add that on that day, some of our colleagues were brutalised. These are hon. Francis Zaake, Member for Mityana Municipality, and hon. Betty Nambooze. In fact, hon. Zaake is still in a hospital in the US and he is not doing well. Although hon. Betty Nambooze returned from India, her back is not in good shape. 

Mr Speaker, on the issue of consultations in our constituencies -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you raising a procedural matter or are you now debating something which is not on the Floor?

MR MUGUME:  I have information 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: From whom? If you are raising a procedural point, I will allow you. However, we are not going to start debating something that is not here.

MR MUGUME: It is a procedural matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR MUGUME: Mr Speaker, we are proceeding but we are not aware of the fate of our colleagues who are not around. Further, I would like to inform this House that during the consultations, some of our colleagues from the other side, headed by the Prime Minister and ministers from Kigezi region, came to my constituency. We were attacked as Members of Parliament who are not supporting the ideology they support. 

Before that, we had a consultation in Rukungiri. However, one of our children, Mr Kakuru Nasasira, was killed from there and people were beaten. Today, we have more than 10 people who cannot stand; they are still hospitalised in Nyakibale and Kisiizi hospitals. Therefore, Mr Speaker, when we inform you of what happened and what is still happening in the field, I think we need a session as the Parliament of Uganda to debate these issues. We kindly request you, Mr Speaker, to put this issue of brutalisation in this country on the Order Paper so that we can discuss and agree on the way forward.

Even right now, I have seen the same men in suits entering Parliament. You can actually think they are Members of Parliament. They are here and I have seen about 10 of them. They are within the premises of Parliament. Because of the location of my office, I always see some of these security people. They are within the corridors of Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, since you guided that you are waiting to discuss this issue with the Speaker, as members of the Opposition we request that you give us a break until the Speaker comes and we discuss and agree so that we come back and debate normally. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you did not ask the Speaker when you left; how can I now grant that you leave? I cannot ask you to leave because no one asked you to leave. Those that were asked to leave were given three days after which they would return, and that suspension has elapsed. There is nothing like asking the Speaker to give you permission to leave. It will be not proper.

Honourable members, I have already stated that we are safe and that is why we are sitting here like this. On those issues, I have just stated that this matter is going to be discussed properly. I have also stated that initial meetings have already been held and I have not been part of those meetings. That is why I cannot report comprehensively on this issue. 

The Leader of the Opposition and several of your leaders have met with the Speaker on these issues and they have had discussions, which the Speaker told me about this morning. She told me that you have had meetings and there are going to be subsequent meetings to agree on how we handle business. This is going to happen.

Honourable members, as I said, this is something that we will solve here as parliamentarians. Let me have the Member for Buvuma.

2.52
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, Members have demanded for full immunity when we are here and you have also told us that at a certain time, a comprehensive report will be brought here after full investigations. I would like to know at what point in the House a Member of Parliament receives full immunity. 

Mr Speaker, according to Article 21 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, we are all equal before the law and we enjoy freedom of rights no matter the party, economic status and religion. As Members, we have the opportunity to speak here but on that day, we had policemen inside here and they were also beaten. They are now suffering and they have not received any treatment. Mr Speaker, I hope one policeman - I am saying this as a mother –(Interruption)-

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It should be noted that Members of Parliament were beaten in this august House and no one dared to beat the police officers or those security personnel who call themselves commandos. 

With all that was taking place, Members of Parliament were only trying to defend themselves. No Member of Parliament beat up a police officer. Therefore, is the honourable member in order to mislead the august House by saying that Members of Parliament beat up police officers yet none of the police officers were beaten?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, sometimes when things happen so badly, we need to look inward and do our own internal assessment. I watched clips of a Member of Parliament throwing chairs and one of them hit a Chamber attendant in the eye. Therefore, if we are going to go to the root of these things, let us do a self-assessment about what happened and come to a reasonable conclusion on how we can serve this country better. 

Let us accept that errors were committed, Members. I was not here but I watched the video and I saw a Member of Parliament throwing chairs. Therefore, let us leave this matter here. We will wait and deal with these issues at an appropriate time. Can we now go to the Order Paper, please?

2.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member had requested to say something. 

MR BAHATI: Mine is a separate one, hon. Karuhanga.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I have some order! I have allowed the honourable minister to say what he had requested to say. Please, hon. Bahati, proceed.

MR BAHATI: Mine was a separate issue, Mr Speaker. I wanted to take this opportunity to congratulate the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) for electing one of us, hon. Patrick Amuriat. We worked with him. That is all I can say. Thank you. (Laughter)

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 14 (10) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

2.58
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I stand here to designate the following NRM Members of Parliament to standing committees:
    1. Hon. Herbert Kabafunzaki, Member of Parliament for Rukiga County, to the Committee on HIV/AIDS;
    2. Hon. Prossy Akampulira, Woman Representative for Rubanda District, to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline;
    3. Hon. Rose Akello, Woman Representative for Kaabong, to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline;
    4. Hon. Suubi Asinde, Woman Representative for Iganga, to the Committee on Government Assurances;  
    5. Hon. Caroline Kamusiime, Woman Representative for Rukiga, to the Committee on Government Assurances;
    6. Hon. Grace Namukhula, Woman Representative for Namisindwa, to the Committee on Local Government Accounts;

    7. Hon. Jane Avur, Woman Representative for Pakwach, to the Committee on Budget;
    8. Hon. Taban Amin, Kibanda County North, to the Committee on Local Government Accounts; and 
    9. Hon. Robert Kasule, Nansana Municipality, to the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises.

Mr Speaker, the following Members of Parliament are designated to sectoral committees:

    1. Hon. Herbert Kabafunzaki -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I deal with the ones of the standing committees? Honourable members, I put the question for those Members to be part of the committees they have just been designated to.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The following Members are designated to serve on different sectoral committees:

    1. Hon. Herbert Kabafunzaki, Rukiga County, to the Committee on Information Communication and Technology;
    2. Hon. Prossy Akampulira, Woman Representative for Rubanda, to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs;
    3. Hon. Taban Amin, Kibanda County North, to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs;
    4. Hon. Rose Akello, Woman Representative for Kaabong, to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs;
    5. Hon. Suubi Asinde, Woman Representative for Iganga, to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs;
    6. Hon. Caroline Kamusiime, Woman Representative for Rukiga, to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs;
    7. Hon. Grace Namukhula, Woman Representative for Namisindwa, to the Committee on East African Community Affairs;
    8. Hon. Jane Avur, Woman Representative for Pakwach, to the Committee on Foreign Affairs; and 
    9. Hon. Robert Kasule, Nansana Municipality, to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for the approval of those Members. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I sit on the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. When one of the two Bills to amend the Constitution was tabled, the Government Chief Whip threatened to change the composition of that committee. The mover of the Bill, hon. Magyezi, said he would like the composition of that committee changed. 

All this can be legal and legitimate but the country has had a problem, which President Museveni keeps talking about - he talks about Milton Obote using a calculator to do kupanga politics. Therefore, the procedural issue I am raising is whether you can have more than 50 Members sent to one committee with the aim of generating a report that supports the removal and change of that Article as the Government Chief Whip and hon. Magyezi had threatened. 

The Speaker made an undertaking that we were not going to change that committee, whether by this proposal, for which a decision has been taken. We do not even remember that the Speaker of Parliament said we were not going to change the composition of this committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there were by-elections in the new districts and there was a court case in regard to Nansana Municipality - the one which hon. Robert Kasule has come to represent. Those were by-elections and all those Members have a right to belong to committees. Hon. Kabafunzaki was a minister and so he was not on any committee, but he is still a Member of Parliament who deserves to be on both a standing and sectoral committee.

Secondly, honourable members, these standing committees run for two and a half years. The first session of this standing committee has not ended and the duration of the sectoral committee is annual and the year has not yet ended. We shall change the committees at the right time when the need arises and when the rules say so. Therefore, there is nothing irregular about what has happened here. Thank you. Do you have a designation?

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I painfully take the guidance, especially under the circumstances in which it is being done. However, I also have hon. Robina Ssentongo, representing Kyotera, who I would like to assign to the Committee on Health and Committee on Local Government Accounts.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE 16 DAYS OF ACTIVISM CAMPAIGN AGAINST GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE 2017

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (GENDER AND CULTURE) (Ms Peace Mutuuzo): Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I take this opportunity to brief this august House about the 16 Days of Activism Campaign against Gender-Based Violence. This is an international campaign to challenge violence against women and girls. The campaign runs from 25th November, which is the International Day of Elimination of Violence against Women, to 10th December, which is the International Human Rights Day. 

The 16 days also highlight other significant international days such as -
    1. The International Human Rights Defenders Day, which falls on 29th November;
    2. The World Aids Day on 1st of December; and 
    3. The International Volunteer Day for Economic and Social Development on 5th December.

The 16 days of activism originated from the first Women's Global Leadership Institute in 1991. Since that time, the United Nations (UN) has adopted numerous declarations and resolutions on ending violence against women and girls. These include the UN Declaration on Eliminating Violence against Women of 1993; the declaration of 25th November as the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women in 1999 by the UN General Assembly; and the UN Secretary General's second launch of UNiTE to End Violence against Women Campaign in 2008. 

These efforts provided an opportunity to take advantage of the 16 days to raise public awareness and increase political will and resources towards preventing and ending all forms of violence against women and girls in all parts of the world. Every year, Uganda joins the rest of the world to use the 16 days to galvanise action to address gender-based violence in all its forms. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, which is the national machinery for promotion of gender equality and women’s empowerment, coordinates the events during this time. 

The campaign has been used as an advocacy and mobilisation strategy with the following objectives:

    i) Raising awareness about gender-based violence as a human rights issue at the family, community, national, regional and international levels; 
    ii)  Strengthening family and local initiatives to end gender-based violence; 
    iii)  Establishing a clear link between national and international initiatives to end gender-based violence; 
    iv) Providing a forum in which stakeholders can develop and share new and effective strategies; 
    v) Demonstrating the solidarity of women and men around the world in addressing issues of gender-based violence; and
    vi) Lobbying governments to implement commitments made to eliminate gender-based violence.

Every year, the campaign is undertaken under a selected global theme, which can be adapted to the individual country depending on the circumstances. This year, the global theme is, “From Peace in the Home to Peace in the World: Make Education Safe for All.” This very theme was used last year in Uganda. Therefore, in Uganda we have adopted from that theme to say, “From Peace in the Home to Peace in the Nation: Male engagement for the safety of women and girls.” The theme was selected basing on the approach Government has adopted to focus on the participation of men and boys for social norm change.

Gender-based violence is a direct manifestation of gender inequality and human rights violation and serves to perpetuate poverty and impede development processes. It raises the need for interventions to address the underlying causes of gender-based violence which emanate from unequal power relations between men and women.

While there is evidence that men and boys also experience some forms of gender-based violence both in and outside the family set up, women and girls are disproportionately affected and face grave consequences of the violations. Violence has negative health and physical consequences on both men and women. It also impacts negatively on the social-economic development of the country. The cost of gender-based violence on the individual, families, community and nation at large is very high. Male engagement for the safety of women and girls means, promoting the role of men and boys in confronting and transforming the social norms and negative cultural practices that perpetuate violation of women and girls' rights. 

The Government of Uganda has registered significant progress towards prevention and response to gender-based violence. There are legal and policy frameworks and programmes in place.  As a result, there is evidence that there is reduction in gender-based violence cases; for instance, physical violence among women aged 15 to 49 years decreased from 34 per cent in 2006 to 27 per cent in 2011. There has also been increased reporting and prosecution of these cases. 

Therefore, the focus of this year's campaign is to mobilise the communities, particularly men and boys, to directly engage in the processes to prevent and/or respond to gender-based violence. Men have power in society as household heads, community, traditional, cultural and religious leaders and they hold majority of decision making positions in the public and private sector and in politics. This necessitates engaging them for the safety of women and girls. 

When men in positions of leadership speak on issues of gender, they are listened to because of the influence they hold in their constituencies. Besides this, men control resources at different levels – household, community and national level. We are, therefore, targeting male children and youth because it is critical to build a future generation that will appreciate harmonious relationships and consequently, promote gender equality, including the safety of women and girls.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, during this period, several activities will be undertaken by different state and non-state actors across the country. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development launched this campaign on Friday, 24 November 2017, which was hosted by Mityana District Local Government at Sekanyonyi Church of Uganda Primary School.

Some of the major events include:

i) 	A high level policy dialogue, which will be held on 4 December 2017 at Hotel Africana. It is organised by UN Women in partnership with its implementing partners such as the Uganda Police Force, Centre for Domestic Violence Prevention (CEDOVIP), Uganda Law Society and FIDA Uganda.

ii) 	Uganda Police Force started their activities on Monday, 27 November 2017 with a gender-based violence case management and exhibition at the Railway Grounds. On Wednesday, 28 November 2017, the police convened a dialogue with boda boda riders on prevention of violence against women and girls, and they will convene a similar event on 5 December 2017 in Nansana.

In addition to the above, there are several events organised by civil society organisations upcountry; for example, Transcultural Psychosocial Organisation in collaboration with UNHCR and War Child Canada are conducting trainings on elimination of gender-based violence as well as media campaigns in Adjumani District. Uganda Law Society is also organising mobile legal clinics in Gulu, Kitgum and Pader Districts, among others.

Religious institutions under their umbrella organisation, the Inter-Religious Council of Uganda, are passing on messages about ending gender-based violence against women and girls, particularly domestic violence in places of worship. Indeed, the Chairperson of the Inter-Religious Council of Uganda, the Mufti of the Uganda Muslim Supreme Council, delivered a strong commitment statement at the launch of the campaign last week. The media, including print, electronic and social media, is heavily engaged in this campaign.

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, I would like to call upon honourable Members of Parliament to show solidarity in ending all forms of gender-based violence not only during this period of the 16 days of activism against gender-based violence, but all the time.

Let us use our political microphone and media houses to discourage early marriages, rape in all its forms, female genital mutilation and cutting, beating and battering of wives and girls, psychological torture, and all other exploitations and discriminations based on gender. As responsible mothers and fathers, let us embrace our role to socialise our daughters and sons without violating their rights and also teach them to respect the rights of others. 

Mr Speaker, the budget process is ongoing and I would like to appeal to you, honourable members, for increased budget allocation to our sector, especially to the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP), Youth Livelihood Fund and Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment to older persons. This will enable us to reach out to many more beneficiaries, especially through the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment. It will enable us reach out to all the districts. Once we have sufficient resources in our coffers, we shall reach more groups of women and girls and we shall also be able to reach more youths.   

We need to commit our own resources to programmes to eliminate gender-based violence and promote women's rights. The funds will help us to intensify campaigns against gender-based violence through community sensitisation. It is only when we, Ugandans, are fully involved that the Ugandan society will be transformed. I thank you. For God and my country. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable minister, I was waiting to hear how you were going to involve the Members of Parliament in some serious activities, like we have always had. This time you have been very quiet on the issue of involving Members of Parliament in some activities, but it is okay. 

Honourable members, that is a ministerial statement and it attracts debate. This activity has always been commemorated every year during this period. The 16 days of activism have always been commemorated in Uganda and Parliament has always been involved. This is a statement for that purpose; it is not a typical ministerial policy statement. It is a statement on this occasion, so we can have a debate on it. 

3.32
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the presentation. 

In my opinion, I believe the advocacy and lobbying against gender-based violence will be continuous. She has elaborated on the activities but I would love to see that this advocacy is reflected in the ministry’s budget so that the stand of the ministry reinforces what happens at the local government level. Therefore, I request the minister to tell this House what is in the budget in this running financial year that will reflect on the activities they are carrying on to strengthen the local government, so that these disadvantaged groups are helped out of this violence. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I have interacted with some Members of Parliament who were here from the Sixth Parliament up to the Eighth Parliament. They had been sharing their experiences on involvement of women as key in fighting against gender-based violence, especially the women Members of Parliament. I would wish to know why this change has happened in a reverse way, because we are not actively involved in major activities of mind-set change. We are only invited when the programme is started, which she has elaborated here. However, we wish to do more so that we are included in programmes and are sent to talk to our people. Although we have our other responsibilities, we want to work with our ministry. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to emphasise that we are not feeling the impact of our ministry because of the low level of investment in the women of this country compared to the previous years. Thank you very much. 

3.23
MR NATHAN ITUNGO (NRM, Kashari County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. However, I would like to get some clarification. 

When we move on the Kampala streets, we find many young underage girls carrying babies begging. What plans does the ministry have to ensure that those are catered for? The same situation is pertaining in areas where we come from. 

There is Universal Primary Education (UPE), but the young girls are the ones still baby sitting and fetching water for the families. I would like to know from the minister the strategies that she has to ensure that there is holistic assistance extended to the girl-child to make sure they benefit equally like their male counterparts. Thank you.

3.24
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, minister, for making sure that this Parliament makes a contribution as we commemorate this very important day. 

I would like to speak to the theme of last year - “From Peace in the Home to Peace in the World: Make Education Safe for All.” Mr Speaker, I speak with experience from my constituency. Last year, we were out in Arua together with the African Network for the Prevention and Protection against Child Abuse and Neglect (ANPPCAN) and World Vision participating in some of the activities to commemorate this day. We visited sub counties where early child marriages have become rampant; girl-child dropouts from school were rampant; many had experienced gender-based violence; and young mothers had been murdered. Therefore, as we speak, these experiences keep recurring. 

Whereas the minister is telling us that the figures have been going down, if we are to review the various media or press reports, you will agree with me that gender-based violence is on the increase. The reason behind all this is that in our education system, the majority of the children drop out at an early age and join the reproduction process very early. Correlate that increase with that situation. The fact that many young girls drop out of school early, join the marriage institution early and eventually fail to sustain the pressure in the marriage institution is a precursor to violence.

Therefore, I think it would be important, as Parliament, for us to guide the ministry with relevant proposals in addressing this situation, because the cost on Government is enormous. We are talking about the crime rate; when you go to the various prisons, the number of teenagers that have ended up in prisons because of defilement cases is high. The question about resource allocation to address this particular challenge is very important.

Honourable minister, you sit in Cabinet, raise it there. When the Budget Framework Paper comes here, let it come with tangible figures so that Members of Parliament can rally behind and support you. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we agree on the time so that we can manage this? You will be the last to speak freely; thereafter, we shall be doing two minutes each.

3.28
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Mr Speaker, let me take this opportunity to thank the minister for the statement. 

I actually like the theme, which is about peace in the home and peace in the nation, especially at a time when peace in the nation is being threatened. I am also like that part of the theme that is about male engagement; that part has been lacking in the country. Most of the time, issues of gender-based violence or sexuality have been taken as women issues and men are left behind, and it looks like a competition between men and women. I think that is the gap that your theme is closing this year.

Importantly, we must know that men are agents of change. If you want to handle the issue of sexual-gender violence, you must take men as agents of change and as partners in this issue. When you ask a man, “What if it happens to your mother, daughter, or sister, how would you feel?” - It becomes important that men too be taken into consideration.

I have previously worked in the NGO world. Most of the time, the money and resources are taken up for celebrations on those days only but the real activities that should change gender-based violence do not always take place. The real activities are not taken seriously in the budget of local governments or the ministry. I think it is important for the ministry to look at the budget and ensure that the activities that bring change are taken into consideration other than dealing with the “big days” only.

Finally, it is very difficult for us to fight gender-based violence if there is poverty in the country. When I was in the NGO sector, I experienced a situation where a man beat up a woman seriously. The woman was disabled and unfortunately, when this man was imprisoned, the family had no food. The woman came pleading that this man be released from prison. She did not mind about the injury that the man had inflicted on her. Therefore, it is important that if we want to stop gender-based violence in the country, we address the issues of poverty. Otherwise, we cannot change the situation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let me go in this order and see how far we can go and we limit the time to two minutes.

3.32
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and especially for the strategy to involve men and boys in the fight against violence on women. This is because we all know that the violence against women is caused by this other category. It is important that we safeguard the lives of women and girls in order to have peaceful homes and a peaceful nation. As the minister has pointed out, it is only when we have peace that we can work towards social-economic development. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the minister: Since last year or for the past few years, what have we achieved? We would want tangible figures. To what extent have we reduced domestic violence or violence against women and girls? To what extent have we been able to retain girls in school and to what extent have we prevented teenage pregnancies and early marriages? If we had the figures, then we would know how to proceed, but as it is we just have a general statement.

It is also commendable that we are involving the cultural leaders and religious institutions because this fight needs everyone. As Members have pointed out, we have seen increased cases of violence against women. We have seen instances where they are killed and objects stuffed in their private parts. Therefore, we would like to request the Government, especially the police, to be heavily involved in the protection of women and girls –(Member timed out.)

3.34
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I am happy to note that the Government now appreciates that it is very important to bring the men on board. For long, we have been talking to ourselves as women, leaving the men out. If we bring the men on board, it is a very good idea. I pray that we even include the men down there, not only men at higher levels.

Mr Speaker, Uganda is known for having very good laws but our challenge has always been implementation. My prayer to the Government is that we should try to implement the existing laws against gender-based violence. Most of these laws are there but they remain on the shelves.

I also support the minister’s plea that programmes such as Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme should be given more money in order to address the challenge of poverty. This is because our women are very poor and many men have left the parenting responsibility to the women. If these women are empowered, if that programme is given more money and more of our women get money, they will take care of their children and we shall even have less school dropouts. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you said women should involve men down there; were you talking about the rural community? (Laughter)

MS KAHUNDE: Mr Speaker, I meant involving men at the local level in our villages and sub counties. (Laughter) I am sorry, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. This is for the benefit of those who will read the Hansard later. They might not understand what the honourable Member was saying. (Laughter)

3.36
MR TOM AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, honourable minister, for the statement about gender-based violence. 

Honourable minister, I will be very happy if you could involve the education department in sensitisation, mobilisation and education especially in schools. The aim here is to encourage the girls to remain in schools and not drop out. The rate of girl-child school dropouts is very high and, therefore, it would be very good if the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development worked with the Ministry of Education and Sports to make sure the girls remain in the school. 


More often than not, the girls are harassed, bullied, laughed at and teased by the boys during their menstruation periods. I would be very happy if the girls are availed with sanitary pads, washrooms and the other things that make them stay in school so that they do not feel segregated against and oppressed. Thank you very much.

3.38
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the strategies laid by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to advocate for women. 

My concern is about the youth who are not working and are languishing in the trading centres. When you move throughout this country, you can find a number of youth discussing Manchester United, Chelsea, constitutional amendment from morning to sunset and they have not done any tangible work. At the end of the day, they go to look for those young girls and women and they insult people. 

In such a scenario, I would like to urge the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development that among the activities they have planned, they should include a component of sensitising those youth who are jobless so that they can also benefit from these activities. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.39
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wold like to thank the minister for the statement. However, there are some things on which I would like to get clarifications from the minister. 

First, honourable minister, in your statement it seems you are depending more on other people organising activities during this period. This is because I did not hear clearly what the ministry is going to undertake in this period. In that case, it means you have surrendered the importance of this day to other organisations. It also means that districts that may be deprived of organisations that can spearhead this will not have such activities. In my view, that is a little bit unfair. I am asking you to clarify what the ministry is going to do specifically in all the districts, so that we know that in all our districts, there are these activities that will take place in this period.

When such activities take place in districts, most times Members of Parliament are called upon to make contributions financially or otherwise. In this particular situation, Mr Speaker, you opened it a little bit when the minister had finished by asking “What is the role of the MP?” I am bringing this up because I feel uncomfortable that I am only called upon to make financial contributions yet I think I would have been useful in a range of other activities. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.41
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to join the others in thanking the minister for the statement. 

Uganda is a member of the international community – a member of the UN – and when these days come up, we join them and celebrate. However, it is not just about making a statement. As a ministry, when you look at the issue of gender-based violence, you should try and analyse why there is violence in society and what your ministry or Government has done about it. You must know the reasons why. Why are men beating their women? Why are women beating their men? Thereafter, you go on the ground and address those issues. 

One of the problems we have in the country, Mr Speaker, is that people are unemployed. Men are moving up and down and when they come home, they ask for food. They find that the women have not prepared anything because there is no money or food and that is when they start beating their women and fighting. These are some of the issues we should analyse and address; unemployment in the country, dropping out of school should be the issues.

When I was growing up, Mr Speaker, the ministry in charge of culture used to visit districts and sub counties showing films. They showed films around, addressing some of these issues. Therefore, your ministry should have been going around in the countryside using Members of Parliament to go and talk about gender-based violence –(Member timed out.)

3.43
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong, Amuria): Mr Speaker, I would like to start by thanking the minister for making this statement to the House this afternoon. 

Issues of gender violence in this country are matters that this nation must pay attention to. I would like to say that if you went across the country and listened to how women and men batter each other, the problems that women face in the community and the situation the girl child is going through, you will definitely know that there must be a problem somewhere.

Mr Speaker, this problem of gender violence cannot be addressed in the same way as some matters are handled here. To address the issue of gender violence, the country needs to bring other ministries on board; for instance, the Ministry of Education and Sports should be involved very seriously. 

Ask yourself, how come a number of girls are dropping out of school? What is the problem with the parents? You will definitely note that the question of poverty precedes the issue of gender violence. Therefore, to address this matter, Government must handle the question of unemployment and must look for a way to make education cheap in order to keep the girl child and all other children that come from poor backgrounds in school. That way, these children can harness high quality education - (Member timed out.)

3.45
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister but at the same time, I got worried that Government adopted activism as a strategy to solve a social problem in our community.

Mr Speaker, I come from a constituency, which has successfully handled the issue of gender-based violence, thanks to the Catholic Church and a project called MIFUMI Project; I am sure you have seen their vehicles. I would like the ministry to benchmark with MIFUMI Project and see how they handled the issue of gender-based violence in homes. 

The only challenge we face there is stigma. In my constituency, it is now the men suffering. In some cases, men have been battered by the women and sometimes chased from home. I heard the minister talking about the rise in reporting, but this is a challenge in my constituency because men have been stigmatised and they cannot report. It is the neighbours who say, “That man was terribly beaten the other day.” 

Therefore, I would like to urge the ministry to come up with a holistic approach not only to address the issue of women but also stigma faced by men so that even when the balance shifts towards men, they have courage to report to the police. The problem can then be handled and we have a peaceful society. I would like to also implore the ministry to look at the strategy which has been adopted by MIFUMI Project – (Member timed out.)

3.48
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement on gender-based violence. 

First of all, gender-based violence is a concern to all of us as leaders. As parents, we have a duty to play because in most communities, parents have married off their daughters in search for cows. In some districts, girls are seen as a source of wealth and parents tend to marry off their daughters at an early age instead of keeping them in schools.  

In addition to the above, sometimes income disparities have also caused gender violence. This is why most parents tend to educate boys and leave the girls at home to concentrate on domestic work and they end up marrying them off at an early age.

In some areas, lack of provision of basic materials for young girls in schools has become a problem. Sometimes, these girls resort to early marriages because they lack basic necessities to use, particularly when they are in their menstrual periods. There is need for massive sensitisation and awareness in the homes, churches, community radio stations, and the need for legislation to eradicate gender-based violence. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.50
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Bugaya County East, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Mr Speaker, 16 days of activism against gender-based violence is a serious matter in this country. For us to create time and discuss this matter gives confidence to Ugandans. It is a very good initiative. 

However, honourable minister, the problem with your statement is that you seemed to have concentrated only in urban centres. We are aware that every district has got a gender officer. What have we seen in all those districts? How are we going to involve the gender officers at districts and community development officers in the sub counties? 

I think the focus should be to bring this debate down to this common person. Much as the theme talked about the family and nation, my view is that peace begins with individuals before you go to the community and the family, because the individual capacities create bigger synergies in this country.

Mr Speaker, Members have talked a lot about the cost of this violence against women. Many people believe that gender means women. However, men are suffering. We tend to focus on women –(Member timed out.)

3.42 
MS ROBINA SSENTONGO (Independent, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Mr Speaker and members. I also wish to thank the minister for the well-presented statement. 

I would like to also express my concern to the honourable minister, in addition to what Members have talked about, on the issue of coordination and collaboration. I would like to urge the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, as they perform their role, to try to look at the different key players who are dying at the grassroots, doing good work but struggling to get resources to do the work. 

I think if the ministry came up with well written, co-ordinated frameworks and mechanisms to work with the people at the grassroots, it would promote, in a big way, our struggle to end or reduce gender-based violence. How do you bring on board the civil society organisations, churches, individuals, local leaders, women representatives and representatives of the elderly? I would wish, in your next presentation, you to have a proper framework that shows how you work with those people so that the results are attributed to a team and not an individual entity. Thank you so much. I beg to submit.

3.44
MR KENETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement she has made. 

Mr Speaker, the minister indicates that the 16 days of activism conclude with the International Human Rights Day on the 10th of December. I would like to ask Government whether they think it is not appropriate to come up, during this time, to make a comprehensive statement on the human rights issues in this country. It is because there are quite a number of issues that you need to explain to the House and the country at large.

However, I have stood to speak on this statement because of the last paragraph where the minister appealed to the Members to support them and increase the budget, for example for the Social Assistance Grant for the Elderly (SAGE). Honourable minister, where is the problem in this matter? Do you think it is really wise for you to appeal to the House on this particular matter? As a House, we have debated that matter several times. Many petitions have come up on it and a lot of recommendations were made. We speak on this matter every time we are budgeting. It is Government which has actually failed to implement this. Now you are appealing to the Members of Parliament; do you want to turn around and say it is Parliament failing to rollout SAGE?

Personally, I think you are not taking this seriously and you are showing the nation that you are disorganised. Recently, we saw it in the media that you are introducing an allowance for children born - children born allowance. I got confused and wondered what kind of arrangement this is. How can you talk about allowances for children born when the money to rollout SAGE all over the nation has not yet been found? 

3.56
MR MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani County East, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the minister who has given us this statement. However, I feel I have something to add onto that.

Mr Speaker, when we talk about gender-based violence, we always refer to rights and we leave out responsibilities; we forget that rights move hand in hand with responsibilities. It is up to us, parents, to teach these responsibilities to the young ones. However, the young ones now grow without being empowered with the responsibilities they are supposed to have so that they act responsibly. When they learn to act responsibly, they will not abuse the rights of others but without that, however much we talk about rights, it will continue to be a nightmare.

There are some infringements of rights which are silent but violent in nature; for example, the act of children who carry babies by the roadside to earn sympathy as they beg is even more violent than any other violent act I have ever seen around. A tired kid suffers under sunshine with no proper food; you can imagine what sort of violence that is. I do not know what Government thinks about that kind of subtle violence.

Before we even talk about those other forms of violence we do not see, we should first do away with the ones we see. We always drive past them and sometimes, we even give them something too - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: After the Woman Representative of Mayuge, we shall then have the Leader of the Opposition. We have exceeded the one hour because of the importance of this matter.

3.59
MS JULIE MUKODA (Independent, Woman Representative, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On a sad note, I would like to inform the House that over the weekend in Mayuge, on the island, we had a very bad incident. A father came back home and suspected that one of his children stole his Shs 20,000. It was in the news on Monday or Tuesday. He was so angry and he burnt the two children with paraffin. The most annoying thing is that he burnt the girl more because he suspected she was the one who stole the money. Part of her breast was all burnt and her private parts were burnt too. At the moment, I am treating the two children and it has cost me over Shs 1 million. 

I am happy that the Government is trying so much, but one thing I have realised is that we are only good at talking. As I speak right now, the island is very bitter with the Government because of the Government’s operation against illegal fishing. As Government does this, where is it putting the island? What programmes do we have for the island at this moment when the poor people are not fishing? It is sad and I call upon the Government to help us, most especially, the fishing communities.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Leader of the Opposition and then I will come to the minister. Honourable minister, arrange your summary in about three minutes so that you wind up.

4.00
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, honourable minister, for the statement. Right now, for comprehensive inclusion of our male counterparts, in some places like Awach Subcounty in Gulu, we have male champions involved in the fight against gender-based violence, and I think that community is a little settled. We really need peace at home.

Honourable minister, it is sad to see we do not focus at all on the Convention on Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). This was signed in 1979 and yet to date, we still have a lot of discrimination. We wish that during this time when you bring to us statements on the 16 days of activism campaign against gender-based violence, you also bring something to report to us on CEDAW because we ratified it.

Secondly, in Kampala, we have an institution called the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) which also handles gender-based violence. It conducts training of stakeholders. I do not know how much we have benefitted from this institution comprising of 12 countries under ICGLR. The ICGLR was brought to Kampala after the Kampala Declaration on Gender-Based Violence by the heads of state who gathered at Speke Resort Munyonyo. We have a lot of people who should be stakeholders in this.

When you bring us statements like this, we would like to hear about the women who were killed in Entebbe. If no report about such is brought, then it is as if we talk without action. 

I would like to also propose that we pay attention to early childhood development. I am a teacher of biology and I will tell you that our brains develop at that tender age of 0-6 years. This age is very critical for our children and for all human beings. We should have a policy on early childhood development. 

I personally mothered my children but did not give them the best. Why didn’t I give them the best? Although I am a biology teacher, I did not know that it was important at that tender age to lay a strong foundation for my children. Right now, if mothers and fathers have missed out on those basics, we should get a policy for our present mothers and fathers so that they give time to their children.

I visit Gulu main market a lot. I told the women vendors that it is good to try running around for your families. However, a mother leaves very early in the morning before 6 O’clock and returns at about 9.00.p.m. By the time she leaves the home, the toddlers are still in bed and by the time she returns, they are already in bed. When do you interact with them?

Formal education does not constitute more than 50 per cent of what we should give to our children. We need this informal education and we should set it as a policy of early childhood development. We should give a good foundation to our children and moreover, we should know that right now, the world is a global village. A child picks a phone and on the phone there is pornography; all the good and bad things are there. However, before the child is exposed to those kinds of things, you first have to give the best and the child will always say, “Mummy said this”.

I remember a lot of what my grandmother taught me. My grandmother taught me a lot, but now we do not have time to give the best to our grandchildren because our grandchildren no longer live with the grannies. Therefore, we should have a policy on early childhood development. I thank you very much for including our male counterparts. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, be brief because every Member is in support. 

MS MUTUUZO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank colleagues for speaking very strongly in support of the statement. Of course, issues of gender attract such a huge debate. We have to handle this issue systematically. 

Government is handling this issue in a multi-sectoral manner. When we talk about children fetching water, the water ministry falls there. When we talk about education, the education ministry falls there. When we talk about culture, we are dealing with institutions of culture and religious institutions. Last year, we declared this particular year as the year of the family and the religious leaders have been supporting us; they have made several statements, even in this report. 

On involving Members of Parliament, we have played our part. We have involved Members of Parliament and even now, I am appealing to Members of Parliament. This means that from now on, we shall continue. You have already done a big job; wherever you have been, you have talked about gender-based violence and we urge you to continue.

One other thing that I would respond to very quickly is the new-born fund. I am not aware about it. I do not know who raised that. It is neither me nor the gender ministry. I do not know where the new-born fund has been generated from; at least not from my ministry. If it is an individual who is offering it, we shall appreciate it, but it is not a policy.

On male champions, definitely it was a very good thing to do and yesterday we celebrated the men’s day. The Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister, Gen. Moses Ali, was the chief guest at the celebration and we appreciate that. We shall make it bigger as time goes on. Few men turned up yesterday - perhaps they did not know - but later on, we shall continue improving. Since it was began by a club –(Interjections)- it has always been there. 

I thought all days were men’s days, but we realised that they were being left behind and we thought we should have them acknowledge a certain day so that they talk about their issues. Today, we have heard how some of them have been battered by women and we think they should be rescued.

Therefore, we shall continue working together and closely. It is not only the gender ministry that will do this work; we shall do it together because gender-based violence is not done on the streets only but sometimes it is in our houses and bedrooms. Some people report and others do not; so it is more of a mind-set matter and once people are liberated, I am sure they will be able to report.

There is an increase in reporting. That is why you hear more about gender-based violence than you did before. Previously, people took it for granted and others thought it was a sign of love for a man to beat a woman up. However, as we preached against it, people started coming out. Therefore, for us reporting is positive. Even then, it is actually now news for anybody to batter a wife. People will talk about it; previously, it was a matter that was supposed to be thrown under the carpet and the woman was not supposed to complain. As of now, there are complaints and people reach out to condemn it.

Honourable members, we shall continue to engage you. We cannot discuss the details and the statistics showing what we have done in 30 minutes. We would not complete that. However, we shall continue to engage you and in all these activities we will bring out the data and talk very strongly. Yesterday, for example, the data we were talking about involved men in health. I must state here that men take long to go to hospitals for medication. It is important that we go out with that message. It is when they are critically ill that they go for treatment in hospitals. Many times they take pain killers every time they get pain; they do self-medication, which is unfortunate. Therefore, we lose many of them. 

If you go to the constituencies, many of the burials are of our male counterparts, which is unfortunate. We do not want to be left as widows. We want to engage you more and more so that we fight these vices and issues that affect your lives. I thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues, for the opportunity and for appreciating the statement. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, the call has been made, please respond and participate in the activities recognising these 16 days of gender activism. Please, proceed and support.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION BY RESIDENTS OF LAMOGI SUB-COUNTY IN KILAK SOUTH CONSTITUENCY, AMURU DISTRICT

4.12
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Mr Speaker, I would like to present a petition by the residents of Lamogi Sub County in Kilak South Constituency, Amuru District, under rule 29 of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.

The humble petition of the people of Kilak South Constituency Amuru District, presented by hon. Gilbert Olanya states that:

Your humble petitioners are residents and members of parishes of Palema, Oboo, Giragira, Pagoro and Guruguru in Lamogi Sub County of Amuru District.

Your petitioners have been residents of the above sub county since time immemorial. They left the sub county to live in the internally displaced people’s camp in various areas of Amuru due to insurgency in Northern Uganda. 

After the insurgency, the residents came back and settled in their motherland where they found the land covered with natural trees and bushes. The Government has taken over the land in Olwal and Keyo villages, claiming it as a central forest reserve. The Government is allocating various plots of land to unknown people in the area to plant trees in the communal land of the people of Lamogi Sub County at Keyo and Olwal.

Therefore, your humble petitioners pray that:

a) 	This august House intervenes in this matter and asks the Government to allow people settle in their communal land without interference.
b) 	If it is the Government policy to plant trees in that area, then the first priority be given to the ordinary residents of the area.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray. 

Hereto your humble petitioners have appended their signatures. In total, we have 621 residents who appended their signatures. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the petition of the people of Lamogi Sub County, Kilak South Constituency, Amuru District, on the Table. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, I have looked at this petition and the situation that this House is in. We are about to adjourn for Christmas and yet these matters are urgent, from the Member’s briefing to the Speaker. Therefore, through the prerogative of the Speaker under rule 29 (6) of our Rules of Procedure, I will refer this specific matter directly to the minister responsible for the environment to handle this matter expeditiously and report back; that is lands and environment because this is National Forestry Authority. 

The minister will report back to Parliament in two weeks about what has been done about this situation. Thereafter, he will let the House know because this matter has come to the House. If we refer it to the committee, that will go to February next year, which might not be desirable for the petitioners who have made this request to Parliament. 

Therefore, honourable minister, please take this up. The minutes will be extracted by the Clerk and forwarded to you with a copy of the petition attached. Handle it expeditiously and report to the House in two weeks about the steps you have taken to handle this situation. Thank you. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.16
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table a report of the Ugandan delegation to the 70th Session of the Executive Committee of the African Parliamentary Union (APU), Rabat, Kingdom of Morocco, 20-21 July 2017.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, you are aware that we amended our rules to accommodate presentation of reports of this nature. We will find time to discuss whatever has come in from this meeting. Thank you very much. 

4.16
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the Public Service Commission Annual Report for financial year 2016/2017. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, this matter will be referred to the appropriate committee to look at the report and advise the House on what the recommendations in this report are. 

4.17
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the Report of the delegation to the 29th UNAA Convention held in Miami, Florida, September 1-3, 2017. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, that also falls within the category of reports of parliamentary delegations. We will find time and look at this and see what recommendations come from this. Thank you. 

Honourable members, there being no business for today, we will adjourn. However, we are adjourning in the following manner: The formal sitting of Parliament will remain adjourned until 12 December 2017. Parliament is not in recess but the sitting is only adjourned to 12 December 2017 at 2.00 O’clock. 

However, tomorrow we have a special sitting to pay tribute to the first woman chief magistrate, the first woman judge, first woman Deputy Chief Justice and the first woman in everything you have to talk about the law in this country, the late Leticia Kikonyogo. The motion will be presented by the Prime Minister and responded to appropriately from the Leader of the Opposition and the Dean of the Independents. 

At the special sitting, the body will be brought here at 12.00 O’clock. Honourable members, let us honour our own who has served this country with such distinction. Let us be here all together tomorrow. The formal sitting of the House is adjourned to 12 December 2017. 

(The House rose at 4.20 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 12 December 2017 at 2.00 p.m.) 

