Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Thursday, 14 November 2019

Parliament met at 3.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting and I, again, apologise for the late start. We had a lot of activities this morning but we hope to catch up. 

I have two matters to communicate. I would like to begin by thanking you for the tremendous work you did yesterday when you stood up to support the girls of Uganda in the debate concerning sanitary facilities. I look forward to the implementation of our decisions. 

Today, I would like to bring to your attention another issue that has not been given sufficient attention within Parliament and the Government. On 1 July, 2009, President Museveni launched a national campaign against female genital mutilation (FGM) in Amudat in the presence of the Kenyan and Ugandan delegations. It was expected that there would be more advocacy on that issue. 

Later, the members of this House moved a Private Member’s Bill and we enacted the FGM law. It was also expected to increase awareness and advocacy and, hopefully, elimination. Along the way, we were able to work with the President to ensure that some Shs 200 million was allocated for advocacy but this was in 2009. There is increased need because, although the vice has gone down, it is still there. We also need to work in more areas in Sebei and Karamoja.

There is an NGO called Reproductive Education and Community Health (REACH), which has been handling the advocacy in the region but they do not have the capacity to go throughout the country. We think the time has now come for Government to be visible in that campaign. Instead of working through NGOs, the Government should be visible in the campaign, together with its agents. We want to see the Government working the same way they did for immunisation or in advocating for Universal Primary Education. We want to see the President and ministers in the campaign against FGM. 

Therefore, I would like to direct the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, in this new budget cycle, to come with a definite proposal. We are in a new budget cycle. Come with a definite proposal of what is involved in doing that advocacy. I also direct the budget committee to take note of that issue and ensure that when we are debating the national budget framework paper, this item surfaces. 

I also direct the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to take note of the issue because they handle that sector. I also remind the chairperson of UWOPA and the women parliamentarians that they must carry out oversight over this issue to make sure that we help the children of this country to stop being mutilated.

The second communication is about the matter that was raised yesterday by hon. Waluswaka as a matter of national concern, relating to the construction of a bridge and a road joining Kamuli and Kayunga, which has not yet been done and yet, it was an integral part of the contract. I recall that Parliament approved the loan from the Chinese Government with counterpart funding from the Government of Uganda for the construction of the 183.2 MW Isimba Hydropower Station. 

The project also included the tarmacking of a 16-kilometre stretch beyond Isimba to Kayunga town and an adjoining bridge connecting Kamuli and Kayunga to facilitate mobility, trade and development. The bridge is part of the Isimba project under component II and was to be constructed in two spans – one connecting from Kayunga to Kuva Island and the other from Kuva Island to Mbulamuti on the Kamuli side to improve transport.

The cost of the bridge was embedded in the Shs 2.1 trillion Isimba Dam project. Yesterday, the Minister of Works and Transport told us that the responsible sector is the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and that they would be giving us an answer. However, again, we confirmed the allegations that the Shs 24 billion meant for the construction of that bridge was misappropriated within the sector. As you recall, this is a very grave concern. 

Therefore, I guide that this matter be formally presented through a motion to enable this House take a resolution. I will be giving the Members time before we close this afternoon to formally move the motion with specific prayers. Thank you very much.

Honourable members, we indicated that there were pending questions for the ministers to answer. However, I do not know where hon. Oshabe is. Yesterday, he was on the list but we missed him. Is hon. Oshabe here? If he is not, let us go to the next item.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE NATIONAL PAYMENT SYSTEMS BILL, 2019

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Payment Systems Bill, 2019” be read for the first time. It is accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implications.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? (Members rose_) Okay, it is seconded and the Bill is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back.

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter. In our Rules of Procedure, there is always an issue of national importance. We had brought it to the attention of the Speaker and we would like to know whether it will be accorded space.

THE SPEAKER: I think I have just made a ruling on this issue - that today, we need the outstanding questions to be answered before we can raise new ones. I had allowed one person only but he is not here. However, if you are in the House next week, you will raise it.

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, yesterday, we talked about the Committee on Education and Sports and its report that was supposed to come to Parliament on the 13th. I am not aware whether the Speaker gave this committee more time to report on the Makerere issue or they were overtaken by events because of the shenanigans in the caucus. I need your guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the committee chairperson wrote to me and I think I had written on his letter that he should come and formally get authority from the House because they said they were unable to finish by yesterday. They said they had interviewed four witnesses and needed more. I had expected either the chairperson or the vice-chairperson to come and formally request the House. Is the vice-chairperson of the education committee here? (Interjections) They are not here. They requested in writing but I said they should come to the Floor.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON CELEBRATING 20 YEARS OF THE EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY INTEGRATION

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I saw you have a rather lengthy statement. I do not know whether you could just give the highlights.

3.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Julius Maganda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have come to make a statement to the country and to this House to give information that the East African Community (EAC) will be marking 20 years of existence since its establishment in 1999.

The overall objective of the EAC at 20 years will be to commemorate the key achievements under the four pillars of the EAC Treaty namely; the Customs Union, the Common Market, the Monetary Union and the Political federation. The theme for this year’s commemoration is: “EAC @20; Deepening Integration and Widening Cooperation”. 

Pursuant to the decision of the Summit of the EAC Heads of State, it was observed that on 30 November each year, all the partner states shall celebrate EAC Day. We have been doing this at a low level but the Summit, which will be sitting in Arusha on 30 November and the Bill, which was passed by the East African Legislative Assembly, stipulates that this day should be given national recognition across all partner states and in the region. We shall be getting guidance from the Ministry of Public Service on how we can recognise this day. The Ministry of East African Community Affairs handles the coordination. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to point out that Article 2 of the Treaty establishes the protocols on which we are operating. I must say that we have progressed very fast and the EAC Common Market has now been implemented at 95 per cent. Implementation of the Customs Union is at 90 per cent and this has harmonised all the customs systems across the five partner states. South Sudan is still undergoing a lot of training but we believe that by February 2020, their customs systems would have been harmonised.

The Monetary Union, which came into force in 2013, has generated two Bills so far, which Bills have been passed by EALA and assented to. We hope that by 2024, we shall have the Central Bank of the EAC. By then, we hope to have established the common currency.

The political federation is now a priority. We have already appointed a team of experts who are undertaking to draft a constitution for political federation. President Museveni is the patron of this. On 18 November 2019, he will preside over the official inauguration of this team at State House, Entebbe.

Madam Speaker, since you have given me a short time, I would like to inform the country that the federation of the EAC is the last pillar and we believe that by 2024, it would come into force. The constitution will give us guidance on how we are going to run and implement this particular protocol. Otherwise, as a region and as a country, we know that this will inform everyone on how we are going to move forward.

The protocols, which have been signed and which we are implementing under the Treaty have set up areas of cooperation. For instance, this year, we shall be having the 10th Inter-Parliamentary Games. This is as a result of the treaties that we have signed.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for the update. On behalf of the House, we congratulate the people of East Africa on 20 years of cooperation. We look forward to improved services.  Hon. Ssemujju, you have three minutes.

3.22
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The minister, in his statement, has said that by 2024, there will be political federation. Can the minister explain to Parliament how that will be achieved when the border between Uganda and Rwanda remains closed?
	
Secondly, we have Ugandans who are crossing to Rwanda and they are being shot. 

Thirdly, all Ugandans who were teaching in Tanzania have been chased away. They started with those who were teaching art subjects but now, they are chasing even those who are teaching science subjects. In fact, it is very difficult for a Ugandan to work in Tanzania. Therefore, can the minister explain to Parliament whether his statement is not a theory or a wish list that these things will happen?

Madam Speaker, the Standard Gauge Railway, which we were supposed to construct with Kenya, has almost stalled. The minister should brief Parliament on why he is very optimistic that there will be a federation in 2024 when almost everyone is on their own.

3.24
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP,	Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am also concerned about the EAC and its celebration of 20 years. 

I do not know whether in the last 20 years, we have been able to achieve at least one of the most important pillars that were supposed to be achieved. Like my colleague has stated, we were supposed to have a common market but we do not have free movement of people among the partner states. 

Our colleagues who tried to move around were shot dead on the guise that they were moving with smuggled goods. If we intend to have a common market, I would think that everyone should be able to cross over with his or her goods and sell to whomever he or she wishes within the Community. You cannot just kill someone on the belief that they were moving with smuggled goods. These are common items within the different partner states.

Since, in my view, we have not seen much achievement, would I be wrong to propose that we postpone the celebrations until 2024 so that we see what has been achieved by that time? Thank you.

3.26
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Maganda for his attempt to make a statement while smuggling in and hiding critical issues from this House.

We do not know how to proceed with our contributions to the statement while knowing that last week, you had directed that this Parliament be informed about the deteriorating relations between Uganda and her neighbours, particularly, Rwanda.

As if that was not enough, on 10th November, 2019 John Baptist Tuhirirwe and Job Byarushanga were shot allegedly for smuggling tobacco leaves. These were Ugandans.

On 24th May 2019, a one Alex Nyesiga was also shot for allegedly dealing in second hand clothes along our border and now, instead of telling the gravity of the matter, the minister is meekly trying to present a statement as if we are here to joke.

We know these are matters of public importance; neither the Minister of Defence nor that of Internal Affairs is here to substantiate on the lives of Ugandans. Government cannot secure the property and lives of Ugandans but you are telling us to come and celebrate 20 years of the cooperation. This is an insult to this Parliament.

May I call my colleagues that in view of the serious matters that warrant this serious Parliament, we do not take this statement until the critical matters are presented to this House?

Is Uganda at war, are we attacked? Yesterday, the Rwandan Ambassador was supposed to be handed a demarche by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs but he declined and ignored. A note of protest was ignored and nobody is telling us what is happening next. Are we taking these matters to the International Court of Justice? Are we folding our arms and looking on as the innocent Ugandans -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, your time is up.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you. Madam Speaker, these matters are touching and we would like to expect the same communication channels between Parliament and its Government. We are the people’s representatives.

Any Ugandan killed anywhere is a Ugandan and we cannot sit here to clap for the statement when these matters affecting and touching Ugandans are swept under the carpet. None is talking about it and they do not seem to be ending. We have been patient since January but they seem to be persisting. 

Can I move that we suspend this statement until matters of critical importance to this country regarding the security and the lives of our people and their property are discussed? Then, we can go ahead to welcome the statement on deepening and widening of the integration.

Otherwise, it is a whole statement that does not merit the attention and audience of this honourable House. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, join me in welcoming our colleagues from the EAC; the joint planning committee for the Tenth Parliamentary Games; from EALA, we have hon. Gideon Gapta, hon. Masha Lwanyantika, hon. Rurakamuye. From Kenya, we have; hon. Wanyama Dan Sitati, hon. Beatrice Kwamboka, hon. Mercy Chebeni, hon. Muhanda Elsie, hon. Jusa George Gazemba, hon. Lolgisoi Naisehenya. From Burundi, hon. Mboneko Sauda, hon. Nduwumwami Renovant, hon. Nduwimana Apippire, hon. Mpitabanuma, hon. Ndayorigeje Oolile, hon.  Beold Mbayahaga. They have come with their staff from the different assemblies. You are welcome to Kampala and we wish you good planning with our team here.

3.32
MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable minister for presenting the statement but as you are aware of the history of the EAC and why it was formed, despite the fact that the minister talked about deepening and widening integration, we would like to draw our attention to the common market, free movement of labour and services, common currency and the ultimate political federation.

I would have expected the minister to come here and highlight to the country in terms of the relationship between the EAC - because it has an agenda, which is related to Agenda 2063 of the African Union; to hear from the minister the achievements made so far since the start of the integration. 

I believe that as the EAC, we have moved some steps and there are some commendable areas compared to other regional economic communities, which are praising the East African Community because of the improvement of infrastructure to some extent.

However, I would have also liked the minister to talk about the challenges before we talk about the celebrations. The people of the EAC and especially Ugandans are not at peace.

Uganda is a home to everyone, which is being celebrated internationally for hospitality. It is the third in the whole world for holding international refugees. That is an achievement that the East African countries should appreciate.

However, Ugandans out there are not totally recognised especially within the EAC. Ugandans cannot cross to Rwanda. When you are in Rwanda, you feel you cannot say anything and yet, we are one people. It is a high time the minister explained to this Parliament how far he has gone in terms of addressing the relationship between Rwanda and Uganda; and in terms of our cooperation between Tanzania and Uganda; between Kenya and Uganda, South Sudan and Burundi. I would have loved to hear theat.
I want to feel at peace when I am in any of those EAC countries so that I am proud to be truly East African just like I am proud to be a true Pan-Africanist and an African.

Madam Speaker, if you are coming to Uganda, you just enter but when you go to other countries, they ask you which –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one minute to conclude.

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Uganda is very hospitable. When any East African citizen comes to Uganda, it is easy but when you go to two of the countries, you will be looked at and you are not at peace.

You have a Uganda national identity card and a passport but they ask for a document from the LCI; why am I being queried? 

Those are the issues that have to be internalised within the EAC if we are to move as one people and achieve an ultimate political federation. I do not believe, based on where we are now, that by 2024, we will be celebrating the great achievements in the EAC. We are not addressing the issues of human and people’s rights as addressed by the protocol, which all these EAC countries signed and ratified.

Those are the issues that we need to clear out because our local people; Kenyans, Ugandans, Tanzanians need to be free everywhere within the EAC. 

Today, we launched the African passport for free movement of people but ask us whether a local person can easily move to any part of the continent. It is not as easy as you may think. It is simply for the elites. It is like this is becoming a club of the elites, rather than –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I gave you one minute, please.

3.37
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Madam Speaker, I thank you. The EAC is an entity, which is top-down. It only thrives and is based on the goodwill of the leaders.

In his statement, the minister would like to impress upon us that we have something to celebrate. Honestly, Ugandans are mourning. This is the time we should be mourning our dead. What used to be there as a coalition of the willing is no more.

You recall that Tanzania and Burundi have been very shy in moving from isolation to cooperation, as far as the EAC is concerned. So, we had a coalition of the willing, which included Rwanda.

However, Ugandans cannot cross and moreover, according to the protocols, which have been actually highlighted in the statement of the minister, the protocol that removed those restrictions of free movement of labour, goods and services is no longer working, as far as the relationship between us and Rwanda is concerned; even Tanzania.

By the way, the President of Tanzania at one time impounded cows. Cattle had crossed from Kenya to Tanzania and those pastoralists lost their cows because after impounding them, they were auctioned. If it were not for the magnanimity of His Excellency Uhuru of Kenya who compensated the pastoralists, this day is also one for mourning for pastoralists in Kenya.

I would like to say that we should not be deluded to believe that we have something to celebrate on a day like this, when Ugandans in Kenya – I have actually experienced it – cannot be allowed to open a bank account unless you adduce a work permit. Even when you have received letters from the relevant authorities in Uganda, including banks like Equity here –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: The information I would like to give my colleague is that as the Committee on COSASE, we visited Uganda Property Holdings Limited. Under the Constitution of Kenya – if I am not mistaken – if you are not a Kenyan, you are not allowed to own property. In fact, properties of Uganda Property Holdings are about to be taken over by a Kenyan in Mombasa.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, if you are a non-Kenyan, opening a bank account in Kenya is a tug of war; almost next to impossible. The stringent measures and restrictions that they have slapped on it cannot be easily broken.

This EAC that we would like to be deluded by the statement of the minister to celebrate even has no capacity whatsoever to meet its expenses or foot its bills. If you are talking of protocols by removing those restrictions to allow free movement of labour, goods and services, it only works in Uganda, by the way –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to give my brother information. If you said you opened borders between English and Kenya, I will give a few examples. In accounting area, Kenyans will come and take jobs there. That applies even to hotels.

Do you remember when we fought for the Crested Crane Hotel And Tourism Training Institute, Jinja when they wanted to steal it? The Kenyans were happy that it should be sold, so that they buy it and it becomes Utali of Kenya. In Kenya, to buy land, you must get a Kenyan to be a shareholder. However, when they come here, it is free.

So, Madam Speaker, the Minister of East African Community Affairs is from the border. At the border, there is no true one. He might be benefitting from across because Busia is here and there; they vote everywhere. (Laughter) He might be having an identity card of Kenya while he is here in Uganda. It might be beneficial to him but the truth is Ugandans and Kenyans have a big problem.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you for the information, my colleague. Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You were very generous to your colleagues. Before hon. Angura comes, hon. Ssemujju has said something, which has alarmed me; that our properties in Mombasa, bought by the taxpayers’ money, are going to be confiscated by a brother Government and we are going to simply watch. I hope you will be able to arrest that situation. [Mr Rwamirama rose.]

Do you want to give information on that property?

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. To the best of my knowledge, I know those properties in Kenya are under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and therefore, a property of the Embassy of Uganda in Kenya and they are supposed to be protected.

3.44
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the updates. I can confirm what the minister has told us. In some instances, as someone who represents a border constituency, there are some gains we have achieved that I can confirm to the House.

In terms of movement of persons, the immigration systems are a bit efficient now and that has helped our people take a shorter time at the borders. I would also like to confirm that the customs union is moving faster because at the border now, vehicles that used to spend seven days spend a shorter time.

However, that has come with a problem to us. The EAC has actually created a big disadvantage to us the people who live within the borders because it has eroded all the employment opportunities that we had and with many more alternatives to take care of the interest of the people at the border.

I would like to give an example of Malaba. Malaba as an urban town was growing because of the cross border trade. However, we are now stagnating because the systems have been shifted. All the clearance has been shifted to Mombasa and this is disadvantaging us. 

How I wish that the inland port that is being constructed in Naivasha would be transferred to the border; then, we know that we are sharing these services. We are now going to have two ports in Kenya; one at Mombasa and another one in Naivasha. In this case, as Uganda, we are losing out. We should be able to share these opportunities by having another port being brought inland such that it can serve the neighbouring countries.

I would also like to inform this House that at the elite level, we might be seeing the EAC with some results. However, at the local level, there is a lot to be desired. Like many of my colleagues have said, movement across the border of the ordinary wanainchi is not as free as the East African Protocols enshrine. 

My ordinary people at the border, in case they cross the other side – and they cross to my relatives that side – asking for documents is the order of the day. However, when we receive our neighbours here in Uganda like the Sudanese and Kenyans, no one even knows that they are foreigners. They are considered Ugandans.

Therefore, we need the honourable minister to implement what the protocols entail such that we can all enjoy –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I hope you are aware of these Masai in their suukas who walk freely all over this country, not even in shirts but in their suukas.  (Laughter) 

MR SSEGGONA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is very important to guide ourselves procedurally. When my brother, hon. Rwamirama, stood up to give us information, he mentioned, first of all that he does not know about these properties that belong to Uganda Property Holdings but he went ahead to mislead the House by saying that that is under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which is not true.

I know for a fact that these fall under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I am also aware that there were attempts to place them under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs – for whatever mysterious reasons – but that did not succeed.

In light of what has been laid on the Floor of this House, is it not procedurally right going forward that we direct the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to report on the status of our property in Kenya, part of which I know leases are expiring in a year or two and are not liable for renewal?

Is it not procedurally right that at this moment, you will be pleased to direct the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give a report to Parliament on the status of these properties; and the bilateral steps taken by Government to save these properties from being lost?  

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, at the beginning of this year, we were in Nairobi with the Commissioner at the Uganda High Commission. They told us that if we are not careful, part of the property is going. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, as a colleague has said, possibly you could even give a timeframe for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give the status. This is information we got from the High Commission that they have tried and struggled but part of the property is going.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, this is extremely alarming. I would like to direct that you, within a fortnight, to give us an update on the status of our properties in Mombasa and especially the legal position because the leases are expiring and Government is going to re-enter. I do not know who will sit in Nairobi to battle with the Government to negotiate. Therefore, within a fortnight, bring the information.

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, it should not only be in Mombasa. There is also land in Kisumu where we went and verified. They said the house was already taken over by the Kenyan Government.

THE SPEAKER: Is it in the Kisumu City?

MS AMONGIN: Uganda Railways Corporation.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, Uganda Railways property in Kisumu should be included too.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The report of the minister has raised a number of issues and we have realised that indeed, Ugandans in all the neighbouring countries are not safe and yet, our neighbours are safe in our country.

Arising from the submission of the honourable minister, we have found that there are still gaps, which we needed more information on, to be put on Table. For example, our neighbours in Kenya can travel and buy property all the way and yet our sugarcane cannot be allowed to cross our borders.

You find that Kenyans and our neighbours work in all the industries in Uganda comfortably but you have heard that Ugandans who are in Tanzania and other neighbouring countries cannot be allowed to work there.

Madam Speaker, is it not procedurally right that we let the minister go back with this report, fill in all the details of what is missing so that it is fully brought here for the Parliament of Uganda to take a decision on to protect our people and economy as we move to federate in East Africa? I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Let us listen a bit. I would like to add that recently, I was told that there are Kenyans buying water melon in Buyende there. They go there to buy. (Laughter) 

3.53
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Madam Speaker, we seem to be so much focused on celebrating and commemorating something that East Africans are not deeply appreciating.

Maybe, the way Ugandans understand and appreciate this federation is not the same way our colleagues from other East African countries understand it. 

We are talking about the pillars on which we thought we would work as members of the EAC. My expectation would have been for the honourable minister to come here and give us an update on the key milestones on each pillar; “For the Common Market, this is where we have reached. This is what we plan to do and this is how far we have gone.”

The Customs Union and the rest; we are talking about free movement of people and goods within the EAC but things are not working that way. 

When we talk about the political federation, which is supposed to be the apex and summary, when we have conclusively done all the other and achieved the milestones on all the pillars, this is not working. In a month, where we have lost our people trying to cross to Rwanda our neighbour and we are mourning and here we are celebrating?

Madam Speaker, when we are here, I am looking at how I explain this, for example, on the day we are supposed to commemorate the 20 years of existence of the EAC to my people in Bwamba. If they asked me; “What is it that we are celebrating?” What should I ably explain?

Therefore, the minister should come back here and give us details on all these issues that we are raising. Update us on how far we have gone on each pillar of the key milestones that we are talking of celebrating. (Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you. I have got the information. The forex bureaus in Uganda sell Kenyan currency but forex bureaus in Kenya do not sell Ugandan currency. They do not; you will not find Ugandan currency in the forex bureaus of Kenya, yet, we have Kenyan currency here. Therefore, we wonder which federation and business we are running.

3.56
MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. In 2013, there was border reaffirmation at the border of Uganda and Tanzania. During that time, people who were found on the side of Uganda were allowed to choose where to stay. They were not compelled to live in either the Ugandan side or the Tanzanian side. 

However, Ugandans who were found on the Tanzanian side lost everything; land, cows and gardens. They are now refugees within Uganda. When we reported that issue to the Ministry of Foreign affairs and the Ministry of East African Community Affairs, those people were told that they were going to be compensated but up to now, nothing has been done.

Maybe the issue was initiated here, practised here and implemented here and that is why those people take the advantage of using Uganda to benefit. Even now, there is no way you can move freely to Tanzania and get anything. 

Madam Speaker, last month, cows crossed to the Tanzanian side; in Kagera, for water but to date, those cows are still there and we are fighting with those people. However, Tanzanians are even here in Kampala, sleeping, eating and enjoying like Ugandans. Maybe, this is because the idea was initiated here, implemented here and practiced here. On the other side, it was merely sold but not fully adhered to.

Therefore, I would like to ask the minister; is it because the idea was initiated here and not implemented on the other side? Do you want us to celebrate? Celebrate what when Ugandans are refugees in their own country? 

We would like those people to behave like we do, if they want to cooperate with us. Failure to do that, Madam Speaker, it would be better that we call them on board and see whether they are within the system or not because our people are suffering. Thank you.

3.59
MR HILLARY LOKWANG (NRM, Ik County, Kaabong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his statement. However, we the communities along the borders from Kisoro to Karamoja are the most affected. For example, you cannot talk about integration for the last 20 years when you have not disarmed some of the communities in South Sudan and Kenya. The Turkana are killing our people every day in Karamoja. What integration are you talking about? Sort out all those issues and challenges before we can integrate.

Madam Speaker, last month, my ambulance went to Kenya where money was extorted from my boys. They were told that they should pay for crossing the border and yet, the ambulance had gone to pick a patient. Is that integration?

Honourable minister, you are not aware of the challenges that we face along the borders. First do research before you bring a statement here. Thank you.

4.01
MR CHARLES ILUKOR (NRM, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas we thank the minister for the report, we would like to inform him that from the information available, it is only Uganda that is patriotic among the EAC members. The rest are just there for strategic reasons but they are not interested.

Madam Speaker, it is only Uganda, which is very active and up to date in subscriptions to EAC affairs. In that Community, there are about two members who have not been paying their annual subscription and I am told that Uganda has been standing in for them. What type of federation is this where others are participating for free while others are standing for the rest?

On the side of properties, which hon. Ssemujju talked about, a new law of Kenya says that no foreigner should own land beyond a certain number of kilometres from the sea and our leases, especially in Mombasa, were about to expire. Therefore, that law is going to catch up with us. The sooner the minister negotiates, the better but he should come and tell us what they are doing because the law is soon catching up with us. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.02
MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County South, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, this debate is very important and sensitive. The EAC collapsed in 1977 and it was revived in 1999. As I talk, despite the problems and challenges that we have had, there are a number of achievements that we have gained.

I would like to implore this Parliament that this matter should be debated from a point of knowledge. What I understand is that the Community was basically forged to facilitate trade among the member states. If I can give you some statistics, from inception of the EAC, Uganda now exports over $ 540 million worth of goods to Kenya, $ 270 million worth of goods to Rwanda, $ 370 million worth of goods to South Sudan and Tanzania. This has enabled our country to establish a number of industries.

We now have over 4,500 industries in Uganda and this is because of the trade that we have within the EAC. It is true we have challenges but we have gained more.

In 2005, we signed the Customs Union Protocol, which was basically to eliminate internal tariff among member states. At the moment, 100 per cent of internal tariffs have been eliminated and this is an achievement of the union.

Madam Speaker, we now have EALA, which is a Parliament for East Africa. This is an achievement that we should state clearly. We elected our members to represent us there and they are there. In the EALA, they have passed laws for the Community –(Interjections)– The problem is not whether they are working or not but EALA is working. That is an achievement that we need to state clearly.

Madam Speaker, when you look at the movement of persons -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, allow the Member to speak.

MR OKOT-OGONG: I have information and it is better that you to listen to me. Madam Speaker - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have one minute to conclude.

MR OKOT-OGONG: Madam Speaker, to summarise, the issue of the federation is very sensitive. Whatever message we send from this Parliament will either promote our integration or completely collapse it.

Therefore, the message that we are going to send from the National Parliament of Uganda must be a message of unity and cooperation and a message that will promote development in the EAC.

4.06
MR SAM BITANGARO (NRM, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the minister for presenting this paper. Having said that, I have my reservations on this paper. While we commemorate 20 years of the EAC, if I stood in this Parliament and started celebrating its achievements, the people in Kisoro would stone me. At the border, we are living in misery and you read in newspapers people who are being shot. Trade between the two countries is totally dead and social relations are at a standstill.

There have been achievements in the integration; trade and customs union. However, what is happening between our sister states; Uganda and Rwanda is really disappointing. I am wondering whether in the summit, there are no mechanisms where this problem can be addressed.

Secondly, I am wondering and maybe on the 18th   November, they will address that. Let us assume that there was smuggling of goods by Ugandans to Rwanda, is the punishment shooting? Is there no due process? Can’t people be tried in a court of law? Do you have to shoot people? I am hoping that the people who will be on the delegation on 18th November will address that. Thank you, Madam Speaker.    

4.08
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for making a report on how we are progressing with the East African integration. For any integration to work, the hardware and software in the various countries must be able to speak to each other and it is only then that we can celebrate integration. We have a case where in our borders, countries are conflicting over boundaries. There is a conflict between South Sudan and Uganda and that has not been discussed. 

There are a number of regional infrastructure programmes, which are supposed to make the countries speak to one another but these have collapsed and there is no account of that in the minister’s statement. Uganda has been accused of harbouring rebels that are destabilising other countries and you have not said anything about that. Are we guilty or people are accusing us innocently?

These are things we should be able to speak honestly about so that we can do self-reflection to – (Interruption) 

MR ACIDRI: Thank you, hon. Oguzu. The information I would like to give is that we have been pursuing a very aggressive regional policy. We go and interfere with affairs of other countries in the neighbourhoods. For example, we stopped a political succession in South Sudan where those people could have resolved their problems. Therefore, how do you expect to deepen integration in a situation where you are interfering with the sovereignty of the member states with whom you are supposed to cooperate? Thank you.

MR OGUZU: Madam Speaker, in the light of the conflicts in Migingo island and other places, it is very important that the minister comes here and tells us where Uganda has done well and wrong so that we can align our policies. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.12
MS ROBINAH SSENTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the minister for the statement he has made on the Floor. When I was listening to the statement, I thought that maybe, it is by design or it is by art that we commemorate days where we do not give an account of what has happened in terms of the objectives that were set. 

I was thinking of what I would tell the people of Kyotera about what we have benefited from the EAC membership. For example, immediately President Magufuli took over Mutukula border before Kagera, all Ugandans that were inhabitants there for many years were deported to Uganda with all their property left in Tanzania and they are still suffering. 

As if that was not enough, recently, my colleague, hon. Christopher Kalemba, reported that the traders from Kenya who were trading in cows were able to tell Ugandans that these cows were from Tanzania. How can you differentiate a cow from Tanzania when they have no labels? All the cows were confiscated and the labourers lost their business. However, when the cows are taken for grazing from the border of Tanzania, that is okay and that they cannot return to Uganda.

Madam Speaker, I do not think it is good for the minister to come here and not give an account of the achievements of the cooperation within the EAC so that they can tell the layman, “this is what we are benefiting from the collaboration and these are the challenges we are facing.” We are going to do a, b and c to address the challenges. I think the people would appreciate because nobody is perfect. 

Therefore, to give you a benefit of doubt, honourable minister, give us a proper statement; telling us what we set out to do with the EAC membership, what we have benefited, the challenges and the way forward. We do not need to celebrate white elephants. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have had the opportunity to speak and you are not allowing your colleagues to speak. 

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, I am raising a procedural issue as per our Rules of Procedure. Having heard from the previous colleague, hon. Acidri – we are political leaders and the statements we make here in terms of the sovereignty of the other countries, the honourable member mentioned that we have intervened on the political affairs of a sovereign country; South Sudan. 

As a Parliament, I think we should not just leave that statement to go like that because it may tantamount to negative relationship between Uganda and South Sudan.

Are we procedurally right to allow the honourable member to leave that statement in our Hansard without it being challenged? 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether hon. Acidri would like to substantiate. 

MR ACIDRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are all aware that the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) was in South Sudan and they still continue to be there. How do you expect a country like South Sudan to federate politically under the EAC when you have active forces in that country where they could have resolved their own problems? 

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, it is common knowledge that UPDF was in South Sudan to repatriate Ugandans and was (Interjections) – I am not a liar. It is also on the Hansard that Members appreciated what UPDF did. 

It is also known that Uganda has been mediating and trying to bring peace in the region. Is the Member in order to impute that Uganda was interfering in the sovereignty of another state when it is common knowledge that Uganda has been at the centre of mediating between the fighting factions in our neighbours? In any case, they had requested for it. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is a question of interpretation but it is true that the UPDF is in South Sudan. In fact, we passed a budget to support them there. (Interjections) They were requested to go to South Sudan. 

4.18
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the minister for the attempt to present a statement. However, I believe one component that must be explained very thoroughly is the one of political federation that is being fast tracked. 

I am sure when you talk about the political federation of East Africa, you must talk about harmonising the individual political systems of the member states. 

As we speak, different member states are entrenching different provisions in the Constitution. In Uganda, a president can rule to death. There are no age limits and no term limits. The rest of the federation-in-making have term limits. I believe this is fundamental. You cannot surrender to where you cannot rule to death when you believe in that. 

We are joining different lands of this region. We also have some other fundamental differences in land tenure systems. Some of our tenure systems are indigenous tenure systems. When you go to the other member states, they are different. I believe the minister should come and further explain that. 

Lastly – and I am mentioning this because we are like burying the dead body because we are burying the federation-in-making and somebody is talking about celebrating the life of the one we are preparing to bury. When you read about Tanzania and what is happening, it is going towards Southern African Development Community (SADC) and leaving the EAC. We should not forget the causes of this. 

What we are discussing today is the re-establishment of the East African Federation. It was here before and it collapsed. We need to understand some of the reasons why it could not live beyond 1977. 

One of the major causes was that Tanzania opted for SADC. It was more gainful and it still looks more gainful now. 

I have always participated in the East African Secondary School Games. It is only Kenya and –(Member timed out.) 

2.41
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, they are questioning why I am speaking from the front, I need to be extremely close to the minister as I raise some of these issues. (Laughter)

The East African integration had a very clear objective about deepening and widening cooperation. When we do stocktaking – I thank the minister for taking the rare courage to come and announce a celebration over challenges that are all over. This is what is called Dutch courage – false courage, where you are completely weak but you feel very courageous. 

The East African Federation, which collapsed in 1977 and was renewed through a very good treaty – if you read the objectives – the fundamental principles that founded them, we are dismantling one by one. I do not even want to read them. 

It is so abnormal that Uganda is now at the lead of pulling the rest by force when others do not want to move with us. Why is this happening? 

When you look at Rwanda, I wish the Minister of Foreign Affairs was here. I sit in the Committee on Foreign Affairs. We have a very big challenge on the situation in Rwanda. Apart from just giving a protest note, there are many issues that need to be raised to Rwanda. 

Look at the situation in Northern Uganda; the border between Lamwo District and Eastern Equatorial. Only the RDC of Lamwo that is contending with issues of territorial challenges and yet, this should be the Minister of Foreign Affairs. 

For those who watch television, you clearly saw the RDC of Lamwo going into Eastern Equatorial to negotiate issues of land where South Sudanese have taken over five kilometers of land inside Uganda and Ugandans are now renting their own land to do agriculture there. These are challenges we need to reveal. 

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you, my brother hon. Komakech for giving way. The information I would like to give is that if you go to Kenya, the trade which the honourable mentioned, they are mentioning what we have got but they are not mentioning what they have taken from us. 

If you go to Kenya with your identity card, if it is a season for planting maize, they will get you and call you “makanyago” so that you go to prison and plant for them maize. After 30 days, they release you. They will have gotten free labour. These people are really dangerous.
 
MR KOMAKECH: As I wind up, in Uganda, many institutions have tried integration. If you look at our universities, they have tried the process of integration. I must say I am a beneficiary of this because rather than going through Arusha, I socially integrated with Kenya and I got a family member from the other side without any struggle. (Laughter) 

I believe, at state level, we have reached a level where Uganda should accept that there are challenges. You can see at the treaty level that when the Summit is called, it cannot proceed because the treaty says that all the Heads of State of the parties must be present. 

All these are challenges that are making us not move forward. Mr Minister, this was a very good opportunity to bring out these issues. However, let us now deal with the outcome of your statement. I do not even believe the minister should come back in the near future. We need to go beyond two weeks because the issues need more than two weeks. He may come back and give us a report which will just be nominal in nature. We need substantive issues to be brought to this Parliament so that we debate from a point of –(Member timed out.)

4.26
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to also add my voice in thanking the minister for courageously presenting the statement. 

Like hon. Felix Okot-Ogong said, I think there are some achievements. However, pointing at some of the challenges we are going through 20 years down the road, we have a big task. We talk about “deepening and widening”, perhaps it is now “narrowing”. I hope it will not reach a point where it will close.

I have participated in the JAMAFEST activity twice and I must say it is one of those activities that I feel is an achievement and should be celebrated. It is about celebrating cultural diversity. However, how has the EAC taken this further to help us solve the problems that we have? If we celebrate cultural diversity, it should help us to solve some of the problems that we have. 

Hon. Lyandro Komakech has just talked about the painful story between South Sudan and Uganda. I come from the border between Uganda and South Sudan. It is not nice when we, Ugandans, receive them nicely but when we try to cross to their side it is like going into a war zone. These are some of the things we are talking about even as we celebrate this day. We cannot continue to pay for the debts of South Sudan. They are now a country of their own and they should be able to pay for themselves – (Interruption).

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much for giving way. I would like to give information. As a Committee on Foreign Affairs, we went to Moyo for an oversight visit. We were on Moyo land but Members of Parliament were arrested by South Sudan authorities, saying we had entered into their land. That is a reflection of the relationships in the East African Community.

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you very much for that very wonderful information. I can also attest to the fact that when I was going for JAMAFEST in Dar es Salaam, at one point I wanted to tell them to give me back my passport for me to come back to Uganda. You fill in the form which has all the information wanted but when you reach there, it is as if somebody does not want to work; they ask you the same questions you answered in the forms and then they keep quiet for one minute. 

For Heaven’s sake, I am a Member of Parliament and I have written down on my form that I am a Member of Parliament; I must have some different form of treatment. It is not easy to campaign in Amuru and come to this House. (Laughter) When they come here, we give them very good treatment. It is not fair. Minister, please, let there be some acceptable level of treatment for Members of Parliament. (Member timed out)

4.30
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister’s statement has given us an opportunity to be heard as representatives of the people. As far as I am concerned, the East African Federation we are talking about only provides a platform for political leaders like us and those at higher levels to go and toast with glasses of wine in Arusha and other capitals. 

However, the ordinary person who is supposed to benefit is not benefitting, as has been heard from every speaker who has spoken before me. This is especially true when it comes to the issue of free movement of personnel and provision of employment facilities.

Madam Speaker, in this “marriage”, each of the five countries has a comparative advantage over one another. However big or small you may look, you have one particular comparative advantage that puts you on equal footing with the other partner states. However, if such a marriage is not working, – from what we see it – I do not want to be like Jesus Christ who said that when you are slapped on the left cheek, turn the right also. 

By the way, at times we forge good working relationships through divergent approaches. Recently, you saw what happened in South Africa. When xenophobia was being carried out in South Africa and Nigerian businessmen and businesswomen were being violently chased away, Abuja reciprocated and also closed businesses of South Africans and it brought sanity. If our animals and people are being denied access through visa requirements and lack of freedom of movement, probably at your level as ministers you should also bring it to the attention of the other partner states that Uganda is also capable of doing that. 

We are not going to continue to have our land accessed by people who are not ready to appreciate that we are in a partnership. Something has to happen so that everybody knows that we are equal partners. It is not the first time that we are in this marriage. It collapsed in 1977 and the reasons why it collapsed are still bold on the wall and in our heads, and history can repeat itself if we continue going the way we are. 

On the issue of border conflict and free movement of goods and services, just recently we were talking about excess sugarcane production in Uganda. A peasant from Kamuli, Kakira or Mayuge, who is crossing the common border in a Fuso or Tata Lorry with hard-earned sugarcane, is denied access to the Kenyan market. However, we find a lot of Kenyan trucks coming in and going to our villages, especially in Kiryandongo, where they load their trucks with maize undisturbed. Probably, if we also set such harsh conditions, they will be able to appreciate that they need us as much as we need them. That way, there will be mutual respect and we will treat each other with courtesy and in a humane way. 

Madam Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. Mr Minister, go back to Arusha and tell your counterparts that Ugandans are not happy. We are a hospitable people but they are not reciprocating. Thank you.

4.34
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Obongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On my behalf and on behalf of the people of Obongi whom I represent here, I would like to say the following: 

One, let this be an opportunity for Parliament to reflect on the path of integration that we have taken and followed so far in the last 20 years. The minister’s statement should be received positively to trigger that kind of reflection. As people of Obongi, we went on a tour to Arusha last year as part of the activities to mark the celebration of Obongi Day in 2018. I would like to say here that local government to local government relationships are what we experienced there. The city of Arusha is a local government. 

We were received very well in Tanzania by the authorities of Arusha City Council. We were treated very well. We stayed there for one week and what we heard and experienced was the love, which originated from the spirit that we were one people called East Africans.

Madam Speaker, I do not know the reason for the difference in our experiences but on our part, we said that we needed to bring down the integration from the one of high profile people to the community, so that people to people integration takes place. However, I would like to ask the minister whether he is aware of the complaints that Ugandans have raised here and outside. As the Government, have you received such complaints or communicated to Tanzania the complaints of Ugandans, which are being expressed here?

Madam Speaker, we cannot bury our heads in the sand when it comes to inter-state relationships. When we were in Arusha, that time coincided with the 20th East African Community Heads of State Summit. We were given 10 slots as Obongi people to attend that summit. However, we saw a quarrel among the other states; for instance, there was a bad feeling between Rwanda and Burundi and that was what actually caused the failure of the summit to proceed. Therefore, the relationships between states, not only between Uganda and her neighbouring countries, needs to be evaluated. 

As East Africans –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Members, we need to conclude this matter. You have half a minute to conclude.

MR FUNGAROO: As I wind up, I would like to say that we should look at common standards on the basis of which we should integrate. Some of the reactions from neighbouring countries are aimed at individuals. If you go to South Sudan, for instance, you will find South Sudanese who are happy with President Museveni and his Government and you will also find those who are very unhappy with Uganda and President Museveni’s Government. Therefore, we are not following common standards. We must have common principles instead of common markets. Thank you.

4.38
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Independent, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice and comment on the statement of the minister.

It is true that under the EAC Treaty, the Common Market was our objective. However, as much as we export our goods, what are they bringing to us? Government must work very hard to ensure that trade deficits are dealt with. Otherwise, Uganda is not prepared for that.

Madam Speaker, you may recall when we passed a law here, when one of the companies was trying to make Uganda –(Interruption)

MR GUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform my brother that we currently do not have a trade deficit in the region. Rather, we have a positive balance of trade in the region. For the record, I would like to inform you that in the financial year 2018/2019, we exported US$ 1,469 million worth of goods to the region, compared to US$ 911 million in the previous financial year. When you compare the exports to the imports, this country enjoys a positive balance of trade. Thank you.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, when we talk about trade deficits, it is not about balance of payments. What about the tariffs? How much did we lose when this Parliament passed a law on excise duty stating that we should not allow Kenyans to take tobacco to Kenya? Can the minister tell Members how much we are losing? What about the labour? What were the cost inputs? Kindly, tell us. We are talking about how much we are importing; what about the tariffs? 

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the minister in charge of cooperatives that when Madhvani tried to export to Tanzania, they banned that sugar. How much did that factory lose? If you have made a law as the EAC and agreed upon the tariffs and all of a sudden when I am trying to export my car to your country, you stop it, this cripples my factory. Moreover, we lose employment as a result. The capital used to produce that product will be lost. Do not only look at the positive side without finding out how much one is losing to produce and export that product.

Uganda must prepare, but to do that we must deal with the tariffs that have been agreed upon, so that industries in Uganda are prepared to enter into a common market with an open hand. It is not simply a matter of no trade deficits but the tariffs. Madhvani –(Member timed out.)

4.42
MR NATHAN	NANDALA-MAFABI	(FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, I am going to provide figures and I would like to seek your indulgence.

In percentages, Uganda exported merchandise worth 9.2 per cent but imported merchandise worth 24.6 per cent. That means that it had a negative –(Interjections)- This is within East Africa. This is valid data – trade flows in East African Community partner states (percentage of the GDP). For us we deal with figures. The figure for exports of Uganda is 9.2 per cent while the imports are 24.6 per cent. Regarding services, it was 7.8 per cent while what we imported was 10.1 per cent. In short, we are in the negative. These figures are from the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).

Madam Speaker, what I am trying to state is that Uganda is in the negative in everything. If you go to Mombasa or Dar es Salaam to clear goods, Ugandan goods are delayed at the ports so that we can pay more demurrage, and that is a cost that comes to Uganda. I have practical examples since I deal in this business. You are aware that I am a professional –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I sit on the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Our colleagues from this ministry must be keen on what we are talking about. If you say that goods are coming to Mombasa and you are creating a warehouse in Nairobi so that you do not have to go to Mombasa, the cost of picking that container will be added to you. Therefore, rather than going to Mombasa, wouldn’t it be better for the goods to come directly to Kampala? I would have paid charges in Mombasa for the goods to come direct but they will charge me demurrage charges for a container to come to Nairobi where there is a warehouse. 

In fact, they have done it in such a way that all the costs in trading are on the individual. It would have been cheaper for me to load a container from Mombasa to Kampala but they have created a warehouse in Nairobi so that people pay for the labour of Kenyans. Do you think that is very good balance of payments?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the reason we are raising this is because the cost of doing business in Uganda is being loaded on us by our friends in the neighbouring states yet when they come here, we give them free land and services.

Madam Speaker, I bid for a consultancy job in Kenya but to win that job, I had to team up with a Kenyan. The Kenyan just picked the money and went away.

Madam Speaker, I would like to tell you about the pipeline that brings oil, because I am a trader. If you want fuel in 30 days, you must pay now and then in 15 days, the fuel would be finished and you would have to pay. Therefore, in a month, you must order four times, but the three orders would be held. That means the cost of capital is held three times. Therefore, I or people of Uganda are paying interest on money they are not using. However, when they come here, they take everything for granted. At the pipeline in Kenya, a Kenyan will say, “I have my order” and then you pay him to make money at our cost. 

I would like to tell hon. Maganda that I went to Nairobi in 1991 - that was before he was born – and I accidentally got land and built a petrol station. The Kenyans wanted it and they thought the lease was about to expire, unfortunately they discovered that I had a 99-year lease. They have looked for a way to remove that land from me, unfortunately it is mine. Now, they have loaded me with charges - ground rent, service charges, etcetera because at the end of the day, they want me to get defeated so that I can leave. However, when they come here, they are given land at the road, which is free investment. These people are terrible.

We went to Tanzania and they said, “For you to do business with us, you must go back to Uganda and ensure that your Constitution is in line with ours” - term limits, free movement, etcetera. Tanzanians are too hard.

I am giving examples so that you learn from me. In Burundi, we wanted a vote and they had failed to pay membership fee –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Just give that information.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. In Burundi, they said, “For you to get our vote, you must pay for us arrears.” We paid arrears for them so that they can vote for us -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Are you now going to talk about Rwanda? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, I will not talk about Rwanda. Rwanda has been talked about. I am talking about Burundi.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you recall that Burundi even came here and coerced us, saying that they helped us during the war, and they wanted to convert their money into stationary. Do you remember the issue of Picfare, where we paid them US$ 21 million on fictitious issues because they wanted to benefit from us, just because we wanted their vote on East Africa?

Finally, when we were opening up the East African Community, I was privileged to have been taken to Arusha in Tanzania. There were issues we discussed, which you will recall, Madam Speaker, when we led a team from here in 2003. They told us that by 2010, we would be in another place. If you go there - 

In short, we as Ugandans have opened our borders for other states to benefit, to take our money and we are the chief losers. I would propose that we have only a political federation, if we can. As for trade and employment, we should go back to our SACCOs and deal with these guys at arm’s length, other than them cheating us –(Member timed out.)

4.50
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. For evil to thrive, you need only one ingredient, and that is good men and good women like you to do nothing about it. The world has become a dangerous place to live in not because of people who do evil, but because of good people who do nothing about it.

I am honoured to be the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs. Integration is something that I struggle with every other day and particularly the relationship between us and our brothers and sisters in Rwanda. It is something that I am passionate about. 

It is very important for us to look at the origin of all of these. While it is crystal clear that our leaders - I am talking about our President and the President of Rwanda - have tried to come together, at some point I really wonder whether the ministers appointed by the President are doing their job to help him achieve his goals. I am happy that the Prime Minister is in the House.

Madam Speaker, we have just passed a budget and it was supposed to be funded by, among others, the exports to Rwanda. The honourable minister for East African Community Affairs is aware that since the closure of the Rwanda-Uganda border, as a country we have lost US$ 664 million in exports. That excludes education, transporters and health providers. Translated in our local currency, that is Shs 2.4 trillion. This must be a crisis. This is something that we cannot stand to see continue. Our specific - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute please conclude.

MR KATUSABE: I think that is because I am the Shadow Minister Foreign Affairs and also the Minister of Foreign Affairs in the People’s Government. 

On July 12th, four Presidents, namely our President, the President of Rwanda, the President of Congo Brazzaville and the President of Angola met, and it was well documented. On August 21st, a memorandum of understanding was signed, with clear proposals. This was followed by an August 21st Kigali, Rwanda, meeting that was supposed to be followed by another meeting to take place in Kampala after 30 days, which has never occurred. The President of Rwanda has been clear in asking for when this meeting will ever take place. 

Madam Speaker, I ask you to please take the lead in that matter. When Rwanda and Uganda were caught up in a fight in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), this Parliament played a leading role by ensuring that a team from this Parliament interfaced with a team in Rwanda. You could do the same - (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: You said you were giving recommendations but you are submitting. Please conclude.

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, leadership is about knowing the way, going the way and showing the way. I am asking you to provide and render your distinguished leadership in resolving this crisis. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.55
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am glad that I finally caught your eye, probably because I have relocated to where I am visible.

THE SPEAKER: You are a nomad. (Laughter)

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, I appreciate our concerns about how we are deepening and widening the integration of East Africa. However, I have two burning issues. One, when you travel to South Sudan, for example, the first signpost you will see, right from the airport, says, “Our land, our oil”. We represent our people and in my view, they would benefit from this debate if this House helps them benefit from their proceeds. 

You have been told that our neighbours from South Sudan, Kenya and others, go and pay for cassava from our gardens at a cost they set for our farmers. This House needs to protect our farmers. Let us make sure the sweat of our people is not taken for granted. We cannot go to their manyatas or wherever, go into their gardens and pay our own price and come out. However, it is happening here. I think this is one of the things we should make a clear pronouncement on - how we are going to protect our people from being actually cheated from their own sweat.

Two, the only thing our citizens and all of us value very much is land. We are already federating but how are we protecting our country and citizens from manipulation, where foreigners buy our own land, not even on lease? In Kitgum, my neighbour, an Indian, bought land and is actually building. Many buildings and land have been bought by our neighbours, the South Sudanese, Kenyans and others. Big businesses are being set up here. 

Madam Speaker, our laws are there to protect our people. Can we take this opportunity and revoke our laws so that foreigners should –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: The laws are clear. I think it is lack of implementation. Please conclude. 

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, we need to stand with our people, especially at this time, and ask the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to probably look at all the land titles owned by foreigners. We are supposed to protect our people. They should use it on lease and after use, they leave it. 

We are going to lose all the little land because our people are poor. Somebody can go with any amount of money and the people give away all the land. We all have properties here. Can we take this opportunity, I pray with you, colleagues, to review all the titles owned by foreigners? Are the properties leased or owned? If they are owned, can we revoke the titles and change them into leases and help our people? I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Anywar, I think you will have to come with a formal motion so that we can have the prayers dealt with properly.

5.00
LT GEN. PECOS KUTEESA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here on two issues. I would like to ask people to start thinking like this is 2019. The East African Community they are talking about was something called Imperial British East Africa, answerable to Britain. What they call the former East African Community was Imperial British East Africa - Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania, all one colony. Kenya was the processing centre for raw materials. That is why we are saying that it is well developed. 

Since I grew up –(Interjections)– What is going on? (Laughter) Please – 

THE SPEAKER: What is the problem? What is the point of procedure?

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to refer to Article 71 and Article 72 of the Constitution, which shows that we have two sides in this House. I can see hon. Kuteesa is speaking from the other side yet he is supposed to be non-partisan. I would like to know why he chooses to go on the other side and not on this side, yet he is non-partisan. The other side is for Government.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he is speaking from there because the microphone which was in the neutral place is no longer there. So, he is okay.

Lt GEN. KUTEESA: How can such a trivial thing disrupt what we are discussing? Where I am standing to speak does not matter. What I am saying is what matters. 

When we were growing up, all the milk used to come from Kenya because that is where the processing plant was. When we got our own milk plants, now the milk is going to Kenya. Recently, I visited Kenya - I was in Nanyuki - and the milk they are feeding the youth in the National Youth Service on is from my district, Lyantonde, and the label is there. So, what we are saying is, this is an integration which should be there, with or without the political goodwill. 

The means of production are changing. The population is growing and technology is growing. Why do you have to fight for the border with Kenya? Process your things well and leave them here. Why do you pass through Kenya? It is because that was the technology of the 1960s. Why are we still stuck in the past? You should have asked Ugandans what the best way to use the opportunity we have is, not cry over spilt milk. I do not think quarrelling with South Sudan or Kenya will do anything.

The way forward, in my own thinking, is that let us ask Government how it is helping our farmers to create the right things, not what Kenya is talking about. Thank you.

MR MWIRU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I take judicial notice of the fact that Parliament is next to National Theatre. Our colleague, hon. Gume, the state minister in charge of cooperatives, rose on the Floor and read figures. I do not know what his source was. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi then challenged him by quoting figures from the United Nations database. When he challenged him, the minister sat back. 

I was wondering whether it is procedurally right for a colleague to rise on the Floor of Parliament and state figures which are not correct. When he is challenged, he sits comfortably yet it has gone to the records. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, Madam Speaker, that the statement he made be expunged from our records since he sat back?

In other parliaments, telling a lie on the Floor of Parliament can cause you to resign. Therefore, I am seeking your indulgence on whether it is going to be expunged from our records so that we proceed with the figures hon. Nandala-Mafabi gave.

THE SPEAKER: Let him tell us his source. Hon. Gume, what is the source of your information?

MR GUME: Madam Speaker, it is true hon. Nandala-Mafabi gave figures. However, I am not under an obligation to believe hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s figures when mine are researched from office. Next Tuesday, I will bring the details and lay them on the Table. The source is the Uganda Bureau – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not intimidate the minister.

MR GUME: I will definitely request that I lay on the Table the figures I presented in Parliament. Equally, we should be able to compare hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s figures with the ones I gave and we see which ones are real. I did not sit back because I was taken up by these figures. I sat back because I do not want to elongate a discussion without facts. Let us have the facts on Tuesday and I will lay them here on the Table. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, my name has been dragged into this matter. You know that I am a Christian and to prove that, I have forwarded the same figures to hon. Gume. 

Hon. Gume, you are a Christian; I have forwarded them to you. He wanted to say, “I am going to mention that yours are Africa…” No; mine are from UNCTAD, and it is on the East African Community Regional Integration. I have given you the figures and I will share them with everybody who needs them.

Madam Speaker, on figures, you know me. Therefore, what I have said is a true story. The minister was guessing and wanted to let us go –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, both of you will lay your figures on the Table on Tuesday and then we shall take a decision. 

I will invite the Prime Minister to speak. However, one honourable minister of East African Community Affairs talked about the performance of the treaty and it has become clear that there are many issues, especially at the lower level. When the EAC was being revived, we were told that this community would be people-centred. However, you have heard the issues raised in the House about the people relations. The top may be okay but probably, the bottom is not very well. Therefore, you will have to come back.

I suppose we have never had a full debate on the East African Community in this House. That is why I allowed it. I had also planned for only 30 minutes but due to the interest, I allowed the debate to continue. Honourable minister, I do not know whether you still want to speak or allow the Prime Minister to wind up.

5.08
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to commend our colleague, hon. Maganda, for producing a good statement on deepening integration in East Africa.

Madam Speaker, I would like to also give a few clarifications on some of the issues that have been raised, particularly concerning foreign affairs. I was rather surprised to hear two colleagues in this House say that Uganda has an aggressive foreign policy, that Uganda has been destabilising her neighbours. Nothing could be further from the truth.

The fact of the matter, as you well know, friends, is that Uganda has played a very constructive role in ensuring that the East African Region is peaceful. (Applause) One or two colleagues quoted the example of South Sudan. You know, conflict broke up in South Sudan and the Government of South Sudan asked the Government of Uganda to go and assist them, especially in protecting and rescuing people who were in danger because of the conflict. I must salute the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) because they did this work of protecting life very well.

If friends have any doubts about the role of Uganda in South Sudan, you very well know that President Salva Kiir and Dr Riek Machar, the leader of the opposition, were here together only a few days ago under the leadership of our President, to see how best they can finalise the peace efforts. In fact, it is in the Entebbe meeting that they both agreed that they should give themselves an extra 100 days in order to ensure that the implementation of the agreement was fool proof and not in danger.

Therefore, the role of Uganda has been very clear and consistent, with promotion of peace not only in Uganda but in the whole region –(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, I do not need to be persuaded about receiving information from my good friend; the Floor is yours. (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much. Ndugu will always remain Ndugu and that brotherhood will always be there. Thank you very much for accepting this point of clarification, which I am seeking from you. 

Now that the Juba Government was able to call you to assist at their time of need, is it also in the same vein that in 2016, immediately and/or around election time, you also asked Juba to send the troops that were manning our airstrip and those who were in Nabbingo and Mukono? Was it in the same spirit of cooperation that we must scratch one another’s backs? That is the clarification which I want from you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I am hearing of this for the first time. I doubt its authenticity. Outside this House, I will ask my brother to give me more details. 

Now, let me talk about one other issue. Colleagues have criticised Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) for participating in resolving the disputes at the Uganda-South Sudan border. That is exactly the work of the RDCs – to ensure that conflicts among the population at the grassroots are tackled at that level, instead of waiting for people to come from Kampala –(Interruption)

MR ACIDRI: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for giving way. You have clearly stated that at the request of the Juba administration, you went there deliberately to promote peace and you ensured that peace was guaranteed. Why then are we hosting very many refugees if your visit to Juba was to promote peace and peace was achieved? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, there is no doubt that the speaker has constructed his own sentences and attributed them to me. What I said is that Uganda was invited because people’s lives were in danger and that Uganda went and saved lives and that job was done well. 

It is true, of course, that there are still challenges of peace in South Sudan; there is no debate about that. There are even some scattered conflicts in a number of areas, and the people are right to run away from danger when their lives are threatened. It is the duty and pleasure of Uganda to rescue her friends when they are in trouble in South Sudan.

However, let me make a couple of remarks and conclude. The RDCs have a responsibility to settle disputes, whether at the Uganda-South Sudan border or some other places. Let me also say that because of their work, Uganda and Sudan (Khartoum) have been given the responsibility to be guarantors of peace in South Sudan. The leadership of both countries are doing this job very well.

Colleagues have been very pessimistic, and I am rather surprised because the achievements of the East African Community are glaring; they are palpable. Even my very good friend from Lwemiyaga can easily touch, feel and talk about them. Let me just mention two or three - (Interjection) - The vision is improving every day that passes. (Laughter) 

One major point is that with a national identity card, you can now move from Uganda to Kenya and Rwanda - (Interjection) - It is just a question of time for the rest. We do not expect things to be done within one day; it is a process. Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania started it and it is going to continue and cover other countries.

Secondly, for the first time, we have an East African passport, which is internationally recognised. This is a great thing. The point about the one area network has also been quoted, which is really a positive point. In addition, we are now drafting a constitution for the East African confederation. This shows that the leadership in East Africa is very serious and we are moving closer to integration.

My brother, hon. Gume, gave us very good information about trade. The fact that Uganda now has a trade balance of US$ 557 million with her East African neighbours is a great thing. I can see some doubting Thomases, including my brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, please conclude.

DR RUGUNDA: To conclude on this matter, East Africa is on course to deepen its integration. This process is not stoppable. There may be irritants here and there - my brother from Kisoro mentioned an unfortunate situation at the border - but it is our duty to resolve them and move forward.

The leadership of the National Resistance Movement (NRM) and the leadership of Uganda is committed to promoting East African – [Hon Okot-Ogong: “Pan Africanism”] - Thank you; you spoke very well. (Laughter) Ndugu Okot-Ogong spoke very well. It is true that we are committed to Pan African promotion and we will take any steps necessary to ensure that the people of Africa, who all along have been one but were merely balkanised by colonialism, get closer and closer for the benefit of Africa. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. The Minister for East African Community Affairs will have to come back here so that we have a general debate on the issue of the community. However, we note the celebrations and we wish you well. I am sure that Members will go and attend the celebrations.

There is something I would like the Attorney-General to explain to us. There is a convention on the right of transit of goods to land locked states, which makes the Port of Mombasa a port of Uganda. I would like to know why it has not been applied and why we are being treated as if it is not our port. I hope that the Attorney-General can come and give us an answer on that convention. Thank you, Prime Minister. Let us go to item 4(b).

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE FINANCING MODALITIES FOR THE KAMPALA-JINJA EXPRESSWAY AND OTHER KEY ROAD INFRASTRUCTURAL PROJECTS

5.21
THE MINISTER FOR KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (Mr John Byabagambi): Madam Speaker, I beg that this item be deferred because the Cabinet is in consultations and we are concluding this matter on Monday. I beg that the statement comes on Tuesday. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: The statement will be presented on Tuesday.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I recall that at one time, cows never had water and we were in recess but we were called to come and pass a supplementary budget to provide money for cows to have water –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: We have been together with hon. Nandala-Mafabi for a long time. I think we came to this House together and we understand each other very well. He crashes me and I crash him, so nobody crashes the other. However, Madam Speaker, I think you have ruled on this matter that the statement should come on Tuesday. Is it in order for us to continue debating it when you have already ruled? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that matter will return on Tuesday.

RESPONSES BY MINISTERS TO ISSUES RAISED

THE SPEAKER: We shall start with the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities - 5(a)(i) and (ii). Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I think now it is the right time to name these ministers. These questions have been on the Order Paper for almost six months and as you can see, those two ministers are not here. By the way, they do not attend House. 

5.24
THE PRIME MINSTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, Ndugu Ephraim Kamuntu, the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities has just sent me a message. He is at a funeral - he has lost a very close friend - and that is why he is not in the House.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, I think that he is supposed to inform the Speaker. I gave notice about these questions the other week when you were not here. Yesterday, I informed you that these questions have to be answered today. I am going to take action, Prime Minister. Let us go to the next one.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT TO ISSUES RAISED

5.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Madam Speaker, at the 39th Sitting of the First Meeting of the Fourth Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda, held on Tuesday, 1 October 2019, hon. Sarah Najjuma raised concern over the escalating fatalities due to fallen electric poles and sagging electric wires and the unreliable emergency response of Umeme.

I wish to make the following statement on the matter: Supply of safe, reliable electricity remains Umeme’s number one priority. They aim for zero harm to their staff, contractors and the general public arising from supply of electricity. The energy sector continues to educate customers and the general public on the responsible use of electricity and its dangers. 

Over the period, the level of accidents continues to reduce despite the five-fold increase in customer connections and the doubling of the size of the network. Despite the improvements, unfortunately fatalities continue to be registered arising out of contact with the network, illegal connections like power theft, internal wiring and construction of structures within the proximity of electricity distribution lines. 

Madam Speaker, the Nakaseke incident is regrettable. It took place on 1 October 2019. Mr Robert Kiwanuka was found dead on the ground laying besides broken electric wires in Nakaseke. This was after a heavy downpour on 30 September 2019 that led to the leaning of the medium voltage line, which got into contact with a low voltage line that had been isolated.

Preliminary investigations have revealed that the medium voltage line energised the low voltage line, leading to the electrocution of Mr Robert Kiwanuka on contact with the conductors. Investigations are still ongoing and are nearly complete. We shall further establish the details of this accident. 

I would like to say a few words about safety improvement and strategy. Umeme is running a public communications programme that seeks to educate the public about the dangers of power theft, vandalism, and what to do should members of the public see power lines on the ground. Umeme will continue with its mass public education on the responsible use of electricity and its underlining dangers through radio, television and online media platforms. They equally target schools and community engagements in addition to involving local leaders in the safety sensitisation. 

We appreciate the involvement of the opinion leaders in participating in public sensitisation. We also commend Members of Parliament that have supported the company in community engagement in their areas.

Regarding the state of the network, Umeme has undertaken major works on the refurbishment of the medium voltage networks and substations, which are now in a much better shape. Following discussions and engagements with Electricity Regulatory Authority (ERA), they are embarking on the refurbishment of the low voltage network through capital investments and normal repairs and maintenance. 

Electricity Regulatory Authority has approved resources to execute these works. Umeme runs a network inspection programme, which drives the network maintenance programme. High priority is given to the network assets that pose a safety risk to the public. They have extended their operating footprint closer to the customer through the opening of six new centres across the country - four more offices in Busia, Kumi, Mpigi and Luweero.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it seems your question has gone beyond what was asked. The issue was about the sagging lines in Nakaseke and non-reliable emergency response by Umeme.

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, the other question, which was raised here, was on the emergency response, which is the next paragraph. Umeme operates a call centre that runs 24/7, where the public can report emergencies on toll-free lines 0800285285 and 0800385385. Umeme responds to such calls in less than 20 minutes to isolate the affected section of the line and render it safe. Where it is not possible to reach the actual site quickly, the line is switched off remotely. Unfortunately, illegal operators sometimes reconnect these lines thus causing accidents.

I would like to inform the House that apart from the four new offices we have listed above, there will be one new office in Nakaseke District, as a result of extending bigger power to that area, which we are about to switch on. The response time is expected to improve equally in Nakaseke District.

Anti-Power Theft Initiative

Umeme will also be running a power theft reduction initiative. To this end, they have enlisted the services of the Uganda Police Force to help in apprehending identified power thieves. What has been observed is that the electrocution victims are women and children and not the actual perpetrators of the vice of illegal power connections. Community sweeps are ongoing in Mbale, Wandegeya Natete, Najjanankumbi, Kabalagala and Masaka, among other places. These were the notorious areas. We appreciate the unwavering support of the Uganda Police Force in tackling power theft and vandalism of electricity infrastructure.

In conclusion, Umeme remains committed to ensuring staff, contractor and public safety remain a priority and are at the core of its operations. We will continue to implement the strategy and learn from safety incidents to improve the strategy and future approaches. We appeal for the continued support of our colleagues, other community leaders and the general public in the sensitisation and reporting of unsafe network conditions, especially during the rainy season. 

I would like to still repeat the emergency lines - 0800285285 and 0800385385. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there are three other questions. Can you please respond to them quickly? 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, could we clear those emergencies as he organises.

THE SPEAKER: Let him finish the responses. There is the one on inadequate power supply that has affected Kisoro District for over two months, raised by hon. James Nsaba Buturo.        

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, this is a very short one. On the 1st Sitting of the 2nd Meeting of the Fourth Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda, held on Wednesday, 30 October 2019, hon. James Nsaba Buturo, Member of Parliament for Bufumbira County East, raised concern over the inadequate power supply that has affected Kisoro District for the past two months. 

Kisoro District was initially served from Rwanda, through Bunagana. This was way back in the 1980s before our power line reached that area. The power supply from Rwanda has not been stable, affecting areas they serve in Kisoro District. 

The good news is that we have since built a line from Kabale to Kisoro. We are now shifting all the load of Kisoro where there is this problem to the line from Kabale. This problem will be solved very shortly.

THE SPEAKER: The other question was on vandalism of transformers. 

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, at the First Sitting of the Second Meeting of the Fourth Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda, held on Wednesday, 30 October 2019, hon. James Waluswaka, Member of Parliament of Bunyole County West, raised concern over the vandalism of transformers and other electrical power installations in various parts of the country. Hon. Jacob Markson Oboth, Member of Parliament, West Budama County South, urged Government to present a Bill to Parliament amending the Electricity Act by imposing punitive provisions on vandalism of public properties.

Transmission and distribution companies have had a challenge of vandalism of electrical installations, especially underground cables, wires, transformers and transformer oil.

An approach of community policing has been used to control vandalism on the distribution network with little success. The sector has met the Chief of Defence Forces (CDF) and the Inspector General Police (IGP) on the matter of vandalism for their intervention that will include regular checks on scrap dealers and smelters to curtail trading in electrical installations as scrap.

A Bill amending the Electricity Act is, among others, imposing punitive measures on vandalism and has been cleared by the Attorney-General for consideration by Cabinet. The certificate of financial implication has also been issued by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The Bill will be brought before Parliament as soon as it is considered by Cabinet. 

Madam Speaker, now that I am on this subject, I would like to appeal to all leaders of this country that the issue of vandalism is very serious. As a matter of fact, the Prime Minister has called our ministry for a meeting tomorrow together with the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Security.  This is because even the lines we are building now from Karuma to Kawanda are being vandalized. The line we are building from Tororo to Lira – you remember that line was made of wooden poles and we are changing them to steel – is being vandalized. Therefore, Government will meet tomorrow under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister to see what we can do. The law will take time to come here, but we want to sit and see what we can do immediately. 

My colleague was earlier on wondering about what I have done. I have instructed that his transformers be replaced as we get a permanent solution to this problem. 

THE SPEAKER: The fourth question is about the rampant power outages in northern Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, following a letter dated 4 November 20l9 by hon. Ronald Reagan Okumu, a member of the Committee on Natural Resources, my ministry was required to respond to extreme power fluctuations in Gulu and Kitgum areas. Specifically, hon. Okumu Reagan was seeking for – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the minister of state answered that question at the wrong time. We had asked him to respond to question No.4 from hon. Komakech but he came and answered the one from hon. Reagan Okumu. 

MR D’UJANGA: Luckily, the one from hon. Komakech is also here. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us then go to that one because the others were answered by hon. Lokeris. 

MR D’UJANGA: As I was saying, in another letter dated 6th, the Rt Hon. Speaker directed my ministry to respond to concerns over rampant power outages in northern Uganda, including plans by Government to connect West Nile to the national grid, raised by hon. Komakech, MP for Gulu Municipality; hon. Atiku Bernard, MP for Ayivu County; and hon. Akena Jimmy, MP for Lira Municipality.

Power supply to the northern region is through a 33 kV wooden pole, old line all the way from Lira, Kitgum, through Adjumani to Moyo. It is a very long distance for that voltage. Therefore, the area served will have intermittent power failures and dim lights. 

Government recognises power demand growth in northern Uganda due to various economic activities taking place in the region. The issue of power cuts has been raised before in different fora by my honourable colleagues. 

The first intervention that has been implemented to increase power reliability in northern Uganda is to install a second transformer at Lira substation to double the capacity of the substation from 20MW to 40MW. This intervention has increased power reliability in the region as implementation of short and medium term interventions are at different levels. I will elaborate on short and medium term interventions later.

The second intervention implemented by Government is to provide additional power generation of 7MW to West Nile that has greatly improved power reliability, as we continue to progress the project that will eventually connect West Nile on the national grid. I will elaborate on the progress of Government plans to connect West Nile on the national grid later.

Therefore, the prolonged power outage that was witnessed on Friday, 1 November 2019 till Sunday, 3 November 2019 was due to an unplanned technical fault on the transmission network.

My ministry, therefore, wishes to respond to the specific issues raised by the Rt Hon. Speaker and my honourable colleagues mentioned above as follows:

Issue One: Restoration of Power Supply in the Subregion for Domestic and Industrial Needs
Gulu and Kitgum are connected on the national grid through the 132kV Tororo-Opuyo-Lira transmission line on wooden poles, which experience breakdowns especially in swampy areas.

There was a technical fault on the 132kV transmission line between Soroti and Lira substations at Kirikiti swamp, whereby a wooden pole in this swamp collapsed on Friday, 1 November 2019, leaving all areas served by Lira substation out of supply for about two days. 

Issue Two: Explanation on how Government will Ensure Power Supply Reliability in Northern Uganda
In the short term, construction of Aswa Hydropower Dam is complete. The line evacuating power from Aswa Dam will be ready by the end of November 2019. Gulu, Kitgum and all the other areas in the north will, therefore, be getting locally generated power from Aswa Dam with effect from December 2019. 

Madam Speaker, as I was coming here, I checked and I was told that this power station and the line are actually ready. I will personally travel on Wednesday to Aswa and Gulu to see if we can connect Gulu, Kitgum up to Moyo on the new power station, which has been constructed. 

We are also constructing Tororo-Opuyo-Lira line on metallic poles. As I have already said, we removed the wooden poles and replaced them with metallic ones and this work has been going on. We expect to finish this project this financial year but we have numerous court injunctions within the Tororo area. Even those we had paid have come back asking for more money. The second problem is vandalism. Therefore, these two issues may delay the project.

The Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Limited has commenced on the rehabilitation of the 33kV Lira-Gulu and Lira-Kitgum lines in order to enhance their reliability in the short-term. As I said, next week we may change Gulu, Kitgum, Adjumani and Moyo to the new power station. Actually, we may feed as way back as to Lira because it may be better.

In the medium and long term, the 132kV transmission line connecting Karuma Hydropower Dam to Lira substation is under construction and is about 85 per cent complete. This power line, once completed, will provide an opportunity for the region to get power directly from Karuma. Once we finish this line, Lira can get power either from Karuma or from Owen Falls Dam. There will now be flexibility in that place. 

Procurement is ongoing for the contractor to undertake construction works for the 132kV Lira-Gulu-Nebbi-Arua transmission line. The evaluation report has been submitted to the financiers (World Bank) for review and clearance. The line will not only connect West Nile to the national grid but also provide power supply reliability in northern Uganda. The project scope is as follows:

    a) Construction of 301km of 132kV Lira-Gulu-Nebbi-Arua transmission line. It will have capacity to supply not less than 200MW;
    b) There will be a substation at Kole;
    c) A substation at Gulu; 
    d) A substation at Nebbi; 
    e) A substation at Arua. 

Gladly, I can say we have procured the land for all these substations, except for Arua where out of eight people, one person is still resisting what the Chief Government Valuer has offered him. However, we are negotiating and we hope that by the end of this month, we shall have all the land in place so that we can start this construction.

Construction of the 400kV Karuma-Olwiyo transmission line with a substation at Olwiyo is near completion. My colleagues who come from that side can confirm that this line is being constructed. It is being constructed under the Karuma project to provide further connectivity to northern Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, I can say that northern Uganda will be enjoying power from three sources if these works are completed - Karuma, Aswa and Jinja. I think that in six months or so, I may not be standing here explaining shortage of power in that area because there will not be shortage of power.

The Government has secured funding from KfW of Germany to construct the 83km 132kV Gulu-Agago/Achwa – I have already talked about this. Initially, we were building a line with our own resources to bring power to Gulu – the line I will check on, on Wednesday. However, we want a more permanent line which does not use wooden poles and we have got the money from KfW to build that line.

Madam Speaker, the last issue was about providing different rural electrification schemes in Acholi sub-region and I have attached a comprehensive list here.

THE SPEAKER: Isn’t that the one which the honourable minister of state also brought. Hon. Lokeris came with a long list.

MR D’UJANGA: Oh! Was this answered?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, it was answered.

MR D’UJANGA: Sorry. Lastly, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank Parliament because all these monies I have talked about were approved by Parliament. I thank this august House for its support to my ministry with all these funds. The only challenges we have been having were land acquisition and vandalism. I would also like to inform the House that we are looking at a special programme to supply industrial parks, which can create jobs for our youth. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: We will have only one supplementary question from hon. Waluswaka.

5.51
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for attempting to answer the questions. However, on the ground it is totally negative. 

Some of us who are in NRM speak with pain. In Busolwe, for example, there is a transformer – Honourable minister, the technical officer you came with here even comes from Butaleja. He can take you to the transformer which the Umeme people themselves took. I do not know whether it is now Umeme vandalising the transformers themselves. They took the transformer, saying they were going to repair it in Lugogo here and it is now six months since it was taken. The other day, we went to bury hon. Okupa’s mother in Kasilo and found that Umeme took everything. 

Honourable minister, I do not know whether you gave these Umeme people the contract to sniff all the money from Ugandans. When they generate power from Jinja, Government pays for it whether we have used it or not. This is the pain. The Umeme people themselves steal the oil from these transformers. Honourable minister, you have not done anything. You told me that you called- 

Madam Speaker, if by Tuesday there is no power in Butaleja, the minister will see what the people of Butaleja and Ugandans can do. (Laughter) It is very unfortunate that the minister comes from an area where there is no power. I have a record of the network of power and roads for the whole country. When you go to where the minister comes from, power is very scanty and he comes here to defend the un-defendable.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as the Leader of Government Business and a good cadre, instead of just bringing reports on the Floor, let work be done on the ground. Madam Speaker, I would like the minister to tell me when power will be restored in Butaleja. Let him say it on the record such that the villagers can see him.
	
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the supplementary should arise from his answer. Your question was about vandalism. Let him talk about when he will return the transformer.

With regard to northern Uganda and West Nile, he said that he is going to establish stations in Kole, Nebbi, Gulu and Arua; that is what he has said. You will check and catch him if he does not do it. Honourable minister, please answer the issue of the transformers.

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, before we came to the House, I met my good friend, hon. Waluswaka outside and we agreed. Even after here, we will go out together. I have given instructions to Umeme Limited but I would like to request my honourable colleague that when this transformer is returned, we get airtime on the local radio stations and sensitise those people not to steal the oil again.

Madam Speaker, the oil may be of small use but the damage they have done – I think it is now a month. We will talk about it on radio and see how we can correct this problem. 

I would like to also appeal to all my colleagues that if you have problems like this, let me know. Do not wait for us to talk about it here. My office is open and the Prime Minister’s office is open. Let us know. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Item five. Honourable members, the questions have been answered. Item five(c), the Minister of Foreign Affairs - 

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. THOMAS TAYEBWA ON THE BUREAUCRATIC PROCEDURES AND PROCESSES THAT APPLICANTS FOR ENTRY VISAS TO EGYPT ARE SUBJECTED TO WHILE AT THE EGYPTIAN EMBASSY IN KAMPALA AND THE ATTENDANT DISTRESS CAUSED

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Foreign Affairs is not there. Item five (d).

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. JOVAH KAMATEEKA ON THE INAPPROPRIATE WASTE DISPOSAL IN THE VARIOUS URBAN CENTRES AND THE NEED FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENTS TO ENSURE CLEAN AND HABITABLE ENVIRONMENTS

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Local Government is not there. Item five (e), Ministry of Works and Transport -

RESPONSE BY MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. STEPHEN KANGWAGYE ON THE DELAYS BY THE MINISTRY OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT TO COMPLETE THE ISINGIRO-NTANTAMUKI ROAD, WHICH HAS STIFLED BUSINESSES AND CAUSED DISTRESS AMONG THE RESIDENTS OF ISINGIRO AND THE NEIGHBOURING DISTRICTS

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was vandalism around my transformer in Mbulamuti and it was on the main road. What I did was to move it to my compound. Now, for the last four years, no one has touched it. I moved it from the road to my home and now power is stable. Ministry of Works and Transport -

5.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a statement presented to Parliament in response to a concern raised by hon. Stephen Kangwagye, regarding delays by the Ministry of Works and Transport to complete the Isingiro-Ntantamuki Road, which has stifled business and caused distress among the residents of Isingiro and the neighbouring districts.

Madam Speaker, I would like to respond as follows: The Isingiro-Ntantamuki Road is currently in a fair state after the contractor completed rectifying the defects between Isingiro and Rugaga. The road was divided into two sections. A call-off order number one handled Isingiro-Rugaga, which is 30 kilometres, which section was successfully completed.

The second section, which is Rugaga–Ntantamuki - 26 kilometres -, is being handled under call-off order No.2 and the grading works are on-going. The company doing the work is known as Wainaki Company Limited. However, the major challenges experienced include:

    1. The call-off orders are limited to lack of funds;
    2. Rains are inhibiting progress of works;
    3. This road is also heavily trafficked because of the Nakivale Refugee Camp.

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

5.59
MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. You have heard the minister fail to spell the word “Ntantamuki” not because he does not know how to read but to me, it is because he has not taken keen interest and time to be on the road itself. Maybe the very people that he is using on the ground are the ones trying to convince him that the road is in good shape. Madam Speaker, even if you went and saw the road now, it is in bad condition. 

Regarding Wainaki Company Limited, for the first call-off order that they had, they worked on the side of Isingiro to Ntantamuki. According to the contract, they were told to put good murram, culverts and open the drainages but this was not done.

Regarding the section from Rugaga to Ntantamuki - honourable minister, if you want, we can go there tomorrow to see the road that I am talking about. If you want me to share with you the pictures from my phone, I can do it for you to see. I do not know where you got this information from.

Honourable minister, I think it would have been better if you had called the area Member of Parliament who raised the issue before you came here so that we could compare notes. I can tell you how the road is so that when you come on the Floor of Parliament, you present a statement that will convince the area Member of Parliament and the House.

Madam Speaker, the road is highly trafficked with a lot of Matooke trucks, cows and passengers. The road is stressed with traffic.

I would like to thank the Government. We have received a lot of money that was given to the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) in conjunction with the Ministry of Works and Transport for that road but up to now, the road is in a sorry state. 

Madam Speaker, I really need to get some help from you. Kindly tell the minister to compel UNRA to go and do some good work on the road. That would be reasonable. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the Member is not satisfied and it seems the road is impassable. You also talked about the trucks that carry refugees and their items. I think there is a programme where the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is supposed to help us with roads. You should examine that.

Honourable minister, could you also visit Ntantamuki so that the Member can – you could actually go with him so that you can examine the road and satisfy the people he represents. Thank you. Item 5(e) (ii).

RESPONSE BY MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. ISAAC ETUUKA ON THE TWO BRIDGES DAMAGED BY FLOODS AT OFFAKA SUB COUNTY, UPPER MADI COUNTY

6.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. During the sitting of Parliament on 12 September 2019, hon. Isaac Joakino Etuka raised concern over damage of two bridges in Upper Madi County by heavy floods, which has hindered transport in the area. He specifically made the new Madi Okollo District Headquarters inaccessible to the people of Offaka, Uleppi and Anyiribu sub-counties and cost human lives.

Madam Speaker, allow me to respond as follows; it has been established that the two bridges - Ora Timber Deck Bridge, with broken timber decking and Linya Timber Deck Bridge, with collapsed deck and abutment walls and the Olido Culvert crossings lie broken along Anyiribu, Offaka, Uleppi, Arara and Odraka in Madi Okollo District Headquarters, which is 51 kilometres and the Baribu, Canya, Pawor Security road, which is 21 kilometres in Madi Okollo District. These roads are part of the district road network.

The two bridges were constructed during colonial times and are now dilapidated hence requiring rehabilitation or reconstruction. The district recently carried out preliminary inspection and assessment and estimated repair of the timber decking at Ora Bridge at about Shs 13 million. 

In October 2019, the ministry sent engineers to carry out detailed field inspections with a view of establishing the scope and cost of the required bridging interventions on the two bridge sites, culvert crossings and the two roads. This would inform the planning and scheduling of the requisite bridging intervention works.

At the short-term intervention, however, the district in consultation with the Uganda Road Fund should carry out repair of the timber decking at Ora Bridge based on the estimates submitted by the district.

Given that the ministry budget for Financial Year 2019/2020 is already committed and in view of the constraints associated with it, no work shall be carried out at the Linya Bridge site during this financial year. 

When the final designs and cost estimates are finalised by the ministry, the bridge will, together with several others already designed but with no funding, be considered for construction in the subsequent financial year depending on the availability of funds.

Madam Speaker, I wish to inform honourable members of Parliament that the need for bridging interventions countrywide is immense; even with the torrential rains that we are receiving, my ministry of doing the best possible with the limited available resources. 

Indeed, I appreciate the substantial increase in my ministry’s budget in the last two years but in order to attain reasonable impact, it would be necessary to develop special projects to address the stock of aging bridge structures as well as address the new bridging requirements.

I plan to bring proposals for these bridge projects in the near future for approval, particularly the proposed construction of 100 steel bridges on the Duka Network across the country. I request for your support when the projects are tabled before this august House for funding. I beg to submit, thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Etuuka, are you assisting him?

MR ASIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I got instructions from hon. Etuuka. These bridges have been a problem for a very long time and it appears that the district does not have capacity to repair or maintain, similarly with the roads.

His request was that this infrastructure should be placed under UNRA so that some work can be done. Apparently, the minister’s work tends to give an impression that since these are district roads, there is nothing that can be done and therefore, we only wait for the district to do the work. I think that is a lamentable situation.

Road infrastructure in the districts is very important for economic activities and I know how important these roads are for the districts. I still appeal that let there be consideration that these be done under UNRA. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, they apparently say that they do not have the capacity; can UNRA take over? We only allow supplementary questions from the person who asked.

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like I said, this road belongs to the district because the roads that we have in this country are owned by different entities of Government. 

The national roads, which are about 2,200 kilometres, are owned by the Uganda National Roads Authority and the other roads are owned by district authorities. Community roads are owned by sub county authorities and urban roads are owned by the urban authorities.

When we are planning - of course every entity plans for what they own - but the truth is that there are a number of roads that have attained the status to be taken over by UNRA and I agree with the honourable Member of Parliament who raised the supplementary question.

However, the law requires that when UNRA takes up a road, it takes it up with associated funding. Therefore, if the minister is giving UNRA powers to take up a road, you must also provide the money for the amount of kilometres; something that we are now trying to plan because of the need that has grown.

Madam Speaker, in the last one year, the ministry has intervened and has gone down to the districts to help in these areas where there is dire need. Like I put it in my response, we sent our engineers and they have given us the status; we have captured it and we are planning.

At the end of the rainy season, there are some areas that we intend to go to as emergencies and this is one of the areas that we may, if we have the resources to get there.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, go to question No.5 (e) 3, the Sigulu ferry. 

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. This statement is presented in response to a matter raised at the 1st Sitting of the 2nd Meeting of the 4th session of the Tenth Parliament, by hon. George Abbot Ouma, MP Bukooli Island concerning the Sigulu ferry, meant for the communities in Sigulu Island and yet lying idle at Masese in Jinja District.

The issue of Sigulu Island is being implemented under vote 113 by UNRA. The Ministry of Works and Transport acknowledges the transport challenges experienced by the people of the islands and is working towards the actualisation of the Sigulu ferry operations. 

In terms of progress, I would like to report as follows;

The construction of the Sigulu ferry commenced in August 2018 and is currently in the advanced stages, with 98 per cent of the works completed by October 20l9, which has elapsed and it is now ready. 

The vessel was floated on water at the end of June 20l9 to continue with the remaining construction works and tests and not to commence operations. As a result, familiarisation training, testing and sea trials have been carried out during the first quarter of Financial Year 2019/2020. The Ministry of Works and Transport has also carried out sea worthiness inspection of the ferry.

Sigulu ferry will serve Namayingo District by connecting the Namayingo mainland to Sigulu Island and Lolwe Island on Lake Victoria. Once the ferry construction is complete, therefore, it will need to dock on three landing sites to effectively connect Namayingo District. 

The three selected landing sites are:

a) 	Watega Landing Site on the mainland that is Bukana/Buduma
b) 	Bumalenge on Sigulu Island, and
c) 	Kadenge Landing Site on Lolwe Island

A two-year contract for design and build of the three landing sites was signed between UNRA and Muga Services Limited in February 2019 and the site handover to the contractor took place in March 2019. 

The contract scope includes the construction of waiting shades, ferry landings, landscaping, toilets, fencing and staff quarters.

As of October 2019, review of the detailed draft engineering design was completed and 5 per cent progress attained. As a temporary measure however, UNRA has undertaken the construction of temporary landing sites to support the ferry operations in the interim and they are estimated to be complete by end of December 2019.  The progress of 90 per cent was attained as of end of October 2019 and temporary landing sites at Watega and Bumalenge landing sites are complete.

Mobilisation to commence construction works in Kadenge is on-going. The ferry will, therefore, start operations after the completion of all the works - both civil and mechanical - and subject to availability of an operational budget.

The Ministry of Works and Transport continues to work with local leaders and all stakeholders, with commitment to have the project completed to ease transport for the people of Sigulu Islands. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Is Hon. Abott Ouma here to raise a supplementary question? He is not here. Hon. Hope Mukisa is also not here. We needed a supplementary. Honourable minister, you said that the ferry will start when the works are complete. Can you give us a date, maybe end of December so that the people of Sigulu know that they are going to have transport?

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The date that we proposed was 31 December, for it to make its maiden voyage.

THE SPEAKER: What of the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road?

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. ESTHER DAVINIA ANYAKUN ON THE DEPLORABLE STATE OF THE MUYEMBE-NAKAPIRIPRIT ROAD

6.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This statement is presented in response to a concern raised at the 1st Sitting of the 2nd Meeting of the 4th Session of the 10th Parliament by hon. Esther Davinia Anyakun, Nakapiripirit District Woman Representative, on the deplorable state of the Muyembe- Nakapiripirit road. 

Madam Speaker, there has been a delay in concluding the procurement of a contractor for the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road (92 kilometres) for over a year because the loan had expired and UNRA was waiting for an extension of the loan before it could proceed with the contracting process. 

The delays were occasioned by the process to finalise the loan re-negotiations by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Islamic Development Bank to finance the civil works and for Parliament to approve the renegotiated loan agreement, which was accomplished. 

The project is planned to commence this financial year, after the Islamic Development Bank, which is funding the civil works, granted a no-objection to UNRA to sign the contract on 15 September 2019. The contract for upgrading the works has been signed and a contractor known as Polat Yol Yapi, a Turkish company, was the best evaluated bidder and is in the process of mobilising.

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Anyakun, do you have any supplementary or are you satisfied with the information?

6.18
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the response. I actually got a written response and we also got to know that the contractor was given the documentation. Everything was done by Uganda National Roads Authority the other day. So, thank you very much for that.

THE SPEAKER: So, it is work in progress. Thank you.

RESPONSE BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. JACKSON KAFUUZI ON THE CONTINUOUS ENFORCEMENT OF THE LAW ON IDLE AND DISORDERLY DESPITE THE PRESIDENTIAL DIRECTIVE TO THE POLICE AND KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY FOR ITS SUSPENSION

THE SPEAKER: I do not see him here.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, before my senior colleague comes to respond to question g (i), I would like to give you information. I see a list of statements under the Ministry of Health and yet I had already responded to some of them.

For example, I responded to question g (ii) on the black outs at Nakaseke Hospital, raised by hon. Luttamaguzi in September. On question g (v) on the increasing infant and maternal mortality at Masaka Regional Referral Hospital; I responded to this on 6 November 2019.

Therefore, I request that these be struck off so that the minister responds to what is left. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. It is true these were already answered. The Clerk should be more vigilant on what has been accomplished. Minister of Health, very briefly.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF HEALTH TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. ROBINAH SSENTONGO ON THE DEPLORABLE STATE OF ADOLESCENT REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH SERVICE DELIVERY

6.19
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 4 September 2019, hon. Robinah Nakasirye Ssentongo, MP Kyotera District, raised concern over the deplorable state of adolescent reproductive health service delivery. 

The Ministry of Health acknowledges the importance of promoting adolescent reproductive health issues, as a strategic focus for improving the general state of sexual reproductive health in the country and continues to provide accurate sexual reproductive health information and adolescent-friendly reproductive health services as priority interventions under the Health Sector Development Plan.

It is against this background that my ministry adopted the adolescent-friendly service policy and strategy, which recommends strengthening service delivery, providing a conducive environment, young people engagement, collaborative and multi-sectoral service delivery, involvement of key stakeholders such as teachers, legislators, community, cultural and religious leaders and parents in the provision of accurate reproductive health information to adolescents. 

The policy applies to both static and services delivered through outreaches. In addition, my ministry has gone ahead and developed tools that health workers, teachers, Village Health Teams, legislators and community leaders can use to advocate and deliver information to adolescents and caretakers. 

A curriculum was developed to train health workers on the provision of adolescent-friendly reproductive health services, in order to improve the quality of services and improve use by adolescents to prevent and manage reproductive health-related issues.

Kyotera District is one of the districts that has benefitted from a project known as DREAMS. DREAMS stands for Determined, Resilient, Empowered AIDS-Free, Mentored and Safe; implemented by the district and other implementing partners, funded by PEPFAR under the oversight supervision of Ministry of Health. 

DREAMS is an intervention to keep adolescent girls free from HIV, prevent unplanned pregnancies among adolescents, sex workers and married young people, through a combination of biomedical, behavioural interventions and economic strengthening of adolescents and care givers. 

It is important to note that whereas the Ministry of Health has done its part to strengthen and promote the Youth-Friendly Services Policy; other key stakeholders are not moving at the same pace. Adolescent health issues cannot be handled by the health sector alone. It requires a multi-sectoral approach. 

Madam Speaker, we still have challenges of sexual gender based violence, school drop-outs, social cultural and religious values, poverty and delays in justice, which hamper reproductive health service use. There are also challenges of inadequate numbers of health workers, which negatively impacts quality service delivery to large numbers of adolescents that need counselling and proper mentoring, which requires adequate time.

The Ministry of Health has concluded the development of the Sexual Reproductive Health and Rights Policy, which is currently awaiting a Certificate of Financial Implications, before it can be considered by Cabinet. 

In conclusion, the Ministry of Health continues to call upon all stakeholders, including Members of Parliament, to support Government efforts to eliminate risky practices at family and community level, promote responsible and positive behaviour and values that favour good health of the young people. I thank you for this. 

THE SPEAKER: I thank you, honourable minister. Hon. Ssentongo is not here; proceed to item No.3 (g) on the sale of blood.

6.24
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Madam Speaker, hon. Odonga Otto, Member of Parliament for Aruu County raised a concern about allegations that health facilities around the country sell donated blood to unsuspecting patients; an allegation that we cannot deny because the process of blood collection and supply still requires refinement and digitalisation for better tracking and accountability. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to update Members on the process of blood supply in the country. The function of blood supply in Uganda is carried out by the Uganda Blood Transfusion Services (UBTS), a semi-autonomous, centrally coordinated institution in the Ministry of Health sufficiently decentralised to render services to all regions of the country. 

The headquarters at Nakasero Blood Bank act as a reference centre for the regional blood banks. The blood transfusion service is divided into regional blood banks and blood collection and distribution centres. The distribution centres act as collection, storage and distribution points for blood. 

Hospitals order for blood from the UBTS service units on a daily or weekly basis based on need and consumption. UBTS supplies blood to 419 transfusing health care facilities as per region. And I have provided that information in table form, showing the regional blood banks and the number of transfusing health care facilities that it supplies.  

Madam Speaker, only health care facilities at the level of health centre IV and above are accredited by UBTS and authorised to carry out blood transfusion. Government policy stipulates that blood issued to both Government and private hospitals must be given free to all patients in need of blood. Anyone found selling blood to patients is liable to prosecution in the courts of law. 

However, while blood is free, private hospitals do charge for processes that must be carried out before the transfusion.  These include:

    1. Grouping and cross-matching to establish the patient’s blood group, hence the correct blood for transfusion 
    2. The blood-giving sets and, 
    3. Other consumables, for example; cannulas and sterilised supplies, among others.

Some public hospitals may also request patients to buy these items in the event that stocks run out. It is also possible that some health workers may demand for payment for blood but we do not have proof of this unless it is reported to us.

Madam Speaker, blood collection includes recruitment of blood donors, blood-donor education and selection, collection of blood and post-donation counselling, which is notification and blood-donor retention. It is recognised that the safest donors are regular, voluntary and non-remunerated blood donors and priority has been given to building up low risk population groups, selecting healthy donors at low-risk transfusion-transmissible infections and motivating them to donate regularly. 

Community organisations; religious groups, corporate organisations, political leaders as well as the media have been engaged in mobilising the people for blood donation. This activity is carried out by both UBTS and Uganda Red Cross. Each blood collection team has a minimum target of 1,000 units of blood that should be collected per month.  

Regarding processing, blood goes through several processes after collection, which include; screening majorly for diseases – HIV, Hepatitis B and C and syphilis – and blood group testing in a quality controlled manner. This is being done using a system called the Blood Safety Information System.

I will move straight to requirements for the country. Uganda, like some Sub-Saharan African countries, has registered improved access to safe and adequate blood supplies though still short of what the World Health Organisation (WHO) recommends. The target of the WHO is 10 persons per every 1,000 population may need blood; which is one per cent blood collection of the country’s total population. If we estimate the population of Uganda to be 40 million people, this means we need 400,000 units of blood. 

Although the number of blood units collected in our country has increased since 2004, the whole blood collection remains insufficient to meet the national demand at 400,000 units. This shortfall especially affects women with pregnancy-related complications, trauma victims and children with severe life-threatening malaria-related anaemia.

Additionally, other conditions require blood transfusion. These include anaemia as a result of sickle cell disease, malnutrition and road traffic accidents that are consuming a huge amount of blood. Unfortunately, due to budgetary constraints and other challenges, UBTS can only target to collect 300,000 units of blood which is 85 per cent of the demand of our hospitals.

I have given a breakdown of blood collected versus the target from 2013 to 2019 and down. I have provided a table which shows the target from 220,000 units to currently the 300,000 units that we are collecting. 

Madam Speaker, the challenges; 

    1. Only 50 per cent of the 164 health centre IVs is currently accredited by UBTS to receive blood from the regional blood bank. This means that the rest of the health centres IV do not meet the criteria to perform blood transfusion services and especially this is about uninterrupted power supply for cold chain. 

    2. Many health facilities do not collect blood from regional blood banks citing transport budgetary constraints. 

    3.  Most of the health care facilities are unaware of their weekly/monthly/yearly blood requirements and this greatly hinders the planning process by UBTS. Many a time, the health facilities make orders for more blood and this leads to blood expiring in their facilities.

The way forward is that the Ministry of Health is working with partners to develop a digitalised system of tracking blood from collection point to the beneficiary. This will help curb malpractices, give better statistics on blood consumption in the country as well as address wastage. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I would like to reiterate that blood issued to both Government and private hospitals must be given free to all patients in need of blood. Anyone found selling blood is liable for prosecution in the courts of law. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I do not see hon. Odonga Otto. Therefore, there will be no supplementary question. Can you proceed to the last question on mismanagement of drugs in Kibuku Health Centre IV?

6.32
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Madam Speaker, on 4 September 2019, hon. Herbert Tom Kinobere, Member of Parliament for Kibuku County, raised a concern about mismanagement of drugs meant for Kibuku Health Centre IV by the District Health Officer (DHO) and alleged that the relevant authorities failed to hold the DHO accountable.

From the outset, allow me to condemn the unfortunate event that occurred in Kibuku Health Centre IV. We acknowledge that such an irresponsible act undermines efforts to increase access to medicines and quality health care, which is a fundamental human right and key in the socio-economic development of the country.

Drug losses or pilferages overburdens the supply chain and the overall budget given the fact that drugs or medicines are expensive and is the largest non-wage expenditure of the health sector. In addition, non-availability of medicines in the health facilities results into underutilisation of health care facilities in Uganda. Hence, the need to put in place measures to ensure uninterrupted supply of essential drugs and medicines to those who need them most.

Madam Speaker, in order to minimise theft and improve access to pharmaceuticals and enhance movement towards the attainment of universal health coverage for all Ugandans, the Ministry of Health has put in place measures such as:

    i. Embossment of medicine for the public sector.

    ii.  Last mile deliveries of medicine up to the doorstep of all health facilities.

    iii.  Monitoring of medicine usage and accountability by the Health Monitoring Unit and use of the Police in investigating alleged theft and mismanagement of medicine.

    iv.  Establishment of the Quantification, Planning and Procurement Unit that quantifies with accuracy the national needs of drugs and health supplies and quantities needed per level of care and prioritises need, allowing for adjustments to meet the funds available.

    v.  Improvement of supply chain management system that has increased easy of procurement planning, accountability and data generation and use at all levels. In this case, the National Medical Stores has an enterprise resource planning software to track medicine up to the district. 

    vi. We have developed guidelines for redistribution of medicine from health facilities with overstock to those with low stock. This has improved availability and minimised expiry.

Notwithstanding all this, isolated cases of theft continue to take place by irresponsible health workers like the above mentioned at Kibuku Health Centre IV.

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform you that this case was taken up for investigation by the Health Monitoring Unit and evidence has been collected and forwarded to the rightful authorities since it is a criminal offence.

When the process is concluded, a comprehensive report will be made and submitted to this august House. If found guilty, appropriate punitive measures will be meted against the District Health Officer (DHO) and his accomplices.

In addition, the Chief Administrative Officer of Kibuku District Local Government has been requested to handle the issue of the DHO’s indiscipline administratively since the DHO is an employee of the district local government. This is in accordance with Civil Service Standing Orders. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I do not see hon. Kinobere so there will be no supplementary. Let us proceed to 5(h). 

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. FRED TURYAMUHWEZA ON THE DELAYED COMPENSATION OF PERSONS AFFECTED BY THE RUKUNGIRI-KANUNGU ROAD PROJECT AND THEIR INTENTIONS TO DISRUPT THE PROJECT, AND UNDERSTAFFING AT THE RUKUNGIRI ZONAL OFFICE OF THE MINISTRY OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the minister of lands here.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister of Finance, planning and economic development.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS

THE SPEAKER: He has requested to go back to the office to do some urgent work but he will answer next week.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES TO A QUESTION RAISED BY HON. ROBINA GUREME RWAKOOJO ON THE IMPORTATION OF FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE-STRICKEN HEADS OF CATTLE FROM TANZANIA AND COUNTERFEIT ACARICIDE-DEXTATIX FROM ZIMBABWE BY A ONE MR MULINDWA

6.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Madam Speaker, I answered these questions.

THE SPEAKER: All of them?

MS KABATSI: Yes but there was one where the Member was not satisfied.

On the first question of importation of Foot and Mouth Disease (FDM) stricken heads of cattle from Tanzania and counterfeit acaricides from Zimbabwe by a one Mulindwa, I have this answer.

I explained last time that these cows did not come from Tanzania because we got proof that they were purchased from the farm of Gen. Otafiire in Buremba, Kazo. Maybe this explanation was not good enough for her but that is the truth.

The ministry received reports on FMD outbreak in Mitima on 7 August 2019 and it is purportedly linked to the 90 Boran cattle that Mr Micheal Mulindwa moved from Gen. Otafiire’s farm in Kazo. The movement permit that accompanied the animals, which was specifically issued in the names of Gen. Otafiire, indicated that they were going for slaughter in the city abattoir here in Kampala. It seems these are the animals that Mulindwa diverted to Mitima sub-county in Ssembabule District for breeding.

In accordance with the Animal Movement Control guidelines, the District Veterinary Officer (DVO), Ssemabuble District should have given a No Objection authorising the animals to come into the district.

However, Mr Mulindwa did not seek for a No Objection, which means he violated the Animal Disease Control Act. This was in two ways; one, for diverting the animals destined for slaughter and taking them for breeding and two, bringing animals into Ssembabule District without seeking a No Objection from the DVO of Ssembabule District. 

He was arrested by the Minister for Security, brought to Kampala and investigations were conducted. We hope that Mr Mulindwa will be charged. All samples that were collected from Mulindwa’s farm and submitted to the National Animal Disease Diagnostics and Epidemiology Centre tested positive for FMD. However, it is not clear that the affected animals were the ones newly introduced or the ones originally on the farm since Mulindwa keeps more than 1,000 heads of cattle.

Madam Speaker, I explained that Mr Mulindwa and the DVO were arrested by the Minister for Security and brought to Kampala. By that time, they were still in prison. The DVO spent 17 days in the cell. The Minister for Security said he was investigating so they were charged in Kampala but they have not yet gone to court. They were released on police bond. Actually, Mulindwa was assisted by Gen. Otafiire; he did not spend as many days in prison like the DVO.

Regarding the importation of Decatix, acaricides and other veterinary drugs, the National Drug Authority in collaboration with the Department of Animal Health in the ministry regulates these. The Department of Animal Health gives a No Objection to any importation and National Drug Authority authorises the importation of the acaricides or any other veterinary drugs.

In the case of Mr Mulindwa, this department or the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has not, at any time, given a No Objection for importation of Decatrix from Zimbabwe. Therefore, this is an illegal importation and should be treated as such. I requested the National Drug Authority to follow up the matter to its conclusion and the Minister for Security is following up this matter closely.

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries imposed quarantine on Mitima sub-county and the surrounding radius of 20 kilometres. All the markets in that area were closed - the markets of Rukushuru, Rumegyere, Kyemanva and Lwemiyaga. Up to now, they are still closed because we have not been able to confirm that FMD has gone out of Mitima. 

After six months, tests will be done and if confirmation is given that there is no more FMD, Mitima and all the markets will be opened. 

On the animals that were dropped –

THE SPEAKER: That is k(ii) six cows ferried at night. 

MS KABATSI: About the sick cows, they were secretly ferried at night by unknown persons and dumped at various locations in Nwoya District with fears that other animals may get infected. This was handled swiftly by the Minister of Security. He brought all the 135 animals back and they were all slaughtered here in Kampala. No animal was left in Nwoya District. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: The last one on heavy rains that threaten food security in various parts of the country and the need for Government to address the situation.

MS KABATSI: On the food security, the report was not completed to be brought to Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

6.45
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her response. I am sorry I am not satisfied again. I do not want to argue whether the animals were purchased within Uganda or not. In my understanding, they were brought from Tanzania. This is not the first time Mr Mulindwa was bringing in infected animals and he should have known the procedure for bring in animals together with the DVOs. However, he is untouchable in Ssembabule District. 

What is important is that the animals were infected and they had no business being moved; whether they are alleged to have come from Uganda or outside, they had no business being moved. The DVO and Mr Mulindwa should have known this; he has been in the cattle business for long. For example, in Gomba recently, somebody brought in 52 infected cows and the resident district commissioner was vigilant; he got those cows, loaded them on the lorries that brought them here to Meat Packers and they were slaughtered. Something like that is what we expect to be done.

On the question of vaccines and acaricides, I am still not satisfied because the problem is that a lot of revenue is got from cattle in Gomba District but the farmers have been left on their own in the whole of the cattle corridor. They think that Government has abandoned them because we do not have vaccines and acaricides and we do not know the right acaricide to use. I would like to see the errant DVOs punished because you find the DVO remaining in place and he is the one giving the permits and these cows continue moving; this is not fair.

You talked about the errant movers of the cows being charged, probably, they were released on bail and I have not followed up on that case but I saw something on television about those who had messed up the acaricides opening a court case against them.

I would like to see the ministry show more concern and appreciation to the cattle farmers. They are putting in a lot on their own and now, milk is even sold at Shs 300. We are not selling any meat because we have quarantine. People have children who go to school, how are they supposed to survive? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there is something you said which I think is alarming. It is in regard to the 135 animals, which were infected in Nwoya and were brought to Kampala and slaughtered for us to eat. We ate them!

MS KABATSI: Madam Speaker, the disuse that is involved does not affect human beings. We can eat the meat. FMD is a trade disease but it does not affect human beings. This is what the veterinary doctors told me. 

THE SPEAKER: Do we have veterinary doctors in the House?

6.49
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. If we have all heard well; in the minister’s submission, she mentioned two names; Gen. Otafiire and Mr Mulindwa and they featured very much. When hon. Rwakoojo, who moved the question, stood, she stated clearly that this was not the first time Mr Mulindwa was involved in that; that is part of him. One of the statements we heard is that he is untouchable.

Madam Speaker, in practice, if somebody is a teacher and is caught in a given act that violates his profession, they cancel the certificate. Ugandans have suffered before the hands of these untouchables. We have heard that the cows were here and the minister has said that we ate them, although she is trying to explain to us that the disease does not affect human beings. However, she said that they were diseased. We wonder which disease can harm human beings and which disease is good.

As a House, we should either take a position on Mr Mulindwa because since this is his practice and he has Gen. Otafiire, who stands for him; the minister said he did not take long in the cell like the DHO. For him, he goes, knowing that he will come out in the morning. 

As a House, the minister should give us a position or tell us that there is something that is going to be done so that Mr Mulindwa either acts as an example to others who are found importing infected animals because the honourable member insisted that the cows were imported from Tanzania. She further said that it is a practice. Can we have a stand on Mr Mulindwa so that Gen. Otafiire learns from there? If this is his country, then we shall also learn that this country called Uganda belongs to Gen. Otafiire.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

6.51
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think you are missing a point. Recently, there was headline in the papers that acaricides - that they have been selling water instead of drugs. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, was responsible. 

They have been doing this at the end of the financial year so that they bring to us and say, we pay you in advance. The company involved has connections with Quality Chemicals, which deals in drugs for HIV/AIDS. If this company, which sells water for animals - how are we sure that Quality Chemicals - she knows Katongole and her father in law have been selling water for cows. Is the minister aware that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, has been buying water to inject cows as drugs?

6.52
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Listening to the submission of the minister, the cattle were bought from the farm of Gen. Otafiire. However, the honourable member also insists that the same cattle were bought from Tanzania. I do not know whether Gen. Otafiire owns a farm in Tanzania so that we can collaborate the information.

Secondly, while it is true that Foot and Mouth does not affect adult humans, it affects children. For you to come here as the minister responsible for the sector and proudly tell us that the animals were slaughtered and sold around Kampala, I think she needs to be more serious and take action on this. Otherwise, a number of diseases that are affecting Ugandans that cannot be diagnosed are coming from such. People are suffering from cancer and all sorts of diseases that cannot be cured. 

Today we have got the answer: that we have a minister who is not supervising her sector and she is very proud that we are eating poisonous meet in Kampala. I think this is very unfortunate. 

6.53
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just starting from where the honourable has ended, I was just googling about the Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD). “Humans can be infected with Foot-and-Mouth Disease through contact with infected animals but this is extremely rare because the virus that causes FMD is sensitive to stomach acid. It cannot spread to humans via consumption of infected meat, except in the mouth before the meat is swallowed.” (Laughter) It is true that it can affect human beings and not only children but also the adults. That is how one ends up having blisters in the mouth. 

I think the ministers need to qualify when they make these statements. Otherwise they are going to confuse the world. People will continue eating this and in the end you find children dying, people having blisters in their mouths and you wonder what is causing all this. 

I thought I would add this information. Please read more about FMD, it will help you. Please crosscheck your information, honourable minister, before you give a statement. 

6.55
MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern has been partly mentioned by hon. Okupa. I would like to make clarification to the honourable minister that FMD is transmissible to human beings, irrespective of age.

It is a very bad disease. The way it affects animals is the same way it affects human beings. We have to be very concerned about the health of the people. That is why we have quarantine. If there is FMD, we are not only putting quarantine for the animals but also for human beings. Thank you.

6.56
MS ROBINAH RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Madam Speaker, my major concern is that this disease used to be controlled almost locally. If it was discovered that cattle in an area had FMD, people would enclose those cows and everyone would know that that is a no-go area and the cows are not supposed to go beyond that enclosure. They would be vaccinated. The cows in the surrounding kraals would be vaccinated and the disease wouldn’t spread. Therefore, how can a whole ministry fail to control this? 

There are people who benefit from FMD being in the area. It is a long chain. There are the traders because they will make it very expensive for those who are illegally packing the cows at night; some of the corrupt law enforcement officers, the corrupt DVOs, and others. 

I want a ministry which can bite because you have the resources; you have the manpower, why are you failing? When they say the Minister for Security has come in, it should not be him but he took it upon himself to police the deviant DVOs because they were not doing their work. We end up losing as a country. 

I would want the ministry of agriculture to bite. Bite! Please do not disappoint us. 

6.57
MR EDWARD MAKMOT (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I agree with my colleagues based on what we have seen. 

First all, the blanket assertion without evidence that FMD does not affect human beings, presented before Parliament, is of serious concern.

More importantly, what concerned me was that I was told that 120 sick animals or so were dumped in Nwoya and the response was that they were brought and slaughtered. I would like to know whether there was a diagnosis that these animals were actually sick before they were slaughtered and to whom they belonged. It did not come out clearly to me and it seems like this is a possible room for abuse at the end of the day. 

When the minister was submitting, I noted that she initially said that evidence has been taken and she hopes that these people will be prosecuted. Then at some point she said that they were out on bail. I know that one gets out on bail after charges have been preferred. 

I think there are a lot of flaws in this statement that is being made. Thank you.

6.59
MS JAQUELINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker because FMD has been a repeated issue on this Floor. I would like the minister to give us a sustainable way of managing it in the country; most of the time when it is brought here, it is addressing a particular area and then it is just left there. That is an area that the ministry of agriculture should invest in ensuring that livestock health is guaranteed. 

The honourable minister should also know that Uganda is one of those countries that signed to scale up nutrition. In the scale-up nutrition meetings that are held often, livestock is emphasised in the feeding. 

You cannot come here as a minister and tell the country that because the animals suffering from FMD do not infect humans; it is okay to consume them. You are seated next to a doctor, I would have expected Dr Jane Aceng to come here and enlighten the House. 

When you take pasteurised milk from an infected animal, there is indirect relation. I am not a medical doctor but I think the minister should address herself to the fact that when we have infected animals, there is a direct implication to the health of a human being when they consume that animal. 

Besides that, it is abnormal for a minister to come here and say – human beings and animals are – these are domestic animals that are consumed by human beings. I would like the minister to come and address this House on a sustainable way of how FMD can be – you are always traveling to different countries and some of these countries have eradicated FMD because they have come up with sustainable – even here in Kenya and in Morocco. We need to see how to address this situation because it will be in Teso tomorrow, then it crosses to Ankore – we the cattle keepers are at risk yet that is where our livelihood is. 

7.02
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, BUnyole West County, Butaleja): Madam Speaker, I thank you. I would like to thank the Prime Minister for having sat. You have heard what the Front Bench has said and as the top management of NRM, we have also heard. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, I request that before we proceed, if this House allows, the statements of the minister be expunged because if it will be read that the minister said that the sick cows are fit for human consumption – 

Hon. Kahinda Otafiire was there on the issue of the farm in Njeru and now the issue of the cows is also coming up. We do not know whether these cows were slaughtered here or whether they were taken to Njeru and transferred to the east.

Madam Speaker, I heard that the Baganda were asking, “Why is it that in the west, there is matooke but theirs is diminishing?” They said they were bringing banana wilt here. Is it the same way they are transferring the disease from the west to other places? It is very serious. Since Gen. Otafiire is here, I request that he also comes and makes a statement about these cows because the Member has raised a very big concern.

Honourable minister, even when the potato is sick – please, it is the issue of sickness and it has gone on record that the animals –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: During the war in Teso, some undisciplined soldiers ferried the animals from Teso; some of the animals there were sick and that is how the East Coast Fever disease ended up in the west and in Bunyoro. It is because the likes of Gen. Kyaligonza and team – the Bunyenyezis and the Rwakatares – ferried cows even in the helicopters and took them to the west. 

Therefore, what you are saying is not new. It is something that has happened. You could have even read in the papers the other day when we were burying Mzee Omeda – may his soul rest in eternal peace – hon. Ecweru stating what happened and how those undisciplined soldiers of the NRA ferried animals and ended up even ferrying the disease to infect the cows in the west.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, hon. Okupa. That might have happened but Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we are moving in steady progress. We do not want such things to happen. Some of us who campaigned for the President get pressures not only from our constituents but countrywide. 

Madam Speaker, I request that since the matter also touches Gen. Otafiire, he should come here and state whether he sold the cows or not. He may deny. Otherwise, when you bring diseases and we get sick – I do not know whether it is by Government to kill some of us. (Laughter) 

7.07
MR TONNY MUHINDO (FDC, Bukonzo County East, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Under the normal provisions of our rules, it is only the mover of the question to ask the supplementary question. However, I think because all of us were terrified by the fact that diseased cows were brought to the national abattoir - where even our supplier in the canteen procures meat from - we are not sure whether we are not the prime consumers.

Madam Speaker, if I am told that an animal or chicken was sick, it is enough to stop me from even thinking about eating its meat. However, from the statement of the minister, when a number of cows were sighted somewhere, she mentioned that this situation was handled by the ministry in charge of security. The sick animals were brought to the abattoir in Kampala. In other words, even security participates in bringing the sick animals to Kampala for people to eat. 

I was also not happy with the statement from the mover who said that the RDC also acted swiftly to bring the 52-or-so animals here. Who is playing the actual role of saving or killing Ugandans? I would like to ask that the Prime Minister really reigns over Gen. Otafiire. The other day it was Gen. Otafiire, yesterday it was Gen. Otafiire and today it is Gen. Otafiire. 

Without anticipation, I would like to mention that we are bringing another issue. The people of Kasese, Kabarole and Bundibugyo have been robbed of over Shs 2 billion. When the people wanted to go to police, Gen. Otafiire wrote to security to leave these people and not arrest them. The suspects are people from Mitooma. This tells us that there is something wrong. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to request you - while we were trying to address this in fear of having eaten wrong meat, the report of the minister also touches on the credibility of this Parliament. We cannot sit here and listen passively, where there is a statement that indicates that the culprits were brought to Kampala, charged, given bonds and they were not taken to court. If we listen to that kind of statement and let it pass, somebody who will hear this will want to check our level of intellect and credibility, as Parliament.

Honourable minister, I think the statement was not very well prepared. I wonder whether I should say that you should take it back. The challenge is that is has very salient issues that we need to follow up. The report does not only touch on the business sector but the health of the people.

Madam Speaker, I pray that as a House, we consider how to handle the general statement and the salient issues in the statement.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, please conclude. I will give my position after.

7.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): I am very glad that I have heard these concerns and I would like to assure you that we are working on these concerns. The issue of the vet drugs has been very important because we state here that we are in charge, yet the vet drugs are not in our hands but in the hands of the Ministry of Health. We just receive them. We receive – even the vet drugs he is talking about, which is water – after the Ministry of Health has said they are okay –(Interruption)

DR ACENG: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is disturbing that the minister of state in charge of animal industry can rise here and make allegations that drugs for animals are in the hands of the Ministry of Health. While the National Drug Authority, which is housed under the Ministry of Health, is only a regulator and does not procure or distribute them, the drugs in question are always bought by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Is she in order to tell this august House a lie that the Ministry of Health handles animal drugs?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you elaborate on how the Ministry of Health buys your drugs? Kindly elaborate before you proceed.

MS KABATSI: The Ministry of Health checks all these drugs before giving the go ahead to buy them. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries only pays for them. That is true.

Madam Speaker, the National Drug Authority does all the follow-up. However, we have a decision by the Cabinet that this has to move and it has. It will now be the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to take charge of veterinary drugs. A Private Member’s Bill is also going to be tabled by hon. Mwesigye. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, how can you be proud of a Private Member’s Bill when it is your responsibility?

7.14
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, this is not a new subject; Cabinet is already discussing this matter. It is true that there is one regulator - the National Drug Authority. However, this regulator does not import drugs for the Ministry of Health or the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Their role is merely to make sure that drugs coming into Uganda are good. The two ministries do their own procurement.

I would like to propose that the two ministers cease-fire and we handle the rest. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on that note, I think it is an appropriate time to adjourn. The House is adjourned until next week.

(The House rose at 7.15 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 19 November 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 
