PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - SECOND MEETINGTUESDAY , 29 NOVEMBER 2022PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6438ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTTuesday, 29 November 2022of sending people abroad, it would be cheaper doing it locally here.They are also starting customised treatment, which will be based on research. Therefore, when they open up for research, they will need our support when Government tables proposals for financing. But we should also push hard to ensure that indeed, they are financed. The challenge they are facing is; in case, for example, we provide more financing to the Uganda Cancer Institute - for which any of us can be a candidate, and where our constituents mainly are - if we could provide more financing to the Uganda Cancer Institute so that they can open more regional centres especially for screening and be able to help people when the cancer is still in its early stages, then it will be made much easier.Then, the other issue I found there is that Government is working in silos – they are not integrated. For example, they would want land around that place for expansion, but someone says, “The land belongs to Mulago, so, we cannot give the Uganda Cancer Institute the land.” Now, you ask yourself: is Uganda Cancer Institute a private individual? Who are you giving? In the process, I have seen a funny situation where I request the Minister of Education and the Minister of Health to meet with the Uganda Cancer Institute. Where we have the bunkers for radiology - those scientific words; that is why I am not paid as a scientist - where we IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 13TH SITTING - SECOND MEETINGParliament met at 2.14 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you, honourable colleagues. I am happy to see our Bishop Nambeshe in the House and Hon. Zaake - I had taken sometime. I welcome you, colleagues, to this sitting.Today, I visited the Uganda Cancer Institute in Mulago with Hon. Okwir, and I found that the people there were doing an impressive job; a very impressive job. (Applause)I interacted with some of the patients. They were appreciative of the free services they are getting, especially with the testing and drugs. Therefore, I want to congratulate and appreciate Government for the good work.However, I found they were facing some challenges considering the work they are doing. They have sufficient human resource, which would be used to train other specialists because the specialists they have were trained in South Africa and America. They say they have the capacity to train more people locally, which would make it very affordable - instead PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6439THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 29 NOVEMBER 2022have the bunkers that house nuclear equipment - very dangerous equipment - the Ministry of Education has built a girls’ hostel for the nurses. Prof. Orem told me - he said, “This means that these people are exposed to dangerous nuclear radiation daily.” The hostel shares the same boundary with the bunker. When I asked them, “How did this happen?” They said, “Look, we asked for this land, but they could not give it to us.” These are internationally certified bunkers; so, you cannot shift them. Therefore, their proposal is that we compensate - I do not know how Government compensates itself. However, Government should look for more funds for the Ministry of Education and Sports, to build a hostel somewhere else. They said, “You could even build inside Mulago, but not next to a nuclear bunker.” Just next to the nuclear bunker is where we have a girls’ hostel. I request the Prime Minister to coordinate this to ensure you have a meeting with the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Health, and the Minister of Finance to sort out this or give a proposal on how you are going to sort this out, and update the House within the next one month; that will be really appropriate. Otherwise, I do not know who will give a certificate for occupation for such a dangerous site, which we saw there.Our team is doing very well in Juba; they are winning medal after medal - I do not know what other countries are taking because I see all gold medals coming to Uganda. We have even encroached on the bronze and silver medals. I pity other teams, but Uganda is really doing a fantastic job, and they know you are cheering them here. I think the games end tomorrow; the Speaker has taken up that project and even now, she is coordinating that to ensure that indeed, our team comes out winners - that shows we have the fittest Parliament. That is very good. Now for you, who are unfit, you can go on kameeme and when we do an average, they say the fittest Parliament in East Africa is Uganda. Those who are not fit will benefit from that kavuyo  -(Laughter)- and all of us end up benefitting.I received matters of national importance, which I found in my office. Colleagues, every day, we attend to only five matters of national importance. Secondly, when I look into matters and scan, there are matters which I cannot bring here as matters of national importance. For example, if so-and-so is arrested and the police admit that they have the person and release a statement, I cannot expect it here as a matter of national importance. Therefore, when I do not call your matter, you know - otherwise, all of us are going to bring issues of our arrested people here. Here, I will entertain cases where someone was picked and no one is acknowledging that they have that person.Further to that, the President has returned “The Museum and Monuments Bill, 2022”, which we submitted to him. Colleagues, if you could allow me read his letter and I will make a comment after reading it, before I refer it to the committee.“The Rt Hon. Anita Among,The Speaker, Parliament of Uganda3 November 2022Re: Museum and Monuments Act, 2022.The above subject matter refers:I have received the Museum and Monuments Act, 2022 for my assent. However, I have been advised that there are some provisions of the Bill that need to be reviewed by Parliament as listed below:i. Schedule 2, part three, item (2) and item (106).The Schedule lists protected areas including Kilembe mines, and Acherer Gold Mine. 6440ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTKilembe Mines is licensed under the Mining Act. Exploration licences and mining leases granted by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development are held by Kilembe Mines Limited, a State-owned enterprise, majority owned and controlled by the Government.Since Cabinet took a decision in 2018, Government has invested in developing Kilembe Mines into an active commercial project for the exploration, exploitation and processing of copper and cobalt for industrialisation. Therefore, Kilembe Mines does not fit the description of a protected area. The declaration of Kilembe Mines as a protected area will frustrate its development and Government’ s on-going competitive bidding process to get a suitable partner under the Mineral Production Sharing Agreement. It should be deleted from Schedule Two.Acherer Goldmines in Nakapiripirit District is also an active exploration and mining area where mineral rights (exploration license and location license) were granted under the Mining Act. It should not be listed as a protected area. Declaration of protected areas should be made after consultation with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. Schedule 2, Part II, Item 17 It provides for Panyimur in Pakwach District as a protected fossil site. The part of Panyimur Subcounty, which is a fossil site and should be protected, should be mentioned. The relevant fossil site should be named by village and parish. There are areas being studied by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development in Panyimur Subcounty for potential development of geothermal resources Panyimur should, therefore, not be declared a protected area as a whole. Schedule 3, Clause 4: InterpretationDefinition of mineralThe Bill defines “Mineral” as “Any substance in solid, liquid or gaseous form, occurring naturally in or on the earth formed by or subject to a geological process, but does not include petroleum as defined under ‘The Petroleum Exploration Development and Production Act, 2013’. The definition of minerals should be amended and a phrase inserted as follows: “Minerals means any substance whether in solid, liquid or gaseous form, occurring naturally in or on the earth, formed by or subject to a geological process, but does not include petroleum as defined under ‘The Petroleum Exploration Development and Production Act, 2013’, or substances excluded from the definition of minerals under Article 244(5) of the Constitution”. The aim is to bring it in compliance with the Constitution and the Mining and Minerals Act. 1.2. Definition of Mineral Right The Bill provides that mineral right means: “The right to prospect, explore or mine for minerals under a prospecting license, an exploration license, a retention license, a large-scale or small-scale mining license or an artisanal mining license issued under the Mining Act.” The definition should be amended and a phrase inserted as follows: “Mineral right means a right to prospect, explore or mine for minerals under a prospecting license, an exploration license, a retention license, a large-scale mining license, a medium-scale mining license, small-scale mining license or an artisanal mining license.” This is to bring it into compliance with the Mining and Minerals Act, which includes a medium-scale mining license. 4.0 Clause 95 (2)The Bill provides under clause 95(2) that the holder of a mineral right issued under “The Mining Act, 2003” shall enjoy his or her right under that mineral right subject to this Act. The clause should be amended to read as follows: “The holder of a mineral right issued under ‘The Mining Act, 2003’ shall exercise his or COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [The Deputy Speaker]6441THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 29 NOVEMBER 2022her rights under that mineral right subject to the provisions related to a protected area or protected building. The justification for this proposal is that the current draft is too broad, general and prejudicial to mineral rights. It would make mineral rights subject to anything done under the Museums and Monuments Act whereas a proposed draft protects natural heritage while still restricting mineral rights to a reasonable extent. It is important to note that the sustainable utilisation of mineral resources includes the protection of cultural and natural heritage. Both activities are important for socio-economic development and can coexist in accordance with the law. Therefore, the Bill should provide for extensive consultation with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development before a site is listed as a protected area by the Department of Museums and Monuments and the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. This consultation and coordination would enable the implementation of mineral development for industrialisation and the protection of natural heritage. 5.  The Bill makes reference to “The Mining Act, 2003”. “The Mining Act, 2003”, was repealed by “The Mining and Minerals Act, 2022”. The clause should, therefore, be amended. There is a need to further scrutinise schedule 2 of the Bill to ensure that the proposed protected area and sites do not affect the development plans of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and Government as a whole are not derailed. Therefore, in line with Article 91(3)(C) of the 1995 Constitution, I hereby return the Bill to Parliament for reconsideration of the clauses listed above.”I refer this Bill to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry and you have to process it in two weeks. After saying that, I have a concern on the side of Cabinet. This is a schedule that came from Cabinet. The committee did not add any of these places. The cabinet is chaired by the President. The ministers who are raising these issues are ministers in Cabinet. This Bill was tabled - for authority purposes, I was still a Government Chief Whip; I remember I was in Cabinet – I am not supposed to reveal what happens in Cabinet, but I was in Cabinet. Now, if you bring your work as Cabinet and we approve it; then you return it saying that we have done shabby work, what do you want us to do? This is making Parliament look shabby. I request the Prime Minister that before Bills are brought to Parliament, do harmonisation as Government; you can see that this came from the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development; they did a Bill that is going to derail our work. So, I request you do serious harmonisation. We had the Attorney-General here when we were passing this Bill. There was no single objection that was raised on any of these definitions. And the President has made it very clear that he has been advised – in his letter. So, I request that this should not be a matter for debate, but a matter for noting on the side of Cabinet - before Bills come to the House, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, harmonise fully with the ministers. If you have areas of disagreement, please, ensure that you sort them out, then we shall do work and conclude it once and for all; we do not come here to handle disagreements of ministers. With that, please, allow me to go to matters of national importance. [Member rose_] Reactions? Let me start with the Opposition Chief Whip. 2.32MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Besides being the Opposition Chief Whip, I am holding fort for my superior.6442ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTMr Speaker, I would like to thank you for the timely intervention and effort in bringing into check this culture of impunity in ministries and so to speak, the Executive. What is disheartening is having a hostel in the vicinity of radioactive materials. That is very dangerous. Health is key here because these are very harmful to the health and lives of the occupants of that hostel because they even run the risk – these girls who stay there – of being sterile.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Luckily, it is not yet occupied. They are just completing it; so, we can prevent-MR NAMBESHE: Mr Speaker, my view is seeking your indulgence that this House should prevail over the relevant line ministry to stop any further plans for settlement in those places that are close to the nuclear bunker, which you have just made mention of for the sake of the lives of our people. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. For some of the cases, we do not need to prevail. This is something very clear. We have given them an opportunity to rectify it. So, I think it is very important for us to follow up on the matter to ensure – I do not know whether the Hon. Dr Muyingo wants to say something about it because I can see - no, it is a hostel for his institution. 2.35THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you. Mr Speaker, our institutions in Mulago are working hand in hand with the management of Mulago National Referral Hospital. They have a council that sat and allocated that land to one of our institutions. Anyhow, I have taken note, and I am going to follow it up to make sure the lives of our children are protected.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would encourage you to go and meet the experts so they can tell you, especially the dangers of sleeping next to a nuclear site.2.36MR MEDARD LUBEGA SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Minister for the undertaking he has made before Parliament. Further to your guidance, I think it would be important for us to establish, as facts: one, which of the two institutions was constructed first? And two, who authorised the plan? I am saying this because you are telling the Government to incur the cost of relocating the hostel, but how did we get there? I remember one time in a PAC meeting while looking at the Auditor-General’s report, one of the issues that came up as to why there was a delay in installing some of the machinery that had been procured by the Ministry of Health, was the issue of land ownership between Mulago National Referral Hospital and the other allied health institutions. However, in this particular case, before we incur the cost of removing or relocating the hostel - if we are going to relocate it anyway - we must establish who occasioned this loss to Government. There must be somebody who approved the plan while knowing that in the vicinity, there is something whose existence could not allow the existence of the next installation.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I request we close this matter since we have given – no, on this matter of the bunker and the hostel -2.38MR LAWRENCE SONGA BIYIKA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Mr Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. On the issue of the nuclear, I want to say two things: one is that Uganda signed and ratified the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials in 2003; it came into force in 2004. This Nuclear Convention came into existence in 1979 although there was an amendment to it. [Mr Nambeshe] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6443THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 29 NOVEMBER 2022All countries that are party to the 1979 Convention have already signed and ratified the amended Convention except Uganda. The amendment purely focused on safety and that nuclear can coexist. However, also for your information, nuclear is one of the cleanest energy we can have. It does not cause any climate change although safety is very important. And for a country to be helped by the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna and so on, it must be party to the convention, which bears this amendment. I discussed this briefly with the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, last week. I told him that it is important that Uganda ratifies this amendment.Therefore, my question now is: do you, as the Rt Hon. Speaker, advise that we bring a substantial motion to this Parliament for Uganda to ratify the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials? This is so because the moment we do that, then we will have safety measures, but those safety measures can only come if we are party to the Convention. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Songa. I hear your concerns, loud and clear. However, this is something that Government negotiated with its international partners. What is important, and which we can do now, is to have the Minister of Foreign Affairs, who holds all international protocols, and who is in charge of ensuring that they are ratified and signed, come and update the House.And this should not only be on the one on nuclear - I remember, there is a time we had requested for all international protocols, which we haven’t ratified, to be tabled here and he tells us whether they will be ratified or not. This is important because sometimes, colleagues, when you represent us in international fora, you are told that Uganda is party to this and that organisation, but that we refused to sign or ratify it.The Minister of Foreign Affairs should bring the whole list to this House, and then we send it to the relevant committee. Rt Hon. Prime minister, that should be done in two weeks because they have the list. 2.41MR GEOFFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you, for making this a Parliament of the people and for being a Speaker of the people. It is not the first time that you and the Rt Hon. Speaker Anita Among are moving down to check on issues affecting the people. And this brings me to the point on how you discovered the danger that Ugandans are going through by being in a hostel that is near the radiation centre. That means you have taken Parliament to the people. Also, when last week the Rt Hon. Anita Among gave out money to assist bring back the lady who was stranded in Dubai, it showed a very good spirit.Therefore, Mr Speaker, I want to applaud you and thank you, but I stood - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you want to give me a medal? (Laughter)MR MACHO: Mr Speaker, you deserve a handshake. Anyhow, I rose on a matter of procedure. Mr Speaker, 21 days were given to Mubende as a lockdown, but I see Hon. Patrick Nsamba, the Member of Parliament from Mubende, is in the House yet he is supposed to be in lockdown. I need your protection on whether he is supposed to be here or else, you direct that he goes back into the lockdown. Thank you so much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. The lockdown was announced when he was in the House; he was not in Mubende and so, he is rightly here. Yes, Hon. Zaake -MR ZAAKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter, under Rule 78(b) and (c), and Rule 85 and Part five of Appendix F of our Rules of Procedure, which require us as MPs, to base our conduct on the full consideration of public interest. 6444ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTMr Speaker, the abduction of citizens, especially here in the central region has reached crisis levels. The victims are mostly supporters of the opposition. We saw yesterday, a Sheikh and Mr Joseph Kabuleta being abducted in broad daylight by armed men. Mr Speaker, 24 days ago, an NUP supporter, a one Kavuma Jamshid, who also doubles as my President’s bodyguard, was abducted with three other youths from their workplace. In this month alone, hundreds of youth have been abducted and have disappeared. They have not been seen or heard from since –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Zaake, just a minute. MR ZAAKE: Mr Speaker, let me first finish my matter -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I am the one who has allowed you and I will allow you again. Do not mind.MR ZAAKE: Mr Speaker –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Zaake, please. I want to guide you. I am your presiding officer; you voted me. Honourable colleague, we are your colleagues here. When I request, do not read mischief in me. It means you know that what you are doing is not right and I have caught you. That is the message you are sending to me.Procedure is about proceedings in this House. The issue you are raising is not part of the proceedings in this House, but there are many ways you can raise that issue. I request you to visit my office and I will give you space on how you can raise it. That is my ruling, honourable colleague.MR ZAAKE: Mr Speaker, this matter has been going on all along and we seem not to be doing anything -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Zaake, kindly take your seat. Honourable Leader of the Opposition, can you control your Member?MR ZAAKE: Mr Speaker, no, no –(Interjections)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, the House is suspended for five minutes.(The House was suspended at 2.47 p.m.)(On resumption at 3.09 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, colleagues, take your seats. I see colleagues standing up - Hon. Olanya, I have not allowed you; even if it is a point of procedure, I must also allow you. You cannot speak to me when you are standing. Please, honourable colleagues, take your seats. Thank you. Matters of national importance - the LOP is speaking.3.11MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek your indulgence and that of the House to bear with us on this side of the political aisle, for whatever mishaps. Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the Members that the Member had to go out of his way and lose his cool because of the massive abductions and many of those abducted up to now are unaccounted for. Therefore, in our meeting, where we retreated - I thank you, Mr Speaker - we have tasked Government to account for this new wave of abductions. The Leader of Government Business is willing, together with all the relevant leaders, to account for the whereabouts of those that have been abducted and besides that - (Interruption)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order?MR OSHABE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition is bringing a very good message. However, I doubt whether it is in order for him to be the one making those commitments when the people in Government are here, when the Speaker has come back and wants to take us to matters of national importance. COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [Mr Zaake]6445THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 29 NOVEMBER 2022Can I request that the people in Government make the commitment instead of the LOP so that when we come back here, we are sure that we are coming back to do business about this matter, which has been around us every time and every day. That is why I am - Hon. Nambeshe is my friend, he is my LOP, but I am forced to put him to order just because he is not supposed to make those commitments. Let the people in Government make the commitments, Mr Speaker.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Please, Hon. Nambeshe - Colleagues, regardless of who you are, no one will be allowed to blackmail this House because I have seen where we are going; we have started a very dangerous game.My decision on what we discussed is not based on someone trying to hijack the microphone, no way. Not any single day will a Member come and undress here; you can even try to commit suicide here. If you are doing it for your constituency, and you want to appease your constituency to show that you have worked, do it; but it will never influence any decision I make here. The commitment to that issue, I started it without Hon. Zaake being here. Hon. Zaake has not been in this House for over 10 sittings. He has not been here, and without my permission. If I go on the Hansard; I can prove it on the record – but I have never spoken about him because he is a brother; you leave him as a colleague. Maybe he is in his constituency. But I want to caution you – and that is why I had moved to matters of national importance because I did not want you to push me to the corner. Colleagues, this House has rules. If you want drama, go and do it in your constituencies ; you cannot do it on this Floor. (Applause)Secondly, if you want pictures to go around of people holding you up and how you were arrested with clothes getting torn and you use them during campaigns, we can organise that for you; we are near the National Theatre, then you can do that. (Laughter) Thirdly, as per Rule 175 of our Rules of Procedure, I refer Hon. Zaake to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline for disciplinary action. (Applause)Matters of national importance?MR NAMBESHE: As I conclude - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable LOP, I am done with that. MR NAMBESHE: No, I wanted to inform my members -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, please conclude. MR NAMBESHE: The amicable resolution of the impasse that we had reached and I had not made any commitments on behalf of Government. I am only being misunderstood. My colleague is merely hitting a messenger who is bringing the message, but the truth of the matter is that mine was to report what we had arrived at. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Naboth, matters of national importance? Colleagues, I want us to move on. Hon. Okupa, raise your procedural matter, then we conclude.MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter which has caused the impasse is a serious one and I had expected the Prime Minister to make a statement and then we proceed. That way - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime Minister, please take your seat. Let him finish.MR OKUPA: That way, Mr Speaker, we would be moving together both on the Government side and the Opposition side. I want to keep you out of this, Mr Speaker. You see, it is painful – until you have gone through that process, you cannot know it is a big problem. 6446ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTYou saw the issue of Hon. Macho and what happened to him at that time. I do not want us to see such things happening in this country. So, let us work together to make sure that these types of arrests, like we read yesterday about Kabuleta; the families have looked for him, but they cannot get him. For such things, if Government keeps quiet, it brews.Is it procedurally right for the Rt Hon. Prime Minister here, effectively represented by the Third Deputy Prime Minister, to let this pass without making a commitment to the nation? Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, you see, before we broke off for recess, if you remember, the Leader of the Opposition presented this matter on the Floor, with a list. I am the one who made a ruling – I was in that seat – and I called the meeting. We met with the shadow minister, the Leader of the Opposition, the Prime Minister, the Minister for Security, among others, and we agreed on a certain procedure. It might have been slow, but the process has been on-going. When you have an issue of that nature, come to the presiding officer; my chambers are open. Every day, colleagues are in my chambers – the Opposition and the NRM – ask for space and I will give you space. Now, this is not a matter where from nowhere you come and decide to cause commotion on the Floor and you say, “Now we shall move, because I have caused commotion on the Floor.” Please, colleagues, no. This House has rules; I propose we go by the rules. Colleagues, allow us to move - there is what we have agreed upon depending on what we did with the Leader of the Opposition and the Prime Minister before we went for recess and this has been in the process. In fact, Hon. Sseggona had brought it earlier; it has been in the process. We are supposed to meet next week, but one cannot say that we meet tomorrow, or that we do this. I request you, colleagues, that however much an issue is disturbing you, never try to test the patience of the presiding officer; never. Because I give you the opportunity to raise it. Now, if you think you will come and hijack me here on the Floor, well, you can try, but I only wish you luck. - Hon. Sseggona, if you bring another report, it will bring us problems and yet you had done good work. So, I request that we move. 3.20MR MEDARD LUBEGA SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker, I have always exercised -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And I am going to suspend the rule of procedure - where we have reached - because I did not do an Order Paper to spend the whole evening. Taxpayers are paying us, colleagues. They are not paying us to handle procedural matters only. Let me end with Hon. Sseggona.MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think by virtue of age and having been here, I can appreciate how hot your seat is. Let me start by thanking you for exercising unprecedented patience. If anything should never run out of the Speaker’s chair, the biggest weapon that the Speaker has is patience and I would continue to invite you to exercise the same patience and even beyond. We have – with the Leader of the Opposition and the team that you met - agreed that both sides of the Parliament should never allow such a scenario to happen again.  (Applause)But we also agreed that we handle the substance as opposed to the symptom, and I am very glad with your statement on handling the substance of the problem. To be quite honest, Mr Speaker, it is very difficult if it is your son or daughter because as I went out to retreat with a few colleagues outside, pursuant to your instruction, I have established that more abductions are continuing and this is not a scenario that I would permit in my Government; I am now in Government. [Mr Okupa] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6447THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 29 NOVEMBER 2022May I continue to plead for your patience that you find it within the usual self – the Speaker – that you stay the action and we handle the substance, then we see how to deal with the symptoms that have erupted. We make an undertaking from our side that in future, such a scenario should not and will not happen. I still plead with you and I still invite the same Speaker that I have known for these decades, to sit on that decision as we try to do the work that you have assigned us from both sides of the House. I plead and beg to submit. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to thank you, our senior colleague, Hon. Sseggona. All the Members you see here, I do not believe there is any Member who condones the abduction of any person; and the best way to handle this matter – it should not be a matter of the Opposition versus the NRM, and it looks like the Government people are supporting abductions and then the Opposition is not - because it can happen to anyone. We have agreed that if there are any new people beyond the list, which we received, they should be handed over to the Leader of Opposition and passed on to the Prime Minister, as we did on the previous one. We will handle them through the same process that we have agreed upon.On the other issues, we shall have a meeting in my chambers after here.3.24MR NABOTH NAMANYA (FDC, Rubabo County, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance vide Rule 49 of our Rules of Procedure. Last week, the whole of Kigezi, including Rukungiri experienced a heavy downpour, and the bridge on Muhanga-Kebisoni Road that connects South Kigezi to North Kigezi, where my brother, Hon. Musasizi, the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development comes from, got damaged and cut us off. We cannot now cross to the other side.Last week, Mr Michael Tumwesigye, a teacher, drowned in the water that had submerged the river on the same road, while he was crossing over to the school. The entire road from Kebisoni to Muhanga is now impassable and not motorable.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Say your prayers, honourable member. MR NAMANYA: Mr Speaker, my prayer is that the Minister of Works and Transport, together with the Uganda National Roads Authority, should rescue our people by doing some emergency works on the road to help our people cross from either side of this road. Mr Speaker, I hope this will be put into consideration, now that people have to do business from areas of Rubabo and Rukungiri District at large. I beg to submit. Thank you.3.26THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will request the Minister of Finance because – I already talked to the Minister of Works and Transport about the same issue and these people need money. So, I would like to ask the Minister of Finance to update the House on whether the Ministry for Works and Transport has got the money or not, then we can proceed from there. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, come and save your neighbours. (Laughter) Be a good neighbour.3.26THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, I, first of all, would like to thank Hon. Naboth Namanya, for speaking on my behalf and on behalf of our people who got affected by what happened on the road between Kebisoni, Rusizi, Nyarushanje and other areas.Mr Speaker, on the issue of the money, I undertake to crosscheck and come back to the House. (Laughter)6448ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, you can see what it means to have experience on this Floor. You can never fail to get out of any trap. - Honourable colleague, clarification comes when a colleague is on the Floor, but now that there is no one on the Floor, you can’t raise it. Prime Minister, this is a matter we cannot handle this way because it is a very serious matter. The answer you have given to the colleague is not satisfactory at all. So, I would like to request that you direct the Minister of Works and Transport to visit the area and do a clear assessment to help the Ministry of Finance intervene. And if there is any emergency support you can give the Member and his people, do it.3.28MR WILLIAM MUSEVENI (Independent, Buwekula South County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the extension of the Ebola lockdown in Mubende and Kassanda districts. Since October, Mubende and Kassanda have been under lockdown and as you know, we were even stopped from accessing our constituencies. The lockdown has been extended thrice. With the lockdown, public transport in Mubende District is not accessible. People are not working yet they are supposed to eat. Children are back at home, but parents have nothing to feed them.Mr Speaker, I pray that Government relaxes some guidelines, like on transport. Secondly, I pray that public means, where taxis can carry maybe half capacity as it was with COVID-19, be allowed, and private cars of transport can operate with only three people. People are dying because they cannot access hospital services.We also need food relief delivered to these people. People are not working yet they are supposed to eat. The other time we were given 1,000 and 500 tonnes of maize flour and beans respectively, but they instead caused mayhem in Mubende and Kassanda districts because they were not enough. People fought for them. This time around, Mr Speaker, we request for at least 2,000 tonnes to be given to these people.I also would like to request for, Mr Speaker -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude, honourable colleague.MR WILLIAM MUSEVENI:  As I conclude, I request that curfew time be lifted from 7.00 p.m. to at least 10.00 p.m., then till morning. Otherwise, Kiboko is Kiboko. They are arresting and beating people. I wonder how Ebola can be stopped when 100 people are being kept in just a small room. Isn’t that another way of spreading –(Interruption)MR PASCAL MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I come from Mubende, Buwekula Constituency, which is the epicentre of Ebola –(Interjections) – it is true –(Interjections) – yes, you are safe. By the time the lockdown was instituted, I was already in Kampala.In addition to my colleague’s submission, I want to point out that there is laxity with the Ministry of Health. People are starving - you find a family spending three to four days with a corpse before it is buried. We are worried. Ebola can spread from there to other people.Therefore, my prayer is that His Excellency the President puts some guidelines and some orders to be implemented, for example, instructing other agencies or ministries to extend services to our place. Otherwise it is absurd that when you call a burial team, they say, “The roads are impassable. We cannot access the places where we are supposed to bury.” And that is why people are spending days with dead bodies. So, I call upon the Government to instruct the Ministry of Works and Transport to work on our roads. More so, the VHTs are not paid. They are not motivated yet they are the ones helping to ensure the contacts are brought to the health facilities to be checked as to whether they are infected with the disease or not. I beg to submit.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6449THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 29 NOVEMBER 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable, let me guide you. When you stand on a point of information, you do not give prayers. You just enrich the submission of your colleague. Number two, you do not access the microphone without the permission of the presiding officer. Let Hon. Nsamba, who is also from Kassanda, the epicentre, add something before the minister responds.3.33MR PATRICK OSHABE (NUP, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think my colleague, Hon. William Museveni, has highlighted something very critical. First of all, I want to thank the Ministry of Health and the partners they work with; they have reduced, significantly, the number of new infections. As I speak, in Kassanda, we have gone 16 days without a new case. The people there thought that if we completed the 21 days, they would be freed from the lockdown. Unfortunately, it was a great pain for them to hear that another 21 days had been added to them. Mr Speaker, I can give simple statistics that by yesterday, the total number of burials in the district were 200 people. Out of those, 21 died of Ebola. This tells you that 179 people died of other diseases. The biggest challenge is that if my son got sick today, I cannot move him to a health centre. I have to call an ambulance, which you call in the morning and it will take 10 hours before it comes. We are pleading with the ministry that if Kassanda District, with 15 subcounties, the Ebola cases you are tracing are only in two subcounties, why keep the other subcounties under lockdown? After the 42 days, the ministry has mapped where the Ebola cases are. The Government has failed to feed the people; maybe they do not have the money to feed the people. Release the other 13 subcounties and concentrate on the two where Ebola is. That is very critical.Otherwise, our people are dying of hunger and they cannot access health care because they do not have money. We are there hopeless. They are abusing us east, west and north. Mr Speaker, thank you for the opportunity you have given me to talk about this matter.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleagues. We commiserate with the people of Mubende, Kassanda and the affected areas. This is your platform. On that issue of Ebola, we are going give you a platform to update us and raise issues so that Government can be able to give feedback and give people hope. It is very important. Locking people and their representatives down – At least one of them should be free. Minister of Health -3.36THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Margaret Muhanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the people of Kassanda and Mubende for raising these issues; they are really pertinent. I also feel for them because locking down people this long - We saw the COVID-19 lockdown and it was tough. People lost jobs and companies closed. I really feel for you. Right now, we have only six people in hospitals and some contacts that we are finishing up with. However, just two days ago, we had a pregnant woman, a survivor of Ebola, who had a stillbirth. The baby was removed scientifically and tested Ebola positive. This baby has no contacts and remember, in the last two weeks, we have not had any case of Ebola in both Kassanda and Mubende.Even the one we have had now has totally no contact because she came from the mother’s womb. She tested positive, but the mother is negative. We are watching the mother because scientists are saying there could be some connection; maybe Ebola can recur, but they have not seen any symptoms in this woman.6450ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTI want to allay your fears, honourable members, that I do not think we shall go up to Christmas under this lockdown. Once these six people in the hospital and their contacts make 21 days, which will be mid-December, I think the lockdown will be lifted. I really believe so. I want to thank you, honourable members. I do not have enough words to thank those who have been coming to the ministry for meetings. Hon. Nsamba who has attended meetings online, your word counts. The Woman Representative for Mubende - Hon. Grania, what you have been doing to educate people about Ebola has helped us.The only challenge we had was that family in Kassanda, which exhumed a body. Actually, all the new cases came from that family. They exhumed the body because they said they could not bury a Muslim just like that. They washed the body and all of them died and also infected others.Otherwise, the people of Kassanda and Mubende have adhered to all this and we have brought Ebola down in record time. I have been in meetings with the World Health Organisation today and they said they cannot believe that we have brought it down in record time of less than three months. Thank you.MR OSHABE: Mr Speaker - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, allow me to close this chapter.MR OSHABE: Just a matter of food –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On food? Who is handling? Let Hon. Anyakun help us. Do not call her “the food lady” – (Laughter)3.40THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Ms Esther Anyakun): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to correct what my colleague said about the 2,000 kilogrammes. We give 20,000 metric tonnes; 2,000 kilogrammes cannot be enough for a village. The department gives 30,000 metric tonnes and we gave Mubende about 60,000 metric tonnes for both the municipality and the district. Kassanda received 30,000 metric tonnes. I want to agree with you, honourable members, that for sure we have a lot of issues right now on disasters. We are trying as much as possible to reach out to those ones that are very urgent and those that have been pending. When we got a directive from His Excellency the President to ensure that we take food to the lockdown districts of Kassanda and Mubende, we made sure that the following day, the food was delivered.However, we are still working out a mechanism on how we can take more food. It is not easy, but we are procuring more food to be able to support the districts.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.3.41MS PASKA MENYA  (Independent, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance. Pader District has been attacked by a strange disease, which is causing loss of lives. We do not know the name of this disease.The disease starts with fever and then cough. After coughing, the patient starts urinating blood. The blood dries off from the body and after a period of time, they die. This disease is mainly affecting children in the age bracket of six to 12 years. The people of Pader are living under great fear. As a leader of the people in the district, I am under that same fear. I fear to lose my voters and at the same time, my loved ones. My prayers are:1. The Minister of Health should immediately dispatch a team to the district to establish what type of disease this is that our people are dying from. [Ms Muhanga] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6451THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 29 NOVEMBER 2022Secondly, Mr Speaker, the Minister of Health should ensure that the health centre IV of Pader District - that is Pajule – is fully equipped and stocked with adequate blood. Lastly, the Government of Uganda – Pader being a district with a population of about 200,000 people – should ensure that the health centre III of Awere Subcounty is elevated to the level of a health centre IV and Pajule Health Centre IV is elevated to the level of a general hospital to extend services nearer to the people, who are really in dire need. I thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Minister of Health?3.44THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Margret Muhanga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Thank you, Woman MP for Pader District, for raising the concerns of your people, especially on a strange disease. I commit that before this week ends, we shall send a team of scientists to assess what is killing the people. If it were Ebola, then the households would be finished. However, if it is one person dying in a home, we can rule out the Ebola. For Ebola, once somebody is very sick and in close contact with other people in the family, they will all get it and most likely die. About upgrading Pajule Health Centre IV to the level of a general hospital, the Government has got benchmarks on which to upgrade hospitals. When we come to assess this disease, we shall also assess the population – the population must be above 500,000 people in order to qualify for a district hospital. Upgrading a health centre II to the level of a health centre III is a lot easier because all health centres II were banned and we are upgrading them to the level of health centres III and every health centre III will have a doctor. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Lumu?3.46MR RICHARD LUMU (DP, Mityana County South Mityana): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Two weeks ago, we were invaded by a violent storm, which destroyed a lot of food. According to the technical persons, about 10,000 acres of food were completely destroyed. It was so strong that even roofs were ripped off some houses. Some people moved from villages such as Bulyankuyege and took refuge in my home. Mr Speaker, I cannot sustain such a big number in my home. I am now calling upon the Prime Minister’s office to come to my rescue and provide food, building materials such as iron sheets, and so on so that these people can be assisted. It is very urgent that even the churches where they would be going are badly affected. If that could be done in a very short time, I am very sure we would have helped them. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister for Disaster Preparedness? 3.48THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Ms Esther Anyakun):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for giving us information. I must confess that in the central, there is no district that has got more support than Mityana. That is because they have been experiencing a lot of disasters. The support has been in terms of iron sheets and food –(Interjection) - this has even been in the media. However, it does not stop me from continuing to support you. I request you to give us a report from the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO). I also request Members that when there is disaster, there is no way we can send support 6452ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTbefore the District Disaster Committee gives us a report on what is happening. We need to agree on that. Otherwise, if you do not base on the CAO’s situation report, it will be political.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The Member said that the CAO has already submitted it. So, kindly link up with him. Honourable colleagues, we have run out of time. For the matters that I have not allowed today, I will allow tomorrow. Hon. Migadde?3.49MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Buvuma constituency comprises 52 islands, with the biggest island – Buvuma Island – measuring 83 square miles. Out of that, 21 square miles are presumed to be forest reserves and 25 square miles are for the Nucleolus Estate for growing palm. The balance of 19.5 square miles remains for human settlement. However, recently, we have seen an expansion of forest reserves, almost covering the whole Buvuma. To make matters worse, the Uganda Land Commission has had officers visit Buvuma for other activities. The remaining forest reserves, specifically Buloba Forest Reserve, which is 300 hectares, has been parcelled into seven plots. We do not know who the owners are. Fortunately, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is here. Mr Speaker, my prayer is that the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, together with the Minister of Water and Environment, should have a joint exercise where such issues can clearly be verified on ground so that our people can know the boundaries and extent of these forest reserves. Where we discover to be forest reserves, then as leaders and the ministry, we can sit to find an amicable solution. Those are my prayers, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister for lands?3.51THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Judith Nabakooba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank Hon. Migadde for raising that issue. We are going to link up with the Ministry of Water and Environment and the MP. I believe we shall sort out that issue. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you visit Buvuma –the honourable colleague even sent me some videos – and see the situation on ground.MS NABAKOOBA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I will go there.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure?MR ALOYSIUS MUKASA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Severally, I have raised issues of fire – intentional and accidental – but on several occasions, I have received non-tangible responses from the Minister of Internal Affairs. Even last week, there was an occurrence of a fire that gutted Ndeeba Market. I would expect a response from the Minister of Internal Affairs today.   I do not know whether it is procedurally right for the Minister of Internal Affairs, of course, to always not give a pragmatic response that is respected by the House. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, you have heard me properly; I said, issues, which I have not given space today, I will give them space tomorrow, and your issue is one of them. But also, the way you have judged the responses from the minister is wrong. To him, it is a satisfactory response. To you, it is not; so I cannot rule on it. (Laughter)[Ms Anyakun] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6453THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 29 NOVEMBER 2022However, in such a situation, I usually encourage reaching out to the minister; I have many colleagues who say, “I reached out to the minister.” So, reach out to them; Gen. David Muhoozi has responded to very many Members who have reached out to him. Therefore, if there are gaps in some of the answers, I request that you reach out to him, and he will- and the one who is more of a celebrity, in terms of responding to Members, is Hon. Esther Anyakun. It seems when you go to her, you get food; but thank you for always opening the door for Members. MR SSEWUNGU: I am seeking your guidance. The previous presiding officer directed the Ministry of Education and Sports to report to this House today on the matter of the higher education loan scheme, where they have failed to release funds; a number of students, who applied for these loans, are going to miss out. Mr Speaker, I see Hon. Muyingo seated very comfortably there in the corner. I am seeking your guidance because he committed himself to report to this House last week. The challenge is that this loan scheme is key; there is no board - but these students take loans and pay them back. We cannot fail to run this loan scheme. As the Committee on Education and Sports, we gave them funds, and they have only received Shs 2 billion. Mr Speaker, the guidance I am seeking from you is whether Hon. Muyingo is going to give us an update - The Ministry of Finance is also here. Otherwise, the students who applied for these loans are worried because university admissions are taking place. I am seeking that guidance from you, Mr Speaker - but he has come closer. (Laughter) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Muyingo, it seems there is a way you are communicating with Hon. Ssewungu. So, since you have come closer to the microphone, go ahead. (Laughter)3.56THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker and my dear colleagues, it is true there has been a delay to release the list of students who are going to be beneficiaries. This has been so because the term of service of the board had expired. As I speak, a new board has been appointed and they have started work. Soon, you will hear the ministry releasing these results. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We hope you can expedite to cover for lost time; it is very important. Next item.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON WORLD AIDS DAYTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister for the Presidency?3.57THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PRESIDENCY) (Ms Milly Babalanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have a maximum of 10 minutes; I hope it is enough.MS BABALANDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This statement is on the commemoration of World AIDS Day - 1 December 2022. Mr Speaker and colleagues, Uganda has made tremendous progress in combating the HIV/AIDS epidemic over the past 10 years. By the end of 2021, Uganda had an estimated 1.4 million people living with HIV . AIDS-related deaths had declined by 67 per cent from 51,000 in 2010 to 17,000; and new HIV infections had declined by 39 per cent, from 88,000 in 2010 to 54,000 (Uganda 2021, HIV Epidemiological Estimates.) 6454ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTIn spite of the progress made, there is still unfinished business. About 1,000 people get infected with HIV every week, and about 326 people die weekly due to AIDS-related deaths. Infections among young people (15 to 24 years) accounted for 37 per cent of all the new HIV infections in the year 2021, with the new infections occurring three times more amongst the young girls, compared to the boys in the same period. (Ministry of Health Annual Estimates, 2021.) Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the drivers of new HIV infections include:Multiple sexual partnership, sexual and gender-based violence, negative social cultural norms and values, for example, early marriages and widow inheritance, transactional sex, income inequality and poverty, high level of school dropout, stigma and discrimination, inequity in access to prevention, and care and treatment services. Concerted efforts by all stakeholders are required to address these challenges. Mr Speaker and colleagues, each year in December, the Uganda AIDS Commission, under the Office of the President, mobilises partners at national and sub-national level to observe and participate in HIV/AIDS advocacy events. Key among them is the World AIDS Day. These events provide a powerful advocacy platform that is well aligned to the Presidential Fast-Track Initiative for ending AIDS as a public health threat in Uganda by 2030, and mainstreaming HIV for epidemic control. The Presidential Fast-Track Initiative aims to ensure that nobody is left behind and promotes increased focus on proven effective interventions of HIV response and addressing prevailing gaps in coverage of key services in the country. Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, currently, Uganda like other countries globally, is undergoing the post COVID-19 pandemic recovery where services were halted due to the lockdown. The impact of COVID-19 was immense across the country, such as disruption of social services in education, health, livelihood, rise in teenage pregnancy, and increase in gender-based violence across the country. This, therefore, escalated the HIV infections among the young people across the country. Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the global World AIDS Day 2022 theme is: “Equalize”.   “Equalize” is a call to action; it calls on each of us to do all we can to address the inequalities which are holding back progress in ending AIDS. The national theme for this year is; “Ending Inequalities among Adolescent Girls, Young Women and Boys.” With the 2030 target in sight, it is critical for everyone to reflect on their individual and collective responsibility towards ending AIDS in Uganda. The objective of this motion is to inform you and seek your support towards the commemoration of the World AIDS Day that will be held on 1 December 2022. The national commemoration will be held in Rukungiri District.As a country, we always commemorate this day to take stock of achievements in the fight against HIV/AIDS and rededicate more efforts to the fight against the epidemic. Mr Speaker, every year, Uganda joins the rest of the world to commemorate the World AIDS Day. His Excellency the President has, since the early 1980s, spearheaded the fight against HIV/AIDS in the country, winning various accolades at continental and global levels. Mr Speaker, in 2017, the President launched The Presidential Fast-track Initiative to end AIDS as a Public Health Threat in Uganda by 2030. Since then, the country has registered many achievements. It is, therefore, critical to have increased and consistent sensitisation of the public about the prevalent risk of new HIV infections and what individuals need to do in order to mitigate the risk. [Ms Babalanda] MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON WORLD AIDS DAY6455THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 29 NOVEMBER 2022Commemoration of World AIDS Day provides a strategic opportunity for engaging the public. This is even timelier because of the highly festive season where some people tend to indulge in irresponsible sexual behaviour thus acquiring HIV . The Office of the President will provide oversight to the Uganda AIDS Commission to ensure that community sensitisation is intensified as part of the commemoration activities. Mr Speaker, in conclusion, my prayer, therefore, and to inform honourable colleagues that: 1. Cabinet has agreed that World AIDS Day takes place in Rukungiri District main stadium.2. The preparations for the commemoration of the World AIDS Day 2022 have commenced.3. The World AIDS Day will be commemorated on Wednesday, 1 December 2022 under the theme: “Ending Inequalities among Adolescent Girls, Young Women and Boys.”4.  To support the preparations for the commemoration of World AIDS Day and relay HIV messages across the country as national leaders to increase HIV awareness and advocacy.5. To support the funding for HIV interventions to ensure we achieve The Presidential Fast-track Initiative for ending AIDS by 2030 in Uganda.6. To participate in the commemoration of World AIDS Day. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Just a small correction, 1st is on Thursday, not Wednesday. So, the Hansard should capture that correction. Colleagues, these statements, Rule 52 of our Rules of Procedure provides that we may discuss them. We have wasted a lot of time today and recently, we discussed a full report from the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters, and there is nothing new that is outside that report, which was presented and given adequate time on the Floor. Based on that, I will not allow debate on this. (A Member rose_) Now, when you say I give three Members and you are standing up, it means you are number one, and the rest are suffocated. (Laughter)Before we do that, when we had a presentation from the Attorney-General, the Action-Taken Report on Acholi, Lango and Teso claimants, he gave us figures on the claimants who had been compensated and colleagues insisted that they wanted a full report with a list and all that. And he has prepared it; let me give him an opportunity to lay it on the Table. 4.08THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. At the last session of the last sitting, we presented a report, which is on page 18 and 19, of the summary of the payments made to Acholi Subregion, Lango and Teso. It was a request of the House that we present the actual list with the names and particulars of the actual persons and the amounts that were paid. I beg to lay. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The report is available. Clerk, you will see a way of managing it so that Members can always – but the Speaker is speaking and you are saying, “Procedure.” Why are you interrupting me; allow me to finish making my comments, and then you can speak. (Laughter) I think you are going to force us into organising another induction because I see a lot of gaps.Colleagues, let me guide you. Parliament is a full-time job; I need you to know that. Parliament is a full-time job that requires you to read. Here, you are like pastors, priests and reverends. You cannot be a priest, reverend or sheikh without reading the Bible or Quran. I cannot keep telling you every day what to do. 6456ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTSecondly, you must go back and read Hansards of the previous sittings, once in a while, to see how they were doing it because personally, I am doing it; that is how I am able to move. Number three, do not get tired. Go to YouTube and watch debates in African parliaments and in the UK because we run the Commonwealth system, and you will learn a lot of things. Then we shall have a less disruptive session whereby, when standing up to speak, you know you will not be interrupted; you will be respected and you will not have much interruption also from the presiding officer. That one, I request of you, as colleagues. So, I am going to allow three people, as you guided, and I will start with Hon. Gilbert Olanya. MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, just a comment. I wish the Attorney-General could provide a soft copy; it is easier for us to access it from the Clerk’s Office; if he could do that. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Please, Attorney-General, provide soft copies so that we can upload them onto the system. Thank you. Hon. Gilbert Olanya -4.14MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Gilbert, just a minute. Since I allowed Hon. Okupa, Hon. Onzima from West Nile might cause problems that we allowed only Teso. 4.11 MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Mr Speaker, when the issue of compensation entered this House, we, from West Nile, have always wanted to raise this issue, but we have never got the opportunity. When you look at the atrocities caused by Kony, whereas the people from Acholi, Lango, Karamoja and maybe Teso, have been compensated –(Interjection) – yes, but the list has already been provided -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable, we have a debate on this issue. Couldn’t your submission fall within the debate today, a few minutes from now? MR ONZIMA: I hope you will give me that chance.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will, honourable, I cannot debate it myself. Hon. Tebandeke - procedure? MR TEBANDEKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the previous sitting, the Speaker had ruled that the Attorney-General also presents a statutory instrument extending the National Women’s Council tenure because while the council is already in place, it is performing its tasks illegally. Mr Speaker, even the PDM, which is on-going -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now you have started giving justification? MR TEBANDEKE: Yes.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No; limit yourself to exactly the procedural matter.MR TEBANDEKE: The council is performing its duties illegally. I thought the Attorney-General would lay that statutory instrument before this august House because it is urgently required. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. But honourable member, you know that a statutory instrument, compared to a list - the list is a historical document and he had it. The statutory instrument undergoes a process before it is taken to Cabinet to see whether it is agreed on. Anyway, I should not speak for the Attorney-General; I only wanted you to get the difference because you had said that it should have come first. Attorney-General, do you want to make a comment to satisfy the honourable member?4.08THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you correctly guided, that is the [The Deputy Speaker]MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON WORLD AIDS DAY6457THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 29 NOVEMBER 2022correct procedure to handle laws. The law under which the Women Councils were elected was made by this Parliament. The Parliament did not grant the Attorney-General the power to extend their life by statutory instrument. So, with the instruction of the House, I have moved the matter in Cabinet to request them to seek an amendment and clearance from the House to be able to do the extension. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Tebandeke, you have heard; the process is on-going.4.14MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the report -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Two minutes only.MR OLANYA: Thank you. Honourable minister, look at page 5, where you talked about the Presidential Initiative Support for Ending AIDS in Uganda by 2030. I really feel this statement should be corrected because it is very impossible to end AIDS in Uganda by 2030. We can end new infections of HIV/AIDS in Uganda, but cannot end AIDS and not by 2030.Therefore, I implore the honourable minister to support –(Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, it is not possible? Are you prophesying or you are –(Laughter)MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, looking at the number of years and those who were affected, it is quite impossible.Finally, I would like to implore the honourable minister to support the various organisations that are supporting people living with HIV/AIDS, for example, TASO, which has its main office in Gulu, and other offices in Lira and other places.Honourable minister, if Government supported such organisations, I really feel the implementation of the various Government programmes on ending HIV/AIDS and its spread would be easier. And so, I pray that you support those organisations. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, let us hear from the Vice Chairperson of the Committee on HIV/AIDS.4.16THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMIT -TEE ON HIV/AIDS AND RELATED MAT -TERS (Mr Stephen Kisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I want to thank the min-ister for the statement, and equally for inviting members to grace this year’s World AIDS Day that is going to be celebrated in Rukungiri.The honourable minister said that the rise and surge in the new infections of HIV/AIDS were mainly during the lockdown and that the numbers increased to 54,000 Ugandans. As we talk, Kassanda and Mubende districts are still under lockdown. So, the concern of the committee is that with this situation in Uganda, we might have more effects of lockdown on HIV/AIDS prevalence and services in those two districts.Therefore, I urge Government in the two districts to focus more on controlling Ebola. We should have strategies in place to help us attain zero new infections, zero new AIDS-related deaths, and zero babies born with HIV , by addressing all of the factors that continue to increase HIV infections in Uganda. Finally, there is an observation I want to make, as the committee vice chairperson. During our interactions with many stakeholders in the country, including the Uganda AIDS Commission, we noted that over time, donor support has been declining drastically. Currently, we only have the United States Government, through PEPFA, still on board yet it is only providing approximately $400 million. The committee noted that donor funds have largely been used mainly on vertical programmes -6458ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable member, you are instead presenting what you already presented. MR KISA: No, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is a simple debate on the statement and I gave you two minutes. If you have a new report, come and I give you space so you can present it.MR KISA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I want just to mention one thing: Parliament, in 2014, passed the HIV/AIDS Prevalence and Control Act. Chapter five of this Act provides clearly that Government should operationalise the AIDS Trust Fund. My appeal, on behalf of the committee, is that the minister and Government at large should ensure the AIDS Trust Fund is operationalised. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I will allow Rakai, where HIV started.4.20MS JULIET KINYAMATAMA (Indepen-dent, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, honourable minister, for this wonderful report presented. I am very worried because when they say that the new infections are eating up Ugandans of between 15 to 24 years of age, it speaks to our school-going children. When you look at the Presidential Fast-Track Initiative to end HIV new infections, you notice that the President’s office and the Ministry of Education and Sports should work together to conduct school campaigns because this is happening in our schools. Thank you. Then secondly, since Rakai District - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, never conclude when you are still submitting –(Laughter)MS KINYAMATAMA: I am sorry, Sir. Anyway, since Rakai District is the birth – and I am sorry to say that, but that is what happened with HIV/AIDS - we have lived with its bad effects to date. We are looking forward next year to having this celebrated in Rakai District because it will create more awareness – (Interjection) - information to you, Hon. of Kyotera - you are asking for information? Oh, okay - (Laughter) - we pray, as the people of Rakai, that we have the celebrations next year so that our people get more sensitised about the effects of HIV/AIDS. Thank you.4.21MS BETTY AOL OCAN (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the early times of HIV/AIDS, when people got to know about it, they were vigilant. Even on the radios and in primary schools, there were competitions and we fought HIV/AIDS. We reduced the incidences of HIV/AIDS. However, today, it looks like everything is just quiet. It is almost like we are contented that we have already done away with HIV/AIDS. And for the young people, it is now like malaria or treating flu. We need to revise our methods of fighting HIV/AIDS. Sometimes Government has air time on radios. That air time should be used to also send out messages on HIV/AIDS. The day after tomorrow, we have the World AIDS Day, which is going to be commemorated in Rukungiri. However, you will find that most districts or subcounties have not prepared to commemorate this day yet it is the time that we should take stock of what has happened. The presidential initiative is very important and good, but there is no push. There is no funding to let us put it on the ground – (Interruption) MR MACHO: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way for information. Truly speaking, as we commemorate this day, I would like to inform my colleagues that the presidential initiative needs money. Uganda, as a Government, has the political goodwill to fight this disease of HIV/AIDS and I want to appreciate the President of this country for that. Thank you.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON WORLD AIDS DAY6459THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 29 NOVEMBER 2022MS AOL: Thank you. I do not believe that we do not have funding. We only need to prioritise HIV/AIDS. If we do so, we will save our young people. Right now, at least there is already a way of preventing transmission from mother to child.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you rejecting his information?MS AOL: I have not rejected it. I have taken his information, but I wanted to finish, knowing that we have a way of preventing HIV transmission from mother to child. That means that we can completely cut down the spread of HIV/AIDS if we are vigilant. We are not vigilant; we are not prioritising and we are not giving funding to HIV/AIDS. Let us do so.The commemoration should have been everywhere; on radios and also on televisions, even in schools, although these have been closed already. It is important to have HIV/AIDS sensitisation to primary and secondary schools where we have the most spread; when we talk about 15 to maybe 30 years. Thank you. 4.25MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. What my colleague, my able friend from Luuka, raised on the AIDS Trust Fund, is true; it is a creature of the law vividly enshrined in the HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Act, which provides for creation of a Trust Fund. Mr Speaker, if you go through the figures provided by the minister in her statement – I have just calculated - it means we are losing, on average, 47 Ugandans per day to HIV/AIDS. That, therefore, means that we cannot nip it in the bud at the target of 2030, like Hon. Gilbert put it.Mr Speaker, even operationalising - If you, for instance, go to the AIDS Commission V ote in the national budget, the budgetary allocation has always been Shs 25 billion. However, what is always provided, for the last three consecutive years, is Shs 15 billion. That, in itself, hampers and actually paralyses the operations of the commission to do its oversight role and even the fight against this serious disease of HIV/AIDS.Therefore, for the minister to get serious, the funding bit must be put right. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, most of these were comments. There were no specific questions to the minister; so, I do not want to disturb her to go on the Floor again to repeat what she had said. I am sure she has noted; I can see she has taken notes. This is an information paper for noting and also for the committee to look at. However, I think it would be a good practice, whenever we are going to have such international days, for the committee to come and give us an independent report on the Floor. We can own it as a House so that once the minister comes with a statement from his or her ministry, it is comparable or we are already informed through our committee. Clerk, ensure that we make this a practice. At least a month or two weeks before, the committee should always give an update to the House in terms of any international day. They are not many. We can always have our own data, which can give us a better way of debating with the minister. Thank you.STATEMENT ON THE INTERNATIONAL DAY FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIESTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have 10 minutes.4.29THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (DISABILITY AFFAIRS)  (Ms Hellen Asamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to brief Members about the forthcoming commemoration of the International Day of Persons with Disabilities. The purpose of the statement is to provide information to Parliament regarding this year’s International Day for Persons with Disabilities 6460ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTscheduled to take place on 3 December 2022 in Kole District. Commemoration of the International Day of Persons with Disabilities is one of the advocacy activities my ministry undertakes in fulfilment of the constitutional mandate as provided for under the National Objectives (xvi), which obliges each society and the State to recognise the rights of persons with disabilities to respect and human dignity. The United Nations’ Decade of Persons with Disabilities was held from 1983 to 1992 to enable governments and organisations to implement measures to improve the lives of persons with disabilities.All over the world, on 14 October 1992, as this decade drew to a conclusion, the UN General Assembly proclaimed 3 December as the International Day of Persons with Disabilities and it was first observed in 3 December 1992. On 18 December 2007, the Assembly changed the name from the International Day of Disabled Persons to International Day of Persons with Disabilities. The new name was first used in 2008.The International Day for Persons with Disabilities is commemorated to celebrate and acknowledge the capabilities of persons with disabilities in contributing towards the development of the country. Commemorating this day creates awareness in the importance of promoting equality and full participation of persons with disabilities in social life as well as development. Further, on this day, Government takes stock of the achievements made in serving persons with disabilities, the challenges encountered and comes up with a very good way forward for serving them better. According to the Uganda Bureau of Statistics Disability Monography Analytic Study 2019, disability prevalence stood at 14 per cent (15 per cent for females and 12 per cent for males) out of the 40.3 million entire population of Uganda. This translates to about 6,642,000 Ugandans with disability. Government is committed to addressing the concerns and needs that come with the increased number of persons with disabilities through eliminating all forms of neglect, abuse and violence as provided for under Article 32 of the Constitution, while promoting recognition of their contribution to national development.Mr Speaker, the International Day of Persons with Disabilities brings together stakeholders across ministries, departments and agencies, civil society and development partners, given the multi-sectoral nature of disability. Most importantly, the day brings together persons with disabilities in celebration of their achievements and contributions to national development, while highlighting emerging challenges and identifying solutions to them. Mr Speaker, the objectives of this statement are to:a) Inform Parliament that Uganda will join the rest of the world to commemorate the International Day for Persons with Disabilities on 3 December 2022. b) Inform Parliament that the theme for the International Day for Persons with Disabilities is “Leadership and Mind-set Change: A Tool for Inclusive Development.”c) Inform Parliament that the host region for the national celebrations was selected based on regional rotation basis and the venue for this year will be in northern Uganda, at Okole Primary School grounds, Kole District.d) Inform Parliament that Her Excellency the Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda is expected to preside over the celebrations as the chief guest.e) Invite the Speaker and all Members of Parliament, on behalf of the disability fraternity, to attend this event.[Ms Asamo]STATEMENT ON INTERNATIONAL DAY FOR PWDS6461THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 29 NOVEMBER 2022Mr Speaker, I would like to recognise some of the results from the previous celebrations.Persons with disabilities requested to be allocated a specific ceiling under the Parish Development Model programme on affirmative action and persons with disabilities can now access 10 per cent of the PDM funds through PDM SACCOs. During the commemoration of the day in 2021, persons with disabilities requested for an increment in the allocation of the national special grant for persons with disabilities to at least Shs 17 billion to cater for 31 local governments that had not benefited from the grant. I am pleased to report that the budget for the programme was enhanced from Shs 9.6 billion to Shs 16.6 billion in Financial Year 2022/2023 and a total of 2,656 PWDs groups will benefit from the programme, thereby reaching over 16,000 households countrywide to start income-generating activities. I thank the Executive and the Legislature for this consideration. A list of disbursement for the grant for each local government since Financial Year 2019/2020 has been attached for your information. Previously, the programme was demand-driven. However, starting this financial year, every local government has been allocated an indicative planning figure to ensure equity in allocation of the grants. Challenges from the previous event Mr Speaker, due to the scientific nature of the commemoration last year, many persons with disabilities were left out since only a limited number of stakeholders attended the function. This year, the commemoration will be held in Kole, involving all stakeholders with strict adherence to COVID-19 and Ebola standing operating procedures. Lessons learned from the previous celebrations The scientific nature of the commemoration due to COVID-19 prevention mechanisms leaves out many stakeholders. This year, we have mobilised stakeholders in the disability fraternity to attend the celebrations and share ideas on how to improve the lives of persons with disabilities. The precursor activities such as the National Disability Symposium had a multiplier effect in terms of advocacy. Despite the COVID-19 challenges, stakeholders have supported a reasonable number of persons with disabilities in different aspects as per last year’s commitments. The National Disability Forum has now been adopted as a precursor event for stakeholders to brainstorm, identify and discuss strategies that can improve the wellbeing of persons with disabilities. Mr Speaker, the theme for this year’s commemoration “Leadership and Mindset Change: A Tool for Inclusive Development” has been strategically selected to strengthen and amplify awareness about abilities of persons with disabilities and encourage leaders at all levels to support persons with disabilities to enhance their potential, through effective participation in all development areas.Mr Speaker, the theme further urges us, leaders, to stop stereotypes and misconceptions about disability and support efforts towards an inclusive society for all. With a positive mind-set, we start to accommodate and put in place mechanisms to support persons with disabilities. The theme is directly in line with our national efforts of steering all citizens towards wealth creation through inclusive planning and implementation of programmes, the Sustainable Development Goals which emphasise “leaving no one behind” and the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which Uganda ratified in 2008. Mr Speaker, some of the activities for this year’s commemoration will include: a) A national disability symposium, which will be held in Kole on the 2nd of November. 6462ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTb) A health camp outreach conducted in Kole District, including eye care, medical referrals, assessment for assistive devices, distribution of assistive devices and other services.c)  Provision of the national special grant for persons with disabilities to beneficiaries in Kole District.d) Launch of the revised national policy on persons with disabilities.e) Launch of the audio visual version of the Person with Disabilities Act, 2020. Mr Speaker, as I conclude, we shall also be launching the first braille Constitution that the Uganda Law Reform Commission - I thank the Attorney-General for that. Uganda now has a braille copy of the Constitution for the blind. Mr Speaker, I want to conclude by requesting Members of Parliament, on behalf of persons with disabilities, to help in promoting meaningful mind-set change towards persons with disabilities and facilitate their inclusion and development. As we count on your deliberate affirmative action for persons with disabilities, my ministry commits to aim higher as far as the welfare of persons with disabilities is concerned. I wish to invite all Members to the national celebrations in Okole Primary School grounds in Kole District. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker. Thank you. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, there is a very small correction on paragraph 1.18. I believe you meant that the National Disability Symposium will be held in Kole on the 2nd of December, not November. Isn’t it? So, let the Hansard capture December instead of November. Like we have done for the previous one - Yes, please, we are going to have three people; Hon. Etuka, Hon. Kamateneti, the shadow minister and – do we have an MP from Kole here? I will also choose Hon. Ameede. 4.40MS ROSE NANTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to appreciate the minister for the presentation as we commemorate the day of the disabled. I seek clarification, first, on the statement. It indicates that the international theme for this year’s commemoration is “Leadership and Mind-set Change: A Tool for Inclusive Development.”  However, the international theme is “Transformative Solutions for Inclusive Development: The Role of Innovation in Fuelling an Accessible and Equitable world.” Therefore, I do not know whether the minister was referring to the national theme, instead of the international theme. I seek clarification so that we can set the record straight.Secondly, Mr Speaker, as we adopt the innovativeness including the PWDs, we need to look at what is curtailing their inclusion. That, to my understanding, is the inability to innovate. Therefore, the Government needs to consider creating avenues to enhance the knowledge and skills of the PWDs. Last year, we talked of inclusive education for PWDs. Therefore, I propose that the Government puts into consideration enhancing the knowledge for PWDs and equipping them with the necessary skills to enable them compete in this world by providing the necessary learning materials and equipment to enable them exercise their abilities as PWDs. Lastly, I implore the Members of Parliament because the minister has listed down money that was sent to districts for PWDs. I would like to implore Members of Parliament to take a keen interest in this money because it is sent to districts, but trust me, most of our Members of Parliament do not know that this money is sent there. [Ms Asamo]STATEMENT ON INTERNATIONAL DAY FOR PWDS6463THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 29 NOVEMBER 2022Therefore, as Members of Parliament, we need to take keen interest in ensuring that this money is used for the purposes for which it is sent to our districts. Thank you, Mr Speaker.4.43MR ISAAC ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi County, Madi-Okollo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I also thank the minister for the statement. I acknowledge the efforts of Parliament to support the budget for PWDs. but one challenge I have seen is that when it comes to distribution of these funds, it does not reach the end-users and so, most of the disabled people in our communities do not really benefit even if it is sent to the subcounty. However, I think the system for this money reaching the end-users is still a big challenge. Secondly, I expected the minister to talk about tracking PWDs or those who are talented differently. In fact, of late, it is said that they are not disabled but they are “talented differently”. I have seen PWDs who are able to play instruments and eat using their toes. There is one in Ayivu Constituency; when he plays the harp, you really see this person’s talent, but they are not supported. This is somebody who has a family, married with three children but he always has to go to the streets to play –(Interjections)-  yes, he is married, with three children but for him to survive, he has to play a harp on the street, using his toes; that is how he makes a living. These people have not been given support. Lastly, when we look at the PWDs in the institutions, I taught for 20 years –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: (Members rose_) Ntungamo - Colleagues, I have already picked the four. I am ending with Hon. Ameede. I will give you opportunity on the next item. 4.45MS JOSYLINE KAMATENETI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I appreciate our minister because she always comes here to make such statements. However, I really encourage leaders and Government to put these statements and policies into real practice. When you go to health centres - I usually visit my health centres - you will notice that there are very few people with disabilities who come to seek medical attention, especially the deaf and the dumb. The reason is that some of them have some diseases, which they do not want to reveal to relatives and friends; yet, there are no interpreters at health centres III and IV and even other hospitals like in upcountry districts. I encourage our minister to work with Government so that they make a clear budget such that at every health centre III onwards, you employ a health worker who is responsible for people living with disabilities, especially the dumb and the deaf, so that they are helped in interpreting their sicknesses.Secondly, about education, in primary schools, there are children who need wheelchairs and use toy latrines. However, during the construction of latrines, they do not put them into consideration. Disabled children have to go and hide in the bushes to ease themselves. During government procurement of chairs, the plight of these children is not put consideration. (Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Agnes Ameede -4.57MS AGNES AMEEDE (Independent, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, honourable minister, for the statement. I would like to comment that this constituency of the disabled persons is very small, yet they are the most disadvantaged in the country. I, therefore, call upon the minister and the Government, that there should be a shift from the way we are doing things; for example, the orthodox way of having big celebrations in particular regions. Societies have moved on. We have radios and televisions. Instead of this 6464ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTbig money going to one particular place, let it be spread across so that on that particular day, all districts are celebrating. The other issue is planning for this constituency. I do not know whether the minister even has statistics, especially the children with disabilities. In my subcounty of birth, there is a secondary school being built. However, I do not see any facilities for disabled children being put in place. It is, therefore, my humble request that we should walk the talk and help disabled persons. Finally, MPs find it difficult to have oversight on the grants that are operating in the local government from different ministries.In Butebo, we have come up with an innovative way: We have come up with a multipurpose committee to look into all these grants. It is my humble request that in Cabinet, please, emphasise this and that we get - (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Okot, you had the clarification you showed me; could you just ask the minister quickly in one minute?MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek clarification from the minister. In her presentations, she said, “provision of persons with disability grants to beneficiaries in Kole District” plus any other activities that she had mentioned. Does she mean that this grant will go to Kole District only or you are also going to take care of other districts?Secondly, on the same note about grants, you have indicated in the table many districts and different allocations that you have given to them. I do not know whether you are going to give provision to persons with disability who will come to the national celebration in Kole. If that is so, have you provided any facilitation for transport? Finally, Mr Speaker, if you can allow me, in northern Uganda especially in Pader, Kitgum, and part of Omoro, there is a disease called the Nodding Syndrome Disease. Majority of the people suffering from this disease are disabled. Would you consider taking some study on them so that you see how to give a special grant in handling that situation? The place is a bit localised; it can be managed if you take interest in it. Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister – LOP, do you have - no, the shadow minister did the work for you.4.54MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa):  I have a brief one, Mr Speaker. I have also realised that they are a few rehabilitation centres for persons with disabilities, but they are ill-equipped. Madam Minister, besides that, we ought to have more of the learning and teaching materials available to these rehabilitation centres and then, even experts in sign language. The staff also ought to be trained in sign language. Otherwise, I salute you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, let us have quick responses in three minutes.4.54THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (DISABILITY AFFAIRS) (Ms Hellen Asamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank honourable colleagues. I will start with the theme, which is national because in Uganda, we feel that as disabled people, we have pushed advocacy, but the leaders are not moving at our pace. When we talk of leadership, we are referring to Members of Parliament, the Rt Hon. Speaker - everybody to take responsibility as far as issues of disabled people are concerned. For instance, Hon. Ameede has talked about a school being built without provision for [Ms Ameede]STATEMENT ON INTERNATIONAL DAY FOR PWDS6465THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 29 NOVEMBER 2022accessibility and yet, she is a leader. I would expect her to become the first inspector to say, “But where is provision for the people with disabilities in this school?” That is what the leadership and mind-set change is because the mind-set starts with us and disability challenges start from society. Even if I walk as a minister, a child will say, “But that one is a mulema.” They really give you another name. Hon. Etuka on the issue of the money - this money is mobilised by people with disabilities. They form groups of between five to 15 people. On average, they get Shs 5 million. The Community Development Officers are expected to do the mobilisation and give these people information about this money so that they are able to grow. I want to report that some of these groups have gone beyond subcounty level and we have already, under my administration, come up with what we call the “management information system” to know which village has got money, which subcounty has got money so that we track where we are and where the money goes.Hon. Josyline from Ntungamo, the issue of sign language interpreters is critical and I have talked to my colleague, the Minister of Public Service, to see that we begin recruiting these people, especially to public places where they can be used. For example, can we get sign language interpreters in hospitals since we have trained personnel? Kyambogo has trained many sign language interpreters, some of them up to diploma level. This is still under discussion; we shall report about it when we are done with it. The issue of facilities is critical. Disability is a progressive issue; it is a development issue, but I want to report to the House that disability is not the way some of us grew. These days you can get wheelchairs, clutches and many other equipment; I think Government is moving towards that. We had a discussion and said, “If Mubende Causality Unit is now making artificial limbs for the soldiers, why not begin a full project to do assistive devices with local materials so that – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude, honourable minister.MS ASAMO: Thank you. That is something we are looking at. For Hon. Okot, Kole will be used as a demonstration of celebrations, but the money goes to the districts; to people’s accounts, for those who have applied for this money. They will get it in their villages; they do not need to come to Kole. We are only doing a demonstration; a dummy cheque to say, “These groups of Kole have received” as part of our celebration. I want to agree with the Leader of the Opposition that the issues of rehabilitation centres is very critical. We already presented this in the last budget and we shall bring it back because they are in dire need of rehabilitation. Some of them were made in the 1940s. I think this is a critical thing that will be handled. I want to encourage Members of Parliament to support this group of unprivileged people because they are part of Uganda. Disability does not mean that you are not able to do anything because sometimes, you are better off – like Hon. Etuka was talking about somebody who plays a harp with his toes; God always gives you an alternative when some body parts are disabled. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. We shall, indeed, support as usual. Honourable colleagues are involved in helping many disabled people in their constituencies. I know many give out wheelchairs and all kinds of support. Therefore, you can always count on us when it comes to issues of people with disabilities. Thank you. Next item?PRESENTATION OF ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENT, MAY 2021 TO MAY 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, if you remember what we agreed on Thursday - the procedure we adopted after a 6466ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTdiscussion we had as a House and we came up with a very clear way of how we shall move. Clerk, we said that we capture them under clear substantive statements so that they can easily be followed up in terms of reports. Last time, 5(i) was Attorney-General; 5(ii) was the Ministry of Health. Tomorrow, I want us to capture them in an orderly manner. They presented, but the Leader of the Opposition was supposed to make – should I call it a rejoinder or a response – let me call it an alternative response, and he is ready. We shall start with a report of the Attorney-General. We are getting an alternative from the Opposition and then, I open the discussion up to you, colleagues. When we conclude that, then we shall go to the next. Today, we shall do – I will see what we shall do after this. Hon. Medard, I do not know if 10 minutes are enough for you. The Attorney-General did not use 10 and so, the response should not be longer.4.59MR MEDARD LUBEGA SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, you are dealing with another Government and it is now Government, but I will endeavour. First, let me clarify by stating that I am no longer acting as the Leader of the Opposition, but I am only designated and instructed to continue with what I started. (Interjections ) - You have advised that I do not allow hecklers on record and I do not intend to do that.Permit me, first of all, to indicate that in our response, we have made reference to a number of addenda, which I beg first to lay on the Table so that anybody reading this report or response would be able to follow. So, each and every reference that we have made in respect of the different ministries’ presentations is contained in this volume, which I beg to lay on the Table. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope it is uploaded. MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: Yes, it is, Mr Speaker. First, in our response, we made an executive summary, which encompasses a summary of each and everything that we have made reference to in our report and I do not intend to read it in light of the time you have given me. I trust that colleagues will be ready to read that executive summary. For purposes of these proceedings, I am instructed to concentrate on the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and for ease of reference, the same is found on Page 61 of our presentation. Mr Speaker, I thank the learned Attorney-General for making a fairly comprehensive response including the addendum of the documents that he laid on Table this afternoon, which I trust brings to completion the task that he undertook to report to Parliament. On page 61, on the motion of 3 November 2021, a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to address challenges facing the girl child and children – sorry, forgive me, it should be page 64-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Page 61 of your response. MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: Yes, Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs appears on page 61. On 3 November 2021, a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging the Government to address the challenges facing the girl-child and children in general in the digital era, was debated and adopted. The resolution adopted by Parliament was for the Government to implement the Trafficking in Persons Act, 2019 and the Anti-Pornography Act, 2014. The reported action taken includes the Trafficking in Persons Act, 2019, being implemented in accordance with the law, while the Anti-Pornography Act, 2014, was reported as being a subject to the constitutional petition, where Court found section 1(2) of the definition of pornography as unconstitutional and an appeal against this decision has been [The Deputy Speaker]6467THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 29 NOVEMBER 2022filed. Therefore, the implementation of the Act has been made difficult. Admittedly, that means that it has not been implemented. On the Trafficking in Persons Act, 2019, the report does not include the statistics of how the law is being implemented in terms of those charged or convicted. We expected a study on whether the law, in its current stage, is the most appropriate remedy to the vice. We would recommend that the Attorney-General presents to Parliament the status of the implementers of the Penal Code Act, intended to protect the girl-child against the female genital mutilation, rape, defilement, child marriage, and all other forms of child abuse. The action taken is on Page 62. The very nature of the Penal Code Act is to provide for offences and punishments for those offences. Therefore, the successful implementation of the Penal Code requires securing convictions on the offences committed. The Government provided a table showing statistics on the offences reported in how they have been handled. To this end, we are grateful to the Attorney-General for the industry exhibited. Observations The figures and statistics presented lack a trend analysis to show whether there has been a decrease or increase in the matter of cases of child abuse over a given period of time. This would enable us know whether the law is working or not, and also explore the need to come up with another intervention, where need be.From the motion on the 14th of April 2022, there was a motion on the resolution of Parliament urging Government to immediately stop cattle rustling and restore peace, security and stability in the sub regions of Teso, Lango, Acholi, Kamramoja, Bugisu and Sebei, which was debated and adopted. A number of resolutions were passed under this motion, irrespective of which the Government has responded. Some aspects of this motion are covered under the Ministry of Defence and other sectors. Therefore, under this part, we shall focus on the following:Resolution Three - that the Government verifies and pays compensation to the people who have lost lives, livestock and property to the cattle rustlers. With respect to those that have lost lives, Mr Speaker, we understand the resolution to mean compensation to their surviving relatives. Action taken The Government commenced the compensation for cattle lost in Acholi, Lango, Teso subregions. To date, 17,687 claimants have been paid a total of Shs 49,345,708,595 with unspent balance of Shs 654,291,405 because of the bounced payments. Observations The action-taken report restricted to cattle lost in the said regions, leaving out compensation for the lives lost and property lost to the cattle rustlers. Is there any compensation planned for the victims or affected families? The report did not indicate whether the number of 17,687 claimants reported is the total and a final number of the claimants or victims in the covered areas. We, therefore, wait to get clarification from the Government. Secondly, the report did not indicate whether funds of Shs 49 billion currently being paid is enough to compensate all the claimants. Our recommendation is that Government should adduce a comprehensive report clearly indicating all claimants, how much they have lost, how much they are claiming and the criteria for the valuation, and families of those who were unfortunately killed by the rustlers and plan for compensating them, among other factors incidental thereto. This, Mr Speaker, stood before the Attorney-General laid the comprehensive list and I would wish to have it amended to that extent. 6468ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTThere are a number of resolutions left out from those that the Attorney-General responded to or the minister for justice responded to. There are certain issues, which have been raised over time, to which the Government has committed to respond, but to-date, we still lack substantive steps taken to address them. On gross human rights abuses - Mr Speaker, I do not intend to read the whole of this text because you have addressed it in the preceding agenda items. It is, however, of interest to us, as Parliament and as a country, to know about the fate of those who are missing. Uganda has a Constitution and that Constitution must be observed to the letter. On page 64, we make reference to the security operatives that instead continued abducting more people and torturing them. Within 30 seconds, Mr Speaker, we will reiterate our earlier demands on the subject, and invite Government to make substantive responses to this. We want to thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Sseggona. Colleagues, we have to applaud a colleague. (Applause) This is how we are going to build a relationship in this House, where alternative policy is given attention. Otherwise, if we always do not allow such an opportunity, then we will have issues of only quarrels; we will have a House of quarrels.For instance, the issue, which the colleague started with, is already here. That is why I said that Hon. Sseggona had raised it and we had already worked out a plan to resolve it. When we come to Parliament without reading, and with a preconceived mind saying, “I have this issue. I will find a way, whether under procedure or not, I must present it” then, we shall end up overshadowing serious issues that are well prepared. Anyway, on this issue, we have already agreed, honourable member, that on Tuesday, we shall meet to address it and that we should update the House. This shall not remain between us. Colleagues, I open debate to you. We shall use 15 minutes in response to this. Each one of us can use one and a half minutes.5.10MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. One and a half minutes? I do not know –(Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, you are wasting some of your time. (Laughter)MR ONZIMA: On the issue of compensation, in my opinion, when Government decided to compensate people for the animals lost, this should have been done in a comprehensive manner. In West Nile, though the rest of the Western subregion did not have many issues to do with the loss of animals to Kony rebels, some areas in Adjumani suffered. Yet, in this report, Adjumani District has been left out. Also in the 10th Parliament, we had started a comprehensive approach where there were lists of other people who lost property like lorries, buses and the rest yet this compensation process has only zeroed on cattle. There were also other rebel activities. For example, in West Nile, there was the West Nile Bank Front rebel group whose operations led to the loss of animals. We also want the Government to come clear on this. There were a number of people who lost their animals. LCs were looked at as people who identified themselves with Government. Many of them lost their property and cattle. (Member timed out.)5.12MR MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Elgon County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the issue of compensation, we agreed in the motion that we should include Bugisu and Sebei. I have not heard anything about these regions. In the discussion, Bugisu, Sebei and Nakapiripirit should also be included.[Mr Sseggona]6469THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 29 NOVEMBER 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Attorney-General, we shall need action taken in terms of those areas.5.12MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of compensation for lost animals and lives due to cattle rustling in Lango, Teso and Karamoja is two-fold. I would have been very pleased for the Attorney-General to give us the details of claimants who went to Court because there was an order of Court. There were three different parties who went to Court and Court made pronouncements. We also have people from Lango, Teso and Karamoja who did not go to Court because the President promised, during his campaigns, that the Government would compensate them and so, they did not need to go to Court. Therefore, I would ask the Attorney-General first to clarify the details of claimants who went to Court and those who did not. Secondly, the animal population, especially the cattle, by 1987 to 1989 when this rustling took place, was estimated to be 1 million cows to be specific. This information is available with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. If you look at the amount of money that is going to compensate these lost animals, they do not match. If we take the 1 million originally proposed - and I am told that it was later adjusted to 1.5 million - you would need Shs 1.5 trillion to compensate the animals that were lost in Lango alone. (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am allowing you to conclude. You gave yourself more time and therefore, the microphone refused.MR ODUR: Thank you very much. It will be important for the Attorney-General to project this total amount so that it comes and settles the people who are waiting for it.Lastly, these payments that have been mentioned here were very inconsistent. I can even mention that they were very chaotic. Claimants who had claimed for six or seven, the Office of the Attorney-General reduced and said, “We are only paying for one.” No one has explained to the claimants what happens to the other six. What standard did the Attorney-General use to reduce for example, from six cows to one or from 10 to five cows? These are very important questions that we would like the Attorney-General to clarify.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I have picked West Nile, Lango and Bugisu. Let me first pick Acholi, then I go to Teso here. Do not mind, I want to first pick Members from the affected areas first.5.15MR RICHARD ANYWAR (NRM, Agago West County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the Government for accepting to compensate for the animals lost. However, the criteria and mechanism being used by the Attorney-General is quite confusing. First, at the onset, they had agreed that they were going to pay each claimant Shs 1 million per cow, but on the last payment, people are getting Shs 30,000 or even less than that. I wonder if the Attorney-General is compensating parts of an animal or a full one.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, without interrupting you, someone who will be reading our Hansard, for example, a researcher - We need to be consistent as colleagues, especially when we refer to figures. Now, you have spoken of Shs 1 million. Hon. Jonathan Odur said that, indeed, at first it was Shs 1 million then it increased to Shs 1.5 million. Now, it has come to Shs 30,000.MR ODUR: Mr Speaker, let me clarify. The amount that was initially awarded by Court was Shs 1 million per cow. The Government voluntarily said, because of the time that lapsed, they adjusted the figure to Shs 1.5 million. However, when it comes to payment, they are paying Shs 30,000.6470ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The good thing is that the Attorney-General has given a report, but he will respond. Let him give us information, which can guide the debate. MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. A cow is valued at Shs 1,050,000 per head not Shs 1.5 million or Shs 30,000. Hon. Anywar, I want to challenge you here that the record I have presented on the Floor here do not show a single person who has been paid less than Shs 1,050,000. That is the information.MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, we need to be factual and help Ugandans. In Acholi Subregion, in my district of Amuru, we have people who were given Shs 200,000. Others were getting Shs 300,000 yet, according to the Office of the Attorney-General, they are saying a cow costs Shs 1,050,000. Let the Attorney-General be very clear; why were you paying those people Shs 200,000, Shs 300,000 and Shs 500,000?Mr Speaker, we have very many “ghosts” who are benefiting from this payment. A case in point is that we have about 500 “ghost” people. I was computing, together with the chairman of the claimants and the “ghosts” are getting Shs 20 million, Shs 30 million and Shs 50 million. The real claimants are getting Shs 200,000 and Shs 300,000.Is the Attorney-General in order to lie or to mislead this Parliament that people are being paid full amounts of money for the cows, yet, the contrary is true in Acholi subregion?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, depending on the route you take, the Attorney-General has presented a document. You have not presented any and you want me to rule him out of order. If you bring me clear evidence and lay it on the Table, it would make it easier for me to say, “Attorney-General, you are not in order.”I would guide, colleagues, that before you come here and say, “People in this area are being paid Shs 200,000 instead of Shs 1 million,” please, lay evidence on Table. Otherwise, speaking generally is for our convenience to win a debate, but it will not help. Therefore, if you know - and this is how you will help your constituents - any person, even if they can write and put a petition - it can be in form of a petition if you do not have bank slips and other details. Write a clear petition and say, “I was entitled to this much, but they have paid me only Shs 200,000 per cow and they are saying I do not have any further claim.” That will make our work very easy. The moment you bring it, I will give it priority. I want to guide on that so that it is clearly understood. MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, the matter is being handled by the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs where the Attorney-General came and presented. Just in case there is anybody who has that kind of information, we can still receive it in the committee because we are receiving them.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In short, I am going to refer the report submitted by the Attorney-General to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Colleagues who have evidence to dispute this report, I hereby call upon the chairperson of the Committee on Legal Parliamentary Affairs to give them time so that they can be heard – even if it means bringing their people to appear before the committee. If it means us, as Parliament, sending the committee on the ground, we can do that. (Applause)MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, indeed, you will have a very good report. Even in the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation, we are always doing the same. We go on the ground to physically look at those particular people who got the cows. So, what we are going to achieve will be the best. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I will be waiting for a report from the oversight committee. Hon. Anywar had not yet concluded, but we have agreed on how we should move. 6471THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 29 NOVEMBER 2022MR MOSES ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance and wise ruling. I would implore that the committee goes on the ground and finds out the truth. Meanwhile, I am ready and request that you give me time so that I lay on the Table facts that people of Agago were paid Shs 30,000 as compensation for their animals. We have evidence, which we can bring if you give us time. The criteria used to vet people who were supposed to be paid - some people lost 10 cows and filled in 10 cows, but at the end of the day, only two cows were reflected on the form. We do not know what happened to the eight cows. Also, Mr Speaker, what is the rush to pay for the cows while the people who lost their lives are not being compensated? Is the Attorney-General telling us that animals are more important than the lives we lost? Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. (Members rose_) No, he has no time to allow you to give information. It is not a matter of passing on the microphones. Just wait. Honourable Colleagues, I want us to, first, have a positive tone.  If we are driven by a negative tone, we will lose it. Let us appreciate that at least compensation has started. The other time, there was zero. At least, now, Shs 49 billion has been paid, which is better than nothing. This can help us to clean up and guide on payment of the other money. If we can submit with a focus on how to improve the process, not the focus of accusing each other, we will move much better. Let us have Hon. Okupa and then, Hon. Aleper from Karamoja. (Member rose_) Yes, I meant you. Should I give it to the Member for Abim? 5.25MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving us this opportunity because I am one of those who took the Government to Court from the time I set foot in this Parliament, under Misc. Cause No. 163 of 2002 at Mbale, Okupa Elijah & 2,020 others v. the Attorney-General and three others.Mr Speaker, allow me, from the onset, to thank the current Attorney-General. At least, we see light at the end of the tunnel. From the time he set foot in that office, I had a meeting with him and he said: “No, let us have a start.” I applaud him for that. (Applause) Whatever mistake could have happened was not because of him. It could have been because of the previous leadership in that office. So, I thank the Attorney-General for taking the initiative. I also thank you, Mr Speaker, for saying that we should have a positive attitude towards this. As I told you, we went to Court in 2002 and we received the judgement in 2018, after 16 years. Among the orders of Court, dated 7 May 2018, was compensation to the families of those that lost their adult persons and there were figures given to it. There were also compensations for every cow, every goat and every pig. There was an interest rate of 25 per annum from the date of filing the suit until the payment in full – which was 17 years.It is detailed and we were wondering why the office of the Attorney-General only picked the cows. The ruling was very specific and clear. That is why I applaud Hon. Sseggona when he asked: why have we picked the cows only? There are a number of compensations that were supposed to be made because this compensation was not only for the cattle rustling, but also the killings that took place during the war -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable Member, please, conclude.MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was trying to give a background, having been in this case for 17 years - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have colleagues here -MR OKUPA: I know, but this will also help them. Mr Speaker, I want to agree with the colleagues that it should not only be cows. There are a number of issues that were raised – even interest. That is why the Government, instead of paying Shs 900,000 – because by the time of the judgement, the figure given for a cow was 6472ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTShs 900,000. However, the Government upped it to Shs 1,050,000 to take care of the inflation from the time of the judgement. However, the more they delay, the more the problems. I am only raising a query. The President categorically, during the campaigns, said: “I am going to give Acholi Shs 50 billion, Lango Shs 50 billion and Teso Shs 50 billion.” That was to start that financial year. Unfortunately, to-date, it is only Shs 49 billion, which has been shared by the three regions - but of course, what was given was Shs 50 billion. So, what could have happened to that President’s pledge of Shs 50 billion per region? We are now entering the third year from the time the President made that proclamation. We needed that to be corrected.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, did we appropriate?MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I was coming to that and that is why I needed even more time. When the Attorney-General’s report came to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, do you know what was provided? It was nil. It is the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, which put Shs 30 billion only for this current financial year. Therefore, the Attorney-General’s office has not been budgeting for this money and we keep wondering why because that was the President’s pledge and a Government assurance, which should have been fulfilled. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should have just provided that money. If he failed to provide the money that year, then, in the current year, they should have been able to provide. However, they provided Shs 50 billion only.Finally, Mr Speaker, after I raised this matter here, you directed the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and they have been going round. They started from Teso region. Some of us have written to appear before them here after they came back, but they are still going round. So, I think that by the time that report comes, it will be comprehensive. [Mr Okupa]I do not want to repeat the issues that have been raised here. Those things happened. At one time, we shared with the Attorney-General and he did admit that there was a mistake in their office and, so, they had to top up to make it Shs 1 million. That is why the report he has come with today is showing Shs 1,050,000. However, the first payment that went - some people in my village got Shs 70,000, but it was a mistake by the people who did the first payment. I thank the Attorney-General for clarifying such that we do not keep pushing. A mistake was made, but it was corrected. People now get Shs 1,050,000 per cow. However, of course, the procedure, which the Attorney-General’s Chambers  used - you cannot do a verification by only sending a list of people to the subcounty, and the officer sits in Soroti to just send a list,  which does not show the number of cows, goats, the people killed. So, we are wondering; were you verifying just the name of a person? The verification should have detailed that - I think the Attorney-General should desist and follow what Court gave in a ruling, because Court gave a ruling that there must be joint verification between the Attorney-General’s office and the people who went to Court or their lawyers or their representative. However, that has never taken place and we are wondering why that has been avoided. This would have solved the problem of first pushing here and there. Finally, there are people who are still in Court. Now that the Attorney-General and the Government has admitted and started, I think this matter should be resolved because we have always had issues; there are people who are still in Court. Luckily, for me, at least, the judgment was made to enable us conclude this matter once and for all. We submitted a list of over 300,000 affected families to the Speaker’s Office and the Speaker transmitted it to the Attorney-General. It was less than 100,000 people that were presented. Therefore, I think the coming of the committee’s report and working together- what we need is working together. We shall resolve this matter. 6473THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 29 NOVEMBER 2022Once again, I thank Government that it has started paying; let us have that positive attitude and continue to pay; every financial year - I know we cannot have the Shs 2 trillion or Shs 3 trillion that we need at once. However, if every financial year, we provide something, our people will be happy and appreciative to Government. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, now you can see that this is work still in progress. We cannot conclude because the report of the committee will come back here; the same people will come to debate it. In fact, we are interfering with the work of the committee. We can lie to ourselves and say we are enriching the committee’s work, but we are interfering with their work instead. I do not know how the debate will be.I had allowed Hon. Aleper; he is the one I am stopping with on this matter, so that the committee can continue with its work and then, we come here and conclude.  - In your point of procedure, you might block the honourable member I had already allowed.5.34MR MOSES ALEPER (NRM, Chekwii County (Kadam) Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to- (Interruption) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order.MS KAAYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My issue is that we are freezing here. I do not know who is monitoring the AC; everybody is freezing. We need somebody to regulate the temperature. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, please, take note of that. MR MOSES ALEPER: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to pick it up from where it stopped. You know, while currently, Acholi, Teso and Lango subregions are being considered, there are other subregions as well like Karamoja, Sebei and Bugisu. This issue has been discussed well, and actually, that is how it came to the level of the President during campaigns and he promised that these issues would be handled. What happened in my particular subregion was that during the last presidential campaigns, the President promised and a team was dispatched from the Attorney-General’s Chambers to collect data from the subcounties, which data is piled up in the DISO’s offices at the districts. When they started paying other subregions, we definitely got pressure and up to now, we are getting pressure from other people who were supposed to be compensated. Mine is for other subregions; let them also be considered in the next fiscal period. This does not only require just paper acceptance. Let the exercise of verification actually start off –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Now, colleagues, I have remembered. You see, I picked colleagues from subregions that had the affected people. I have picked Karamoja - you have made your point, honourable member. Your point was very clear. I think it is important to also pick Sebei. Please, colleagues, do not mind; I know how I am monitoring. I know there are people from Buruli who were also affected. So, Hon. Chemonges for Sebei - we are getting fillers for now. I hope the Committee on Legal on Parliamentary Affairs is taking note of the fillers from the different sides. Please, use one minute, Hon. Chemonges.5.37MR WILLIAM CHEMONGES (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Attorney-General.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, you have started thanking him? You have issues, please, raise them.MR CHEMONGES: I thank the Attorney-General because last year, when he brought the report to the House, it did not have Sebei and when I protested, he went and came back with the report with Sebei. 6474ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTHowever, my question is: what is the actual process of identifying the beneficiaries? Up to now, there is nothing on the ground. Finally, when he brought the report, he told the House that the Government would consent to the cases of all the people who had taken it to Court. In Sebei, we had a group of people who had gone to Court and up to now, they have not received their consent judgment. Otherwise, thank you very much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Committee on legal, you need to look at the assignment we gave you. For example, here Hon. Alfred Edakasi from Kaberamaido is saying the committee needs to reach out to Greater Kaberamaido and Kalaki among the Kumam people. They always stop in Soroti, like the Attorney-General’s people always do. Therefore, you need to do a comprehensive reach-out. Hon. Sseggona, please, relay this message to the committee, but I will also link up with the committee. Let me pick Buganda.5.38MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are Baruli who settled in Lango for quite a number of years. Having settled in Lango, in 1979, they were forced back; it is on record. However, they had acquired property in Lango; they had land, cows and buildings, but they never came back with their properties. This issue was tabled in the Attorney-General’s office. The Deputy Attorney-General came to Nakasongola, met those people and they gave him the information, but when I look at the list here, those people’s group is not included. My humble submission and prayer is that those people be considered by the Attorney-General’s office. Please, go to Nakasongola, meet those people, and consider them for inclusion on the list. I beg to submit. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Attorney-General, when responding, please, guide us properly on what your compensation covers because when you look at the resolution on 14 April 2022; a “Motion for resolution of Parliament urging the Government to immediately stop cattle rustling and restore peace, security and stability to the subregions of Teso, Lango, Acholi, Karamoja, Bugisu and Sebei” was debated and adopted.Is this compensation for the war or for cattle rustling or for both? We need to get that one. The moment - and someone is saying which war? Are we covering the Mau Mau, Rwenzururu, Nyungu ya mawe and Bachwezi dynasty wars? I think we need that clarification captured, but let me finalise with Busoga because I have picked one per subregion.5.41MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we were debating that report, I remember the Attorney-General capturing Lakwena survivors in Busoga and their property, on record. I am just surprised that when we are finally looking at compensation, there is no single mention – it is going in passing – it is an opportunity, Mr Speaker, because every electioneering period, the issue of Lakwena victims keeps coming up.It is an opportune moment now for the Attorney-General to come out clearly and tell the country when –(Interjections)-  we are not saying now, but when. This commitment should be put on record such that people are able to make a clear follow-up. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Attorney-General - Lakwena was there for one year and she was mainly performing witchcraft. (Laughter) 5.42THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a very emotive issue and the guidance you have given is very good because the committee then gets to interact with the things that we are doing. [Mr Chemonges]6475THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 29 NOVEMBER 2022It has been on our books for a very long time, and claimants were only appropriated Shs 50 billion. We had three regions to deal with. The decision we made was to distribute the money equally to each district - each district, not region - in those three regions because we could not determine who should take the money because some places had 100 claimants, one person has 100 cows, another has five cows, now the question was: “Should I pay the one of 100 cows and finish all of it or should I pay the one with one cow?” We decided that the money will be paid pro rata to every claimant with a minimum payment of one cow. Like Hon. Okupa has said, we made a mistake originally and they distributed the money pro rata across every claimant and therefore, some people got 50, 100, depending on the number of cows that were – (Interjection) - However, as we speak, Mr Speaker, with the report that I have given you, that anomaly was corrected and everyone was paid Shs 1,050,000 and – (Interruption) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I guided sometime back. This House does not deal with small things; small clarifications, small submissions. We deal with substantive stuff. (Laughter) MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We shall continue to interact with the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation, where we are sharing all these details and maybe, when we get back here, we will have a more meaningful conversation. Mr Speaker, we only receive the money that is appropriated by Parliament. We requested for Shs 100 billion in this financial year. When the budget came out, we had nothing. The Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs assisted and appropriated only Shs 30 billion, which we were advised it is coming in this quarter. As the money comes – now the verification is not complete because it is continuous. In fact, I received some from Kumi last week. Omoro did not have any of theirs in the last cycle, but we continue receiving those. We require the support of Members; if you discover that there are “ghosts”, the “ghosts” have names, and national IDs; we will deal with them. It is criminal and we need to work together and we need to rely on you, Members of Parliament, to help us to deal with those problems. That is why we try as much as possible to present here the actual list of these people who are receiving this money. Finally, Mr Speaker, the Office of the Attorney-General does not participate anymore in the verification of claimants. When I came into office, I made a decision and I cleared it with Cabinet. The Office of the Attorney-General did not have the capacity to determine the people who lost cattle in the different areas. That decision was left to the leadership of the different districts. We only receive and process; we do not even reduce what has been approved. We are going to continue sharing with the committee and I am sure when we come back, we will have a more enriched report because the committee will have gone to the ground and then, we can have a meaningful discussion. I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, this is closed because it is still on-going. If you still have any issues, we still have an opportunity. Every Member is a member of a committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. You can go and submit. So, colleagues, this is done. Thank you, Attorney-General, for bringing an action-taken report on resolutions of Parliament as per Rule 220 of the Rules of Procedure. We have received them; we have received from the Opposition a response to the report, we have debated and this is not even for adoption because it is an action-taken report, but what I would guide is that the relevant committees continue looking out for these issues. We will follow what has been promised as being on-going. 6476ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTSecondly, we are going into budgeting. Some of the issues require a serious budget. We need to consider them during budgeting. Some need legislation. So, let us take very keen interest in that. Attorney-General?MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I got taken away by one issue in my report, but I would like to thank my colleague, Hon. Sseggona, for the comments he has given. We have taken them and I think they add a lot of value. We shall definitely bring the statistics that you have requested and we will try to enhance working together to develop this process. I thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Edakasi, I have never seen you insisting this way. I hope you are not repeating what you wrote here that I have read. MR EDAKASI: No, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much for allowing this procedural issue. We seem to have concentrated on cattle compensation and we did not discuss the issue of trafficking, which was the other resolution. So, I just wanted to raise this. Wouldn’t it have been procedurally right for us to also talk about child trafficking?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Colleague, when I was allowing people to speak, I never limited them to anything. So, these are the issues, which you chose. Let them go for noting. Most of them were to do with the legislative programme and all that; there is nothing much you can do that is urgent that we need to submit here. (Mr Nambeshe rose_) But LOP? (Laughter)5.49MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa):  Thank you, Mr Speaker – (Interruptions)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Colleagues, one day, I will give you this Chair so that you sit in it and you – the problem is that you might not hand it back. (Laughter) It might get sweet and you refuse to vacate; otherwise, I would give it to you. (Laughter)MR NAMBESHE: Just like you rightly put it, since budgeting has commenced, Mr Speaker, I realised that to have a comprehensive compensation to all this, the learned Attorney-General should also capture compensation to torture victims and victims of gross human rights violations so that it is not left out. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Especially awards given by the Human Rights Commission and courts - it is very important. Since we are in the budgeting process, if you gave him money, he would not refuse; he would pay. That is his prayer: to settle all his debts. Thank you. Ministry of Lands, you are the next to present - there is traffic jam outside, honourable colleagues. So, instead of spending hours in traffic jam, we would rather be doing work for the country. (Laughter)5.50THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Judith Nabakooba):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. This is an Action Report on the Status of the Implementation of the Resolutions of Parliament on the Naguru-Nakawa Land Allocation, 2022. The Parliamentary Ad hoc Committee on Nakawa-Naguru Land Allocations presented a report with recommendations to Parliament on Wednesday, 18 May 2022. The Clerk to Parliament communicated the Parliamentary resolutions to the Prime Minister, who is the Leader of Government Business, and requested her to present to Parliament an action taken report on the resolutions of Parliament. Below are the Parliament resolutions and status updates on their implementation.Resolution 1 Given the irregularities that surround the allocation of Naguru-Nakawa land to the so-called investors, all the titles already issued be cancelled and the entire land revert to the Government. [The Deputy Speaker]6477THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 29 NOVEMBER 2022Status update Government takes note of the concerns of Parliament. However, the allocatees have binding leases with the Government, subject to the development conditions. Even Court, in the case of Hon. Persis Namuganza v. Attorney-General, guided that land titles are cancelled according to the provisions provided for in the Registration of the Titles Act, Cap 230.Resolution 2That Shs 17 million ex gratia planned to be paid to the former sitting tenants of Naguru-Nakawa land should be revised upwards to reflect the current market value and be expeditiously paid to the beneficiaries. Status updateGovernment takes note of the concerns of Parliament. However, ex gratia payments are discretionary in nature and are not based on market value. We recommend that Parliament should appropriate funds to be paid to the former city tenants of Naguru-Nakawa. Resolution 3 Government should maintain the original land use plan of Naguru-Nakawa land as residential, and in conformity with the 2013 Kampala Fiscal Development Plan. Action takenThe Government takes note of the Parliament resolution. The development of Nakawa-Naguru land shall take place in accordance with the Kampala Capital City Authority approved development plan. Resolution 4 All those political leaders, ministers and technical officers mentioned in the Ad hoc committee report on Naguru-Nakawa, who acted contrary to public interest and in disregard of the law, on the basis of the alleged Presidential directives, must be held personally liable.Status update The Government noted the concerns of Parliament and the matter was sent to appropriate organs for further investigations, which are still going on. Resolution 5 Mr Ramathan Ggoobi, the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury should be held responsible for making payments to a third party, ROKO, without any lawful basis. Action takenThe Government noted the resolution of Parliament, and the appointing authority was notified of the resolution. We are still waiting for a response from the appointing authority.Resolution 6 The Government should recover the payment made to ROKO Construction Company Limited, which is about Shs 15.7 billion, given that there was no contract between the Government of Uganda and ROKO Construction Company.Status update The Government takes note of the resolution of Parliament. However, the Government has since acquired shares in ROKO Construction Limited and any outstanding obligations will be reconciled. Resolution 7 The Secretary ULC, Ms Barbara Imario, be held personally liable for fraudulent activities in allocation of the Naguru-Nakawa land.Status updateGovernment noted the resolution of Parliament and Ms Barbara Imaryo is on interdiction and investigations are still going on.6478ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTResolution 8 Uganda Land Commissioners should be held accountable, retired in public interest and replaced for abuse of authority and violation of the Executive authority in Uganda.Status update Government noted the resolution of Parliament and the appointing authority was notified of it. We are still waiting for the response. Resolution 9 Hon. Persis Namuganza should be held accountable for abuse of office for misleading ULC into the allocation of land to individuals and entities, following Presidential directives, which were non-existent.Status update Government noted the resolution of Parliament and the appointing authority was notified of the resolution. We are still waiting for the response. (Laughter)Resolution 10 M/s Opec Prime Properties filed an application for contempt of Court against the Attorney-General, ULC, Hon. Rukutana Mwesigwa, Hon. Betty Amongi, Hon. Baguma Isoke, which was successful, and the respondents were ordered to pay a fine of Shs 50 million each, but that was paid by the Government of Uganda. The money that was ordered by the court to be paid by individual ministers, but was paid by the Government, should be recovered from the affected ministers/individuals.Status update The Government noted the resolution of Parliament and the Attorney-General was notified about it. We are waiting for guidance from the Attorney-General on the matter.Resolution 11 All Government land should be identified, surveyed and titled and a comprehensive public land inventory and register be established under the supervision, management and administration by the ULC.Status update The Government takes note of the resolution of Parliament. The ULC has embarked on a process of updating the Government land inventory, detailing all the Government land. The following actions have so far been taken: updating the register of all leases issued by ULC. We have written to MDAs to have all their land registered; we are conducting visits to MDAs to ensure they have registered and titled land under their jurisdiction. However, this activity requires huge financial resources, which ULC does not currently have. A project proposal has been prepared and forwarded to the Minister of Finance to provide funds for surveying, demarcating, registering and titling all Government land.Resolution 12 Since ULC lacks both the financial and human resources capacity to satisfactory execute its mandate and has often relied on the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to second personnel to help out in the technical aspects of land management, leaving it very vulnerable to unscrupulous land dealers, the technical and financial capacities of the Commission needs to be strengthened.Status update The Government takes note of the resolution of Parliament. The vacant positions in the staffing structure have been cleared by the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance for filling or recruitment. The ULC is engaging the Ministry of Public Service to review its structure. A training and capacity-building programme has been [Ms Nabakooba]6479THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 29 NOVEMBER 2022developed to enhance the capacity of ULC staff. Government will enhance the budget ceiling for ULC and Uganda Land Commission Bill is in the offing. When enacted into law, it will expand and regulate the mandate of the Commission and its relationship with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, district land boards and other key players in the land sector. The Bill will ensure autonomy of the commission, but also provide appropriate structures at the headquarters, regional and zonal areas. Resolution 13 Appointment of a more technically competent commission with exposure and experience on land management be done.Status Update  Government will take into consideration the resolution of Parliament while appointing Commission members and recruiting technically competent staff for the Commission. I beg to submit, thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. We still have the action taken report in regard to the recommendations of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the petition in the matter of Kasoli Tenants SACCO Limited. Please, present that also so that we handle all at once before you respond.6.03THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT  (Ms Judith Nabakooba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a report on action taken in regard to recommendations of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the petition in the matter of Kasoli Tenants SACCO Limited/Kasoli Housing Project. On Thursday, 19 May 2022, the Committee on Physical Infrastructure presented a report on the petition in the matter of Kasoli Tenants SACCO Limited/Kasoli Housing Project. After the presentation and debate on the report, you directed that the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should present an action taken report in regard to the committee recommendations on 19 May 2022. After receiving the resolutions of Parliament on the report of the committee on the petition in the matter, on 16 June 2022, I communicated the resolutions to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Minister of Works and Transport and the Executive Director of Standard Gauge Railway for appropriate action. The following actions have been taken on the committee recommendations:a) Government should, as a priority, clear the outstanding mortgage with DFCU Bank and get back the land title to avoid accumulation of interest.The lands ministry engaged the finance ministry, the ministry of works and the Standard Gauge Railway to prioritise compensation for the DFCU Bank outstanding mortgage to avoid further loss to Government in accumulated interest.The lands ministry also engaged DFCU Bank to halt the sale and eviction of Kasoli Housing Project tenants. The bank agreed to halt the sale and eviction of tenants subject to availing a letter of payment of the mortgage with clear timelines.The Standard Gauge Railway wrote to the Minister of Finance for compensation funds, which were not provided. Also, the Standard Gauge Railway could not provide the commitment letter to DFCU without commitment from the Ministry of Finance to provide the funds. The Standard Gauge Railway is constrained and cannot clear the loan. Parliament should compel the Ministry of Finance to reprioritise and provide funds for repayment of the loan since it accumulates interest annually.6480ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTb) The Standard Gauge Railway be provided with Shs 4.231 billion to cover the verified Project Affected Persons (PAPS) as per the valuation reports as follows:i) PAPs in 92 houses and one project office: about Shs3.7 billion.ii) PAPs in the 90 structures in existing slums: about Shs 817,068,304.iii) Seven freehold offers from pool housing committee: about Shs 143,557,180.The Ministry of Works and Transport, and the Standard Gauge Railway agreed to prioritise compensation for the outstanding DFCU Bank mortgage in this Financial Year 2022/2023 budgetary allocation for compensation under the Standard Gauge Railway. This will enable urgent recovery of the land title and also avoid further loss for Government in accumulating interest. The next phase of payment will deal with compensation of the rest of the PAPs. There were 59 PAPs who were not valued by Standard Gauge Railway because they were never found on ground at the time of valuation. These were part of the initial project and their property was demolished during the initial phase and they were never valued. However, the Chief Government Valuer provided a value for the demolished property of Shs 636,915,708. We request Parliament to allocate for compensation of the 59 PAPs and that they should be paid through the Ministry of Lands. The Shs 3.2 billion for the mortgaged land of 9.318 acres as valued by Standard Gauge Railway and approved by the Chief Government Valuer should only be paid to the ministry of lands for land acquisition if Government is going to replicate the project elsewhere. Otherwise, Government cannot pay itself.Mr Speaker, the overall objective of the Kasoli Housing Project was to pilot a new initiative of low income mortgages for poor households through partnerships for several parties to minimise risks while aiming at full cost recovery. Other objectives were to test bringing housing finance to the low income segments in our society, provide security of tenure for the poor, enhance the skills and incomes of the slum dwellers, promote the culture of saving among the population with the overall goal of improving living conditions and the urban environment within Tororo Municipality. This is in line with Government policy on housing. It was envisioned that upon successful piloting, this model would be replicated in other slums across the country. Unfortunately, the objectives of the project were never attained or achieved.In light of the above and given the urgent need to address the challenges of slums and mitigate the acute housing deficit of about 2.4 million housing units, the ministry intends to replicate the project elsewhere. The ministry has embarked on the process of identifying a slum for a similar project. The compensation awards for the structures on the Kasoli land should be deposited on the individual accounts of the respective beneficiaries. The SACCO should be notified about the direct payment so that it deals with its members individually.Mr Speaker, the ministry communicated the Parliamentary resolution to SGR for appropriate action. The SGR indicated that the compensation award will be paid on the Kasoli SACCO account. After offsetting the mortgage for DFCU, the balance will be paid to individual accounts and the SACCO will be notified accordingly. Mr Speaker, thank you. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable minister.MR MOSES ALEPER: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been following the report presented by the minister. However, to make the report complete, plausible and authentic – there are matters that the report refers to: notifications to the appointing authority and [Ms Nabakooba]6481THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 29 NOVEMBER 2022other people. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right to have that documentation appended to the report to make it complete?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, I agree. Honourable minister, please do that. The way rule 220 – which we base on – was framed, it is the minister to make this report. Now, where the minister cannot go beyond her powers – when she informs the appointing authority – she will have taken action. However, like you have said, we need proof that this has been done. Also, like I guided on the last one, the relevant committee should now take up this matter because whatever the minister has presented here, we need to ensure is followed up and realised. That is the purpose of the sectoral and oversight committees. Therefore, honourable minister, we shall request that you bring those letters on Thursday. Ensure that the documents you have referred to are laid on the Table. I will give you space. Procedure, honourable member?MS KAAYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise under rule 25(7). At the 33rd Sitting on 22 September 2022, under Item No. 6, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development had eight questions to respond to. However, in this session, the Minister of Lands had only one new question and there was no reference to the earlier questions. I wonder whether they were resolved during recess. Therefore, my procedural request is for the minister to respond to the eight questions that were on the Order Paper by the 22nd of September during the 33rd Sitting of the First Meeting of the Second Session of the 11th Parliament. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Colleague, read rule 220. These are resolutions, not questions of Parliament. These are resolutions that arise out of adopted reports and motions, not questions asked by honourable colleagues. Questions asked by honourable colleagues are totally different. For those ones, as the Presiding Officer, once I receive an answer, I put it on the Order Paper. However, an action taken report is when the committee does work, we adopt the report and pick out the resolutions or when a motion is presented, and we debate, adopt it and pick out the resolutions. Therefore, these are totally different rules.However, to answer her point, honourable minister, if you have any pending questions, please, ensure that you respond to them. I remember there was a time we gave you a lot of space on the Order Paper and you cleared very many issues – before we went for recess. I was the one in the Chair. I ensured that all pending issues were handled. All the issues of the ministry for lands were captured and we handled them. If there are new issues that have come up, they should be there.Honourable colleagues, always refer to the Order Paper. “Business to Follow” on the Order Paper is where we usually have pending business. If you do not see it here, know it has been handled. If we forget and you have it, please, come to us. We will ensure that the Clerk extracts it. However, I remember the Minister of Lands answered around five questions consecutively on the Floor here – and I was the one presiding. However, crosscheck those questions you talked about.Let us hear from Hon. Sseggona, who has been given responsibility by the Leader of the Opposition to prepare responses to the issues raised.6.23MR MEDARD LUBEGA SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for the action taken report. I observed though, as you earlier guided, that the minister needs to table evidence of the action taken – and of course, to take guidance from rule 220 because the minister is required to submit to Parliament an action taken report – and mark the following words – “detailing what actions have been taken,” not simply mentioning. 6482ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTSecondly, Mr Speaker, as colleagues will observe, of the 13 resolutions that the minister has been responding to, the common denominator has been to say “the Government notes this”. If you follow the Hansard of what she has read, in a significant number of resolutions, no action has been taken apart from noting. Our resolution was not to invite the Government to note, but to take action – and it must be demonstrable action. Mr Speaker – and this goes for almost all, apart from one where the secretary of the Uganda Land Commission has been interdicted as a result of our recommendations. I would, therefore, invite the minister, this time, to take action. My attention has specifically been drawn to the payment by the Government for some officers who were found wanting by Court for personal or individual action. Contempt of Court, by all standards and within its four corners – at least as I understand the English language – is a personal action. It is not only a personal action, but criminal. When somebody allocates himself or herself the duty to pay for somebody’s criminal action, that person is an accomplice and must equally be called upon to pay for his or her sin. It is not sufficient to tell Parliament that after resolving that you pay back our money, you have written to the Attorney-General to guide you. In the first place, why didn’t you seek guidance from the Attorney-General before spending public resources on the crimes of individuals? Indeed, the Attorney-General has been here and he has not been called upon –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  He is here. MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: Oh, he is actually here seated cross-legged and should have been called upon to explain why it has taken him that long to exercise the function under Article 119 of our Constitution of advising errant people on their errors of paying for their individual actions that amount to contempt. We have heard about the ULC Bill, and this has been pending for more than a year because I remember the first time I raised an issue here to do with ULC, particularly ULC divesting itself of land, where they are only and constitutionally required to hold in trust. Then, they talked of a Bill, which has not come in and that was in the Ninth Parliament. To-date, we have not seen this Bill. When someone tells you “the Bill is in the offing”; what does offing mean? They have not even put pen to paper to draft this Bill; the moment you say it is in the offing; probably, it is at conception or even preconception stage. Mr Speaker, I now beg to proceed in a detailed manner, but bearing in mind the time limitations we have. On page 50 of our responses, we have raised matters to respond to the action taken report by the Ministry of Lands. Mr Speaker, you will recall that while presiding over the House on 19 May 2020, when the matter came up by way of a petition presented on Kasoli Tenants SACCO Ltd, the presiding officer, in the spirit of cohesion in the House, directed that the minister for lands, and the Minister of Finance make a follow up on the recommendations of both the majority and minority committee reports and reconcile the two. The expectation and an inevitable conclusion would be that they would be looking at the two reports. Mr Speaker, looking at the action taken report, after receiving the resolutions of Parliament on the report of the committee, including your guidance - the Minister of Lands communicated the resolutions to the ministers of Finance and of Works plus the Executive Director of the Standard Gauge Railway, for appropriate action.Our observation If the resolutions of Parliament extracted by the Office of the Clerk did not include the harmonisation process or reconciliation of the recommendations of both majority and minority reports, then there was a very big problem. [Mr Sseggona]6483THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 29 NOVEMBER 2022However, the minister is a Member of Parliament, and he was here. Before attempting to implement the recommendations of only the majority report, as reported by the minister, we would expect the reconciliation of both reports to be done as per the presiding officer’s guidance and an action taken report on the agreed position be tabled in this House. I make reference to the Hansard, which I already laid on Table. Mr Speaker, it is also important to note that going by the majority report, Government will spend Shs 7.5 billion and I footnote for ease of reference. In the compensation for houses to be demolished and if purchased and adjacent land to realign the SGR, considering that an acre of land is currently at Shs 40 million in that area, 10 acres would cost the country only Shs 400 million. A total of Shs 7.1 billion and 92 low cost houses would be saved that way, hence saving the taxpayers money. We recommend that the reconciliation process be concluded as the presiding officer guided, and the action taken report tabled in the House without any further delay. This will help us cover any gap where taxpayers’ money is wasted since the whole matter of Kasoli has irregularities, impersonation and speculators who want to take Government’s money. Action taken on the status of implementation of resolutions of Parliament on Nakawa/Naguru land allocations Mr Speaker, I will summarise our response in this. One, the ministers well captured the resolutions of Parliament on the subject. They included the IGG investigating further the matter with a view of bringing to book any wrongdoers. The Government expediting and giving the two entities titles namely; Naguru/Nakawa Division Headquarters and Naguru Infant School, to safeguard those interests - the minister has not reported on those. The settlement agreement to be implemented by both partiesMr Speaker, we have reproduced all the 35 recommendations. Let me particularly respond to the argument that cancellation of the title and those leases was not possible because they are legally binding agreements. We beg to differ, and fundamentally so, because once irregularities and illegalities have been identified as marring the process, then, there is no legally binding agreement; you cannot be stopped from cancelling a lease improperly, illegally and originally procured. Therefore, that cannot be a defence, except if Government was disagreeing with our committee report. The payment of Shs 17 million as ex-gratia payment to be revised to the current market value We agree that ex-gratia payment is discretional, but a commitment has already been made. The pegging of ex-gratia payment to the value of land is intended to achieve the objective for which it was intended because ex-gratia, you were supposed to pay some two, three years back, the value of land has changed, and your intention was to settle that tenant who you evicted and that was the whole purpose. The observation by the ad hoc committee, which investigated the matter was that it was aware of the land in question that was leased out, and that the leases between ULC and the entities that did not qualify for an allocation, to be terminated. For example, the committee concluded that M/S Internal Medicine Virginia, Plc. a non-existing and a sham company of an investor as such, that the land be allocated to them should be recovered and the lease terminated; what is difficult about that? Somebody does not exist; there is not even risk of a suit because the person does not exist. This Parliament has already recommended that certain people be prosecuted for wrongdoing. What is the wrongdoing connected with? It is connected with this allocation. Therefore, you cannot approbate and reprobate. On the 6484ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTone hand, you are saying it was an irregular process, on the other hand, you are saying it produced legally binding lease agreements. Mr Speaker, I do not think such a thing could be accommodated.We, therefore, recommend that the lease offers to M/S Internal Medicine Virginia Plc, Master Links Uganda Ltd, Phaneroo Ministries International and M/S Arab Oil Supplies and Exploration Limited whose analysis by the ad hoc committee revealed that ULC ignored its own set parameters in the allocation, be cancelled with immediate effect. We re-iterate, on page 55, the Parliament’s resolution that ex-gratia payments planned, therefore, be paid with guidance from the market values. We recommend that the Office of the Prime Minister proceeds to implement these resolutions of Parliament and adhere to the resolutions of Parliament. As I conclude, Mr Speaker, I do not know what happens in the Executive. I thought that civility and elementary decency would require that when you are not clear about the resolutions of Parliament, you come back to Parliament; you do not wait for the same Parliament to wake you up for you to come back and say “Oh, we have done this, we have done that” When we talk about an action taken report, whereas it is true that legally, we cannot cause the President to come here in order for us to compel him, the President has submitted to the jurisdiction of this House by nominating a representative who is the Leader of Government Business here. When we make our recommendations and resolutions, they are not only intended for the ministers, but Government as a whole, including the Presidency. It is not acceptable, in my humble opinion, that you can simply say, “We wrote to the appointing authority and that is His Excellency the President,” Yet, he is going to come back to us in that same year – to ask us in his capacity as minister for finance, to send and appropriate money to the people we have already sanctioned.It is high time we put our feet down and asserted our authority as the appropriating authority. Whereas the President is the appointing authority, we are the appropriating authority. We do not appropriate money to be wasted. I beg to submit. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable, on behalf of the Leader of the Opposition. Colleagues, I open up debate for five people. We will start with the Chairperson, Committee on Physical Infrastructure -6.32THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr David Karubanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development for the action taken report. However, this land in question, indeed, is supposed to house the headquarters of the Standard Gauge Railway. Hearing from the honourable minister, I think Parliament needs to hear further from the Ministry of Works, and the Ministry of Finance; and the Standard Gauge Railway because what we need is money to secure this land. Secondly, Mr Speaker, I would like to – I have heard the comment from Hon. Sseggona. He has talked of the possibility of acquiring a piece of land at the site. I just want to inform the House that during the implementation of this project, Government was party and indeed, Government wrote to the SACCO and intimated to the SACCO members that Government was going to take this land after compensation and, therefore, they were going to be evicted. That was one of the strong –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude, honourable. MR KARUBANGA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to inform Hon. Sseggona that by Government opting to go away, the SACCO would sue because Government was party and [Mr Sseggona]6485THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 29 NOVEMBER 2022it is just the delay that caused that – because they wrote to the tenants that Government was going to take that land. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairperson, this matter is under your committee; so, you have all the powers to follow up in terms of ensuring that indeed, the Parliamentary resolutions are implemented. Hon. Sseggona has told you the whip we have, the strength we have and although we would want to work together, we would not want any commotion. The moment we respect each other, it becomes very easy for us. 6.34MS DORCUS ACEN (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. However, I want to note, just like Hon. Sseggona has also taken note, that if we are to be honest with ourselves while rating ourselves on the status of implementation of these resolutions, very few of them honestly could be said to be completed. The majority are pending, but we also do not have timelines that are tagged for us to be sure that some concrete action will be taken in order for us to see tangible results. I pick, for example, the one on the appointment of a more competent commissioner with experience and expertise in land management. That is just mentioned there and then, she says it will be done, but when will it be done? We should be honest with ourselves and to Ugandans. If we could tag actions, in fact, concrete actions with timelines so that we know we are doing something; we are not only just answering this for the sake of answering. Let us really challenge ourselves. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I want to guide you. You see the language we use here and how we address each other is very important. When you say, “And then she says,” – it should rather be “the honourable minister says”, or “the honourable member says –MS ACEN: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Acen. DP -6.36MR GEOFREY OKELLO  (DP, Nwoya East County, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okello should be – is he independent?MR GEOFREY OKELLO:  I am a member of the Democratic Party. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, he is DP. People are doubting because Hon. Sseggona left DP, now he no longer knows the DP members. Please, go on, honourable. MR GEOFREY OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think those contesting should be given the opportunity next time. Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable minister for presenting the report and Hon. Sseggona for that detailed request. I rise with my heart spread over the suffering of the former tenants of Naguru Housing Estate. When this matter was presented to Parliament, Mr Speaker, the interest then was to see that those people who were promised compensation from Naguru were compensated. The other issue was that whatever money they were going to be given should have been commensurate to enable them to acquire other pieces of land elsewhere to settle. It is saddening, Mr Speaker, if Government finds Shs 17 million little and just stops at that. My prayer would be that if technically paying Shs 17 million is not possible, there are many other ways Government can do it in order to pay more money so that they resettle. For example – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude, honourable. MR GEOFREY OKELLO:  For example, they could consider adding interest on that Shs 17 million so that they settle because this land 6486ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTis for people, not people for the land. I thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there are people who bought interests at a higher price than what we are giving as compensation. These are very many in Naguru. I remember – I do not know how I survived – I usually do not get excited, and even Hon. Okupa almost paid, but people came to me. You know it was a hot cake; we knew it was a prime area. Now, it will be bad. Our very own people will feel bad. You got people and you gave them land, which is worth millions of dollars for free and then, the individuals who paid their money cannot get their worth back. Here, it is even beyond the law; it is empathy, it is humanity. That is why projects do not get completed. If those people who were in Naguru are passing there daily and cursing those you gave – people really suffer. This is where they had their future. On this, the Chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure should work with the minister. Please, follow it up and let us support colleagues. During appropriation, let us follow it up. Honourable minister, you know, if you present it to Cabinet, the issue of ex-gratia should be revised from a compassionate point of view. I am sure Government can be considerate and be kind to these people. 6.40MR ERIC MUSANA (Independent, Buyaga East County, Kagadi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the update she has given us, which is very good. I represent a constituency that was tagged among the lost counties; those that have serious issues to do with land. Honourable minister, you have talked about a matter where the Government has bought land and this land is idle and the people have failed to have ownership. On the 2nd of July, I wrote a Question for Oral Answer regarding this area, and the Clerk to Parliament also wrote to you. However, since then, I have not received any communication. I have moved around offices to get an answer on how the people of Buyaga East and Bugangaizi can get their land. The Government bought this land and then other people -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, we are discussing a specific land issue. Is Buyaga and Bugangaizi land part of the Naguru land matter? Was your land lost in Naguru? We are specifically discussing this. –(Laughter)- If you have issues beyond Naguru and Kasoli, I will give you an opportunity if you bring, for example, a petition for your people -MR MUSANA: Mr Speaker, you have rightly guided that the minister has talked about the inventory at the ULC and it is still pending. The ULC has this land and it is pending. The people want this land. I know the connectivity of Naguru and the land was for the ULC. This is a serious matter, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, when submitting your issues, make sure you submit them in a way that is traceable. The way you have brought your issue, I can assure you that it will die here and you will not get any chance of picking it out of Naguru and Kasoli. I am giving you an opportunity to bring a petition from your people so that we can substantively handle it. We should even send the committee on ground, come up with clear resolutions, and then, we require the minister to come and give an action taken report on resolutions specific to your area. If you choose to continue here-MR MUSANA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That would make it very easy.6.43MS CHRISTINE APOLOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I first want to appreciate the minister for lands. Hon. Nabakooba is one of the most active ministers [Mr Okello]6487THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 29 NOVEMBER 2022we see around, and this ministry is very challenging. Honourable minister, thank you very much. I am reacting to the submission made by the minister in relation to action taken, where she said that the office of the minister has already engaged the Attorney-General to provide guidance. I thought that by this time, the honourable minister would have come to report to us with the guidance already given by the Attorney-General for us to see the way forward. Even as we look at the Naguru land and the issues of titling Government land, you are aware that there is a lot of land grabbing, even from the Government, happening across the board. I challenge the ministry to take serious action on this. For instance, the honourable minister would have informed us that maybe a write-up has been made and sent to districts to immediately begin taking action. Otherwise, if we continue at this pace, by the time we take serious action, Government will have lost a lot of land.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But Government is the one giving away land. (Laughter) It is not even losing land, but giving it away. Laughter)The only point I want to appreciate is that she is among the ministers for whom we have directed here to go - when you say, “Honourable minister, go here and address a Member’s issue”, she goes. That must be applauded. We have Hon. Rusoke, who is our foot soldier and has been with us. We appreciate, honourable colleagues, whenever we have all these issues because ministers are part of us and we would want to bridge the gap. - That is the head girl of the whole Cabinet. When any minister refuses, and you go to her, she will come herself. (Laughter)6.46MR ALLAN MAYANJA (NUP, Nakaseke Central County, Nakaseke): Mr Speaker, my concern is about the Naguru-Nakawa land. One of the recommendations we made was that Government should recover the Shs 15 billion payment made to ROKO Construction given that there was no contract between the Government of Uganda and ROKO Construction. The minister has given us an update that the Government takes note of the resolution of Parliament, but that Government is now a shareholder in ROKO Construction. We need clarification on this because I remember ROKO Construction was given Shs 200 billion, in line of shares. We need the minister to be specific. Was the Shs 15 billion, which was supposed to be recovered, computed from the Shs 200 billion shares? We need the details according to the rules and what they say; we need more details about this. That is my concern, Mr Speaker.6.47MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Listening to the two presentations, one can judge that the other had gaps, which need to be addressed. I would ask that the honourable minister and Hon. Sseggona to reconcile their statements because that will enrich and give us a better response. I was only asking, when the minister said the money for the Kasoli people is not there -  the money for the Naguru claimants, which is about Shs 17 billion, is not there, yet, the man in charge of our purse - the PSST, could have the audacity to pay more than Shs 16 billion to a company with a non-existent contract. I would forgive him if he had paid this money to Kasoli or Naguru people, but paid ROKO Construction, which did not have a contract at the time, as confirmed by the Attorney-General, Hon. Kiryowa. It defeats my understanding. Maybe someone needs to explain to me, what science – and this is related to the issue raised by my colleague, who had just sat here about the preferential shares. That money we paid, do we now have the 200 shares worth Shs 260 billion? I think that detail needs to come out. Honourable minister, are you saying that our 6488ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTpreferential shares are now valued at Shs 216 billion? On the issue of the ULC, before you even went to that ministry, the ministers in there kept saying that the Bill is in the offing. No wonder the problems we have in the ULC are persistent, partially because of the absence of the law. When will this Bill be tabled? The Committee on Physical Infrastructure and the current chairperson will bear me witness: they have kept, year in year out, us asking. Where is the problem, honourable minister, which is delaying the Bill? Maybe we can help you. If that is the case, the honourable here says he is going to bring a Private Member’s Bill. Maybe, that is what we should do. Mr Speaker, I think we shall encourage the private Member to move this Bill if we are to achieve anything because I think there is a problem. Finally, about the Kasoli project, you said you are in touch with DFCU Bank and the ministries. I am informed that this week, DFCU is opening that land. I want to ask the minister to save that land. It is a very strategic measure that we need for that place. Therefore, as you move out of here, please, follow up on that matter because what you are telling us is different from what is happening on the ground. Definitely, Mr Speaker, as you said, the Committee on Physical Infrastructure must follow up these matters conclusively. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Committees, you have lots of power. When you are sitting, it is Parliament sitting; please, use your powers. For example, the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry recently agreed and said Government has completely failed to bring the Bill for consumer protection. They mobilised themselves and a private Member brought the Bill.Therefore, if the minister for lands is failing to bring one to reform the ULC, you can awaken them by starting the process when you identify gaps and find that they affect your work as legislators. I believe this will help the minister. I know the process of drafting a Government law compared to the one of a private Member – A private Member can burn the midnight candle, but when I was a Government Chief Whip, I saw how ministers could struggle to go through the process of Cabinet. It is a long process and so, sometimes, I pity the ministers when they are struggling with it. Honourable minister, please, expedite it. Honourable Attorney-General, please, support her.Honourable minister, just quick responses to specific issues. You do not need to go through each separately.MS NABAKOOBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am going to respond to the issues raised by the Members. I will begin with that of harmonising the reports. We did our best, together with the Ministry of Works and Transport, and the Standard Gauge Railway, to harmonise the two reports, but the Standard Gauge Railway insisted that they wanted the land that had the project. In any case, this land belonged to the Standard Gauge Railway. That is how we came up with a payment plan for the mortgage, but also to the project affected persons. To summarise, I would suggest that money is found to have the land re-acquired. Right now, we have been pleading with DFCU for them not to auction the land. We have now heard from Hon. Okupa that they are opening the bids. This means that they have been patient enough and they are running out of patience. I believe that in failing to get that land, we would get it back at 10 times more than the money which is required to have the land paid for. We have informed the ministry of finance and the ministry of works, but we are not making any headway. Therefore, Parliament, through appropriation of a supplementary budget, can have this issue sorted because the Standard Gauge Railway does not have the money.[Mr Okupa]6489THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 29 NOVEMBER 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can you intervene in this matter? The minister is on record saying that if you are to acquire this land, you will pay 10 times more. In the future, if it comes here - whether it is correct or not, let them meet.What I mean is, instead of it being between Works and Lands, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, invite the Ministry of Lands, the Ministry of Finance, and the Ministry for Works and the Attorney-General and sort this matter because this is not a matter, which can be resolved on the Floor.6.55THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Mr Speaker, I am going to take up this matter and call all the responsible ministries to sit together and get a way forward. We will come here and update the House. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, next week, you will update the House.MS NABAKOOBA: Mr Speaker, I will say that the ULC Bill is in draft form. However, Cabinet guided all ministries with pending Bills to sit and conclude the process of having them processed. Between now and January, we are going to process all the pending Bills, including the ULC one.On the documents asked for by Members as proof that I communicated to the relevant authorities, we shall provide them accordingly in relation to action taken by the ministry.On payment of ex-gratia, this was a matter that was decided upon before Cabinet sometime back. They agreed that as a way of sending off these Government workers, a compassionate fee of about Shs 17 million should be paid. I do not know how to term ex-gratia; maybe akasiimo. It is not even compensation, but ex-gratia. I will take up the matter with the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to see if the total sum can be revised.Therefore, for those who had entered into contracts with the sitting tenant, maybe it is a matter we need to probe further. The whole project looked at these people as tenants; Government workers in Government houses and while sending them away, they thought, for inconveniencing them and for the damages, let them get something as they go away.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude, honourable minister.MS NABAKOOBA: I promise to handle it with the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. On other matters, which are still pending, I want to convince the honourable members that it is work in progress. This is not the end of everything. You have heard that for most of the recommendations I have put, there is need for follow up. These are matters that are still being investigated. There are those that were forwarded to the appointing authority, meaning that work is still in progress. It is not like the reports have been concluded. Therefore, I beg you to give us time as we work out a way of following up on most of these issues. As we get feedback from the concerned authorities and from the investigating authorities, we shall come back and report to this House.Mr Speaker, I think those are the issues I managed to pick. Thank you very much for the opportunity.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleagues, for being here. I adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.(The House rose at 6.59 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 30 November 2022 at 2.00 p.m.) 