Thursday, 1 November 2012

Parliament met at 2.54 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Your Excellency the Vice President, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. Today is Thursday where private Members’ business takes precedence for the first 30 minutes. Before we do that, I would like to welcome back hon. Joy Arinaitwe. When we started the second session, she was still indisposed, and was out of the country, but we are happy to see her. She would like to reassure you that she is back.  Please take the Floor for a few minutes.

2.57
MS JOY ARINAITWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you Madam Speaker, honourable ministers and honourable Members of Parliament. I take the opportunity to thank God first for the life he has given back to me. On a special note, I would like to thank His Excellency the President of Uganda, Madam Speaker, all Members of Parliament, my family members and friends who were greatly touched by my sickness.

I am indebted to my people of Buhweju who have not only missed my presence and presentation in Parliament, but who have also been worried and concerned about my health. I am now very okay.

I propose the following interventions to improve on the medical care in our country:

Improvement of referral hospitals in terms of provision of medical equipment and specialised doctors to treat complicated cases; 

Provision of a good atmosphere to in order to attract highly specialised doctors to Uganda and consequently reduce costs of accessing specialised medical care;

Improvement of health centre infrastructure network and related facilities in the country to help our people; and
Provision of ambulances to enable the sick access medical facilities so that they can get treatment faster.

Ugandans are spending a lot of money on treatment and I believe that many are dying because they cannot afford treatment abroad. The faster Uganda responds to investing in medical infrastructure and in attracting private medical investors the better for us.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I thank you very much for the candle of the 9th Parliament that has kept burning. May the good Lord bless Uganda and Parliament. I thank you.

2.59
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of utmost national importance regarding mobile phones. Of recent, you’ve heard some authorities giving the public a deadline to do away with their mobile phones, believed to be fake. I would like to ask the minister concerned to clarify to us how you discern a fake mobile phone, and how you get to know that it is a fake product. Is it necessarily that everything that is branded “from China” is considered fake?

I think we need to be assisted. Some of us want to buy phones, and some of our voters and traders have invested a lot of money in importing and buying these phones, but now they are being told that the majority are fake, and they have been given a deadline. So, we would like to be helped. 

Of recent, even medicine is considered fake. Most of the products that are coming into the country are now believed to be not up to the standard. So, we would like the minister in whose docket this –(Interruption)

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are all aware that there exists the Uganda National Bureau of Standards in charge of setting standards for goods that are imported into this country. It is on the basis of those standards that they determine what goods come into the country. The ordinary person who uses a phone would not know whether a phone meets those standards or not.

The duty should be imposed on the Uganda National Bureau of Standards, who should be questioned as to how these phones got into this country. It is not the users to pay the cost because they did not know. The standards have not been published; they are not readily available to the users. That is the information I wanted to provide.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: So, Madam Speaker, as I wind up, who is going to foot the bill? How are the people who imported these phones going to be compensated? How are you going to know - apart from the mobile phones - which products are fake? I would like the minister to inform this Parliament such that we can take back the message to our constituents. Otherwise, everybody is worried.

THE SPEAKER: Leader of Government Business, how do you respond to that issue - because even me, I do not think I know what a fake phone is? I do not know how the villagers in Bugiri would deal with a fake phone.

3.03
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Justine Kasule Lumumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Ssebuliba Mutumba who has raised this issue. Cabinet has not concluded discussions on this issue because the method to be used in identifying fake phones is by registering only phones that are produced by the so-called leading manufacturers in the world. These are recognised as the right phones.

However, many questions are being raised about the new companies that have come on the market of recent that are not known to be big because most of the so-called big companies  are based in Europe and Asia. How about those from Africa? All these are questions that have to be answered and we shall bring a statement here next week on this issue.

3.04
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter that has terrified me in the media for the last two or three days; it has to do with the breakdown of the intensive care unit facility in Mulago.

It is reported that the consumables required to run that facility are out of stock, and for the last three or four days now, the facility is not operational.

It was also reported three people have died already and others have been withdrawn by relatives and taken to other facilities.

There are others who are in need of the services of the facility, but they are not getting any help and it is feared that many more people will die.

It is also reported that the required consumables will be brought in after two weeks because the management of Mulago has decided that they will follow the normal procurement procedures. This for me is terrifying because anybody, anywhere, anytime, can end up in the intensive care unit (ICU).

DR OKUONZI: Thank you Madam Speaker. What my colleague has raised is a very serious issue, and it is not just the ICU. Two weeks ago, I lost a cousin because the renal unit, the unit that deals with kidneys, has one dialysis machine which is not working well; only one for the whole of the 33 million people in this country. Because this disease was diagnosed in Arua, this young man was brought to this unit and found over 40 people in a line waiting for that machine which was faulty. I want to regretfully announce that we lost this boy, and I am sure there are many others.

I have now been informed that the machine has actually stopped working. It is not just the intensive care unit, but also other units in Mulago Hospital, which are getting dysfunctional and are closing down. That is the information I wanted to give.

MS ALASO: Thank you, honourable colleague for that information. Madam Speaker, the picture is very grim and I think Government owes this country a quick explanation, perhaps in this very sitting, of what is going on, and where the patients in Mulago will find hope. God forbid if anybody in leadership collapsed now, we would not wait for procurement according to procedures, we would find the next plane leaving for Europe to take one of us out of this country. Can’t we find the next plane leaving for wherever these consumables are, for the sake of Ugandans? (Member timed out.)

3.07
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. In the wisdom of Jeremy Bentham who said, “Two rulers rule the world; pain and pleasure”. Today, I rise because my district is under the rule of pain. Just yesterday, there was heavy rain which occurred in Congo to the effect that Nebbi being the water catchment area geographically - because of the Congo Basin, which slopes to the East - has suffered a very big effect of that rain.

Right now, over 200 latrines have been destroyed totally; one person drowned to unconsciousness, but not to death. Over 7,800 acres of crops ranging from cassava - our most darling food - millet, rice and cotton, and ten shops were destroyed with all the goods inside; and two bridges on Pakwach-Arua Road at wildlife have been submerged to four metres below the floods.

Over 36 senior four students who were supposed to do their final exams today – Fine Art - were unable to cross to their school.

Primary schools like Oguta, Ojigo and Ocayo primary schools have been closed. 

This is an act of God but warrants the act of man with the help of God to redress. That is why in the wisdom of this country there is a Ministry of Relief and Disaster Preparedness under the auspices of the Prime Minister’s office, and also the Minister of Education. So, the question I have is; are these ministries aware and what solutions are they urgently providing for the people of Nebbi District?

3.10
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker for this opportunity. Hearing all the lamentations, we get more stressed as people’s representatives because of the unsolved equation of service delivery.

I rise on an issue of importance. Since September 2010, the Parliamentary health club was opened, and you are aware of how I started soliciting for this facility, and I would like to thank you for the cooperation and advice you gave me. I would like to also thank the Vice President who was the Speaker by then, who made it possible that as we speak, we have a health club established in the parliamentary facilities.

However, as we speak right now, our colleagues, stressed as we are, very few are really taking advantage of these facilities. Even the established place down in the Basement is not private or big enough to enable the facility to be fully utilised.

We would like to request you, Madam Speaker, that we have this place expanded and probably, put it in a private place such that Members can comfortably use it, rather than just in the open basement and encourage Members to take advantage of this health club.

I would also like to request that the machines which are already there are not enough to cater for the MPs and staff. Probably, we increase the number so that we all benefit.

I would like to also request that we provide a facility for massage and sauna to compliment the health club so that we are fully catered for. 

We would also want to request that may be we have an attached saloon so that you contain your Members here with a busy schedule of work which is at hand so that after the health club, you make-up yourself and come to Parliament and we do not waste time.

Madam Speaker, I would kindly request you to officially you launch this health club, probably early next week, so that Members feel its goodness of it and you lead us into catering for our health, as we legislate for the good of this country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR KAWUMA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I need to be guided. My colleague here raised pertinent issues and among others, was about those students who missed exams, the bridges that collapsed and the primary children who are bound to miss exams next week. I will need to be guided about the intervention from the Ministry of Education on the students that missed exams and those that are bound to miss exams. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I am waiting to take all the points and then the Leader of Government Business will give us a solution. 

3.14
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I am rising to inquire from the Minister for Education about the extent to which the ministry has extended a hand in the matters surrounding Kyambogo University. 

You will remember that on 30 August this year, Kyambogo University closed and the students left the university under mysterious circumstances. There was a strike and our students were affected. As a result, an ad hoc committee was put in place by the University Council to look into the matters and suggest remedies. 

This Parliament gave the matter to the Committee on Education and the committee is handling it. It has not yet made recommendations to the Council. 

It was reported in the media that the Vice-Chancellor was relieved of his duties yesterday. The committee just handled the report at the end of the month and among the many recommendations that the ad hoc committee gave, was that the Vice-Chancellor should be given some time to build teamwork and harmonise the management issues of the university. But instead of helping him, the same council that set up the ad hoc committee, has suspended the Vice-Chancellor – [HON. MEMBERS: “Dismissed.”]– The council has actually dismissed him. 

Right now, there is unrest in the university and students are threatening to strike. Before the situation runs out of hand, I would like to know from the Ministry of Education how prepared they are to ensure that this does not happen; that the students do not strike and that the university remains calm, to avoid costs. I wish to be allowed to lay the report of the ad hoc committee on Table. 

THE SPEAKER: Please lay the report and then I will ask our chairperson because we gave her some responsibility here. 

MS KIIZA: It is the final draft report of the Ad hoc Committee of Council to carry out investigations into the alleged mismanagement of Kyambogo University by Prof. Isaiah Omolo Ndiege, the Vice-Chancellor of Kyambogo University, and other related issues as done by October 2012.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Before I go to the other Members, may I ask our Chairperson of the Committee on Education to tell us how you stand with the work that we gave you?

3.18
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (MRS SYLVIAS SINABULYA NAMABIDDE): I thank you, Madam Speaker. The Committee on Education and Sports has handled the petitions as presented before it by this Parliament, and our report is ready. We are also astonished at the way the Council of Kyambogo University has hurriedly handled the process. We would request you, Madam Speaker, that at the earliest opportunity, we are given chance to present our report and then Parliament will discuss the report. 

THE SPEAKER: We shall put you on the Order Paper for next week. We shall have Dr Baryomunsi and then hon. Mawanda. Two minutes, please.

3.19
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): I thank you very much. I would like to raise an issue that is related to what hon. Arinaitwe - we want to welcome her back - hon. Alaso and Dr Okuonzi raised, that the country is spending a lot of money treating Ugandans abroad because our facilities cannot handle a number of ailments. 

As Members know, most Ugandans who can afford or who can be paid for by Government, are going to India and sometimes South Africa. Recently, we paid a visit to India together with you, Madam Speaker, and while interacting with the Uganda High Commission in India, we were given information that people who run the state-of-the-art hospitals in India had expressed a wish to construct a facility here in Uganda that can provide the same kind of services we are getting from India. The only requirement was that they wanted Government to give them land and then they would construct a state-of-the-art health facility in order for us to access the health services that we are being referred to in India, but Government has not been able to do this.

Initially, we were told that Government offered land somewhere on Entebbe Road, but later on, it said that it had given it to Japanese investors who were also putting put up a hospital, but that offer has been on for close to 10 years. Government was also contemplating finding land in Entebbe but apparently, the information we got was that Government seems not to be ready or is not helping those investors by providing land for them to come and construct a health facility, which would benefit all of us –

MR TASHOBYA: I thank you, Dr Chris Baryomunsi. I would like to inform you and the House that that facility you are mentioning was not only supposed to help Ugandans, and in so doing saving us the money that we are spending in sending people abroad. That facility was also supposed to be the only one of its kind in the region that would cater for the needs of the countries around us and so, it would not only save us the money we spend, but we would also earn money from that facility generated from the patients and the people going to India from the neighbouring countries. I thank you very much.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I thank you very much, hon. Tashobya. For the question that I am asking, we would want to get information from Government as to why it is not supporting these investors to come and construct a health facility so that we save the lots of money that we are spending on our health -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

DR BARYOMUNSI: And yet, we have seen Government in the past giving land sometimes to bogus investors who start investments that never materialise. This facility will help all of us and, therefore, we would like an assurance from the Leader of Government Business in front here about what is happening.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mawanda and then I will ask the minister to respond.

3.23
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Some time back I stood on the Floor of this Parliament and raised an issue of Uganda’s candidature to OIC (Organisation of the Islamic Conference) and the fate of our candidate. You directed that the Minister of Finance comes on this Floor and gives us the status as far as Uganda’s candidature is concerned in respect to paying subscription fee and facilitating the candidate. Elections are slated for 31st November 2012. Uganda has not paid; the candidate is just campaigning through SMS because he is not being facilitated. I would like you to urgently direct the Minister of Finance to come and tell us whether as a country we are still interested in this candidature or not. Thank you very much.

3.24
PROF. GILBERT BUKENYA (NRM, Busiro County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, can I also congratulate you very much for what you did in Canada. (Applause)

I heard what one person said about the intensive care unit and somebody mentioned that there is only one kidney dialysis machine. It took me by surprise because there used to be six kidney dialysis machines in Mulago. They were too few to manage the many people whose kidneys had shut down. All of you are vulnerable to your kidneys shutting down. When a kidney shuts down, you have no alternative, but to get an artificial kidney, which is the kidney dialysis machine. 

I am worried because if there is only one – we need an emergency system to be put into place to have these machines here. Whether you wait for the bigger hospitals that will be built in the future, today, your kidneys could shut down. I can see vulnerability here with honourable members. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, the intensive care unit also needs emergency help, and I am very worried if you have shut down the intensive care unit for three days. Those days when we used to shut it down for only four hours, the mortality rate of people who would need the facility would hike to 80 percent. If you have shut it for three days, I do not know what you are doing for the Ugandans who need intensive care.

These statements were made and we were left hanging. It should be concluded by the Minister of Health, by giving us a commitment. What are we doing, especially at this time? I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will soon ask the Leader of Government Business to respond to the issues raised, but on the issue of a health facility, your points are well taken, hon. Anywar. The Commission will study them and see how they can be implemented, but the long-term solution is going to be in the new chamber, which we have already designed. It will have a gym. We shall address the others with time.

I want you to join me in welcoming the following delegations; in the public gallery, we have women vendors from St Balikuddembe  Owino Market. They have come to witness the proceedings. They are represented by hon. Nsereko and hon. Nabilah. 

We also have the Speaker of Zombo District, hon. Ruth Opwonya, represented by hon. Carter Anywarach and the Woman Member of the district. You are welcome.

We also have teachers and students of Nabumali High School, represented by hon. Connie Galiwango and hon. Werikhe. 

We also have teachers and students of St Kizito Kasaala Boys Primary School in Luweero. They are represented by hon. Brenda Nabukenya and one of the Members of the constituency. You are welcome. (Applause) 

May I now invite the Leader of Government Business to make some quick responses to the issues raised.

3.29
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Justine Kasule Lumumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Members who have raised these issues. I have received a note from hon. Sebuliba Mutumba and he is asking me about the deadline on the issue of phones. Honourable Members, let us have a comprehensive statement next week to answer all the questions that have been raised, including those that have not been raised today.

On the issue of Mulago Intensive Care Unit, given the information that the Members have given, since the Minister of Health is here, we request them to bring a statement next week and give us an update on what is happening. [HON. MEMBERS: “No.”]

THE SPEAKER: Order! Order! Members.

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker and honourable Members, the Member has said that there is only one dialysis machine in Mulago. The information I am getting is that there are 16. So, the best thing to do would be to get the proper information and an update, because even if the minister comes here to commit herself now –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, if we have plenary tomorrow, the minister can make the statement. 

It is so sad that we have lost Members -(Dr Bitekyerezo and Prof. Bukenya rose_)

THE SPEAKER: There is a bit of seniority. Let us invite Prof. Gilbert Bukenya.

PROF. BUKENYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issues we have been discussing today are emergency issues. There must be people dying now because the acute care unit has been closed. There is only one kidney machine, the haemodialysis, functioning. You heard one Member of Parliament from West Nile – Vurra - saying that one of the patients they brought here whose kidneys had shut down, died. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, in light of the emerging events, is the honourable Leader of Government Business and my Chief Whip in order to say that the Minister of Health will come next week to make a statement? My view is that this is an emergency and I do not think the emergency can wait for a whole week. Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think in view of the urgent nature of the situation, and taking into account that it is three days since the ICU closed down, I direct the Ministry of Health to bring a statement here at 4.30 p.m. today. (Applause)

3.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY HEALTH CARE (Mrs Sarah Opendi Achieng): Thank you, Madam Speaker, I just want to assure the House that I will be ready with the statement because I have been following up the matter and as I talk, I was informed before I came here that some of the items that were lacking had arrived. So, just let me confirm, and I will be able to report at 4.30 p.m.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you will report at 4.30 p.m. today.

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the Minister of Health that what was raised was not only to do with the Intensive Care Unit. It was also to do with the Renal Unit. So, the House will need that comprehensive report so that Members are informed of what is going on, including a commitment on what is going to be urgently done. 

On the issue that has been raised by Hon. Joshua Anywarach about Nebbi, I would like to inform the House that I have already sent a message to the Minister of Education because this is very urgent, especially now that students have missed exams.

On Kyambogo University, I would like to say that it is true the chairperson has given us an update, but I think we should also change the way we work in Parliament. I am saying this because when a Member presents a photocopy of a report and we just receive it without asking the sector minister whether the council did the work on behalf of the ministry; so that it gives us an update – we have to change our method of work. Assuming one Tables a wrong document to Parliament over such a sensitive matter? 

Therefore, I would like to suggest that the best way is to have the committee present the report before the minister makes a response when it is a sensitive matter.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue of Kyambogo University is very important for anybody who values education in this country. The problem of Kyambogo University has been going on for a long time. I am happy the Minister of Education and Sports is right now in the House. So, is it in order for the Government Chief Whip to shield the minister when she is here, by claiming that possibly a wrong report has been Tabled? Is she in order to shield the Minister of Education who is around and can talk for herself?

THE SPEAKER: I think what the Whip was talking of is that she was not yet sure about the source of the other document. However, I want to assure her that no one has discussed the content of that document yet, though it has been laid on Table. What I can tell you is that it will be the committee to examine it.

However, you should take note that what the Members want to know is whether you are going to avert another strike at Kyambogo University. That is what the country wants to know, in view of what is going on. However, the minister has come.

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that I am standing here as the Acting Leader of Government Business, and not as Chief Whip. When this issue was raised, the line minister was not here. So, I believe I was right to speak and later brief my minister to come and give an update because she has just come in.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of our candidate for the OIC, I am going to get an update from the Ministry of Finance, because when the issue was raised the last time, the Prime Minister committed himself that he would make a follow-up. But no statement has been made yet.

And on behalf of Government, I would like to say that we are so sorry for those who have lost their lives because of the breakdown of the Intensive Care Unit. A statement will be brought here. However, as we wait for that, as honourable Members of Parliament, we need to take note that it is our responsibility to ensure that everything functions very well. Thank you for informing us. 

I would now like to invite the Minister of Education and Sports to give us an update on Kyambogo University.

THE SPEAKER: On Kyambogo University as well as on the children who were not able to do exams in Nebbi due to the collapsing of a bridge.

3.39
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to welcome you back from Canada where you did a wonderful job on behalf of Uganda.

Secondly, I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Lumumba, for effectively and sufficiently furnishing this House with matters that relate to all Government ministries including that of Education. I also would like to thank her for giving me the opportunity to reinforce her position.

First and foremost, it is true that in Nebbi District – the hon. Fred Omach called me at 6.00 a.m. today and gave me a report about the problem of bridges that have collapsed, and which has led the candidates there to miss their examinations.

Madam Speaker, I would like to report that we have talked to the Ministry of Works and Transport, and have also directed UNEB to ensure that whatever the circumstances, the candidates sit their examinations.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I would like to report that I just came out of a meeting with the Management of Kyambogo University. Besides, I met the student leadership of the university last week. So, I have a fair picture that I can present to this House, in light of the challenges that Kyambogo University is currently facing.

As a way forward, we have encouraged Kyambogo University to independently handle the issue of investigating the circumstances of mismanagement of the university affairs by the people who were named by the ad hoc committee, whose report I have just received in a meeting with them.

We have also encouraged the University Council of Kyambogo to work in accordance with the Act and ensure that they manage the situation with a view of ensuring that the university does not close again.

What I can assure this House is that so far, the Ministry of Education and Sports and the management of Kyambogo University together with the students’ body, have agreed that Kyambogo University will not close again.

We have also agreed that issues of finances, which are key among the reasons why there are problems there, should be addressed by Government as a matter of urgency.

I would like to add that we are committed, as Government, to addressing the issues of finances of Kyambogo University and we call for the support of Parliament in order for us to pursue them up to its logical conclusion.

What I know is that the cardinal question that is causing discomfort is that the Council yesterday sat and recommended that the Vice-Chancellor of Kyambogo University be retired as per the law and that is what the law permits them to do. So, the matters of the Vice-Chancellor of Kyambogo University are now in the hands of the Chancellor of Kyambogo University. The council has done their part and we as the ministry have respected their decisions because the law does not allow us to meddle in their decisions.

However, what we are also saying is that on top of what the committee and council have done, we as Government are also going to involve other competent Government departments like the IGG, CID and Auditor-General’s office to carry out a comprehensive forensic audit on Kyambogo University in  terms of human and the financial resources. The management of the university and the leadership of the students are all agreeable with it, and I think we are moving together. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, that is what is so far obtaining as far as Kyambogo University is concerned. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have so far exhausted the 30 minutes we had agreed for the private Members’ business. I think the minister is on top of things. She is abreast with what is happening. Let us give her time. (Applause)

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for giving us this update. I am glad that she is up to the task and is giving us the information that we wanted. However, my point of concern is about the report that the chairperson of the committee talked about. Doesn’t this now leave the work of the Committee on Education and Sports hanging? The chairperson said she has the report ready and should be given time to present it. The Speaker said that among other issues, you will be given the opportunity. Therefore, does it still have any relevance to this matter?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall allow the committee to present their report. If there are areas where ground has shifted, then we shall amend the final recommendations accordingly. 

MS OSEGGE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There were a number of questions that were addressed to the minister and I am especially concerned about the children who have already missed their exams. What provision is there to make sure they are not punished by a fault that was not of their own making? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Was that generally for Uganda or it was about Nebbi and the children who could not cross to go to their school because there was no bridge?

MS OSEGGE: There are those who have already missed their exams. They were supposed to have started their exams this week and they have missed. And there are those who are in Senior Four who are in danger of missing the next exams. So, for those who have already missed, what plans does the ministry have because they should not be punished for a problem that is not of their own making? Thank you.

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Osegge for being extremely concerned about the students. That shows that she is really supporting the work of the Ministry of Education and UNEB, in particular. However, Madam Speaker, you also know that what happened was something of an emergency in nature which does not mean that UNEB’s hands are tied. 

What I would like to assure the honourable member and the House is that examinations will be arranged for those students that missed the Fine Art examination, and it is not happening for the first time. It has happened in some other areas where inconveniences interrupt the delivery of examinations, but UNEB has always sufficiently catered for these gaps. So, the children and the people of Nebbi should know that the students who missed their Fine Art examinations will be given their examinations under a special arrangement. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

STATEMENT OF BUSINESS FOR THE SUCCESSIVE WEEK

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you forgot to mention about the land for the hospital that the President had promised the Indians. 

3.48
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Justine Kasule Lumumba): Madam Speaker, we shall follow up the issue of the land with the ministry since it was a Presidential directive. 

Concerning business for the successive week, as Cabinet, we think we should continue with what is on the Order Paper because even when we look at the business to follow, there is still enough work for us. We shall introduce new Bills the following week. Thank you. 

PETITION BY MEMBERS OF ST BALIKUDDEMBE (OWINO) MARKET WOMEN VENDORS ON THE MISMANAGEMENT OF ST BALIKUDDEMBE (OWINO) MARKET

3.49
MS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to present a petition under rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.  

The humble petition of the members of St Balikuddembe (Owino) Market Women Vendors on the mismanagement of St Balikuddembe (Owino) Market presented by Rosemary Nansubuga Seninde, showeth and states thus:

(1)	The petition regards the operations of St Balikuddembe (Owino) Market Stalls Space and Lock-up Shop Owners Association Limited (SSLOA), an association contracted by KCCA to manage St Balikuddembe (Owino) Market.

(2)	The petitioners are women and mothers who operate in the market of St Balikuddembe (Owino) Market and are facing serious hardships in carrying out their businesses in the market due to the persistent wrangles between the vendors and St Balikuddembe (Owino) Market Stalls Space and Lock-up Shop Owners Association Limited (SSLOA) , who claim to be the legitimate owners of the market. 


(3) The petitioners cite the mismanagement of the market and fraud committed by St Balikuddembe (Owino) Market SSLOA Limited as hindering their work in the following ways:

(a)	The lorry donated by His Excellency the President to Owino Market as well as the proceeds from the same have not been accounted for since 1992; 

(b)	Profits made by FAMUSA, which is a company incorporated in 1995, from monies meant for purposes of constructing stalls amounting to Shs 1,225,000, 000 have not been accounted for since 1995;
 
(c)	Dividends from FAMUSA have not been issued;  

(c)	The IGG’s report and recommendations concerning the management of the market have not been implemented since they were made in 1998;

(d)	Failure to conduct elections for the Owino Market Vendors leaders for the last 14 years;

(e)	Failure to account for Shs 3 billion being monies advanced by vendors to buy Owino Market from KCCA.

(f)	Numerous fraudulent dealings perpetuated by a one Kayongo Geoffrey Nkajja, leader of St Balikuddembe (Owino) Market Stalls Space and Lock-up Shops Owners Association including;

(i)	the purported acquisition of Ushs 4 billion loan from DFCU Bank purportedly to pay for the market lease from KCCA, which has since increased to Ushs 8 billion;

(ii)	The continued and forceful levy of market dues helped by the Police and illegal muscle men, the so-called “kanyama”, contrary to KCCA’s directive stopping the same.

(iii)  The non-remittance of market dues amounting to Ushs 1,261,250,000 to KCCA and yet the same monies had been collected from the vendors as of January 2012.

(4) De-registration of over 30,000 vendors from the list of entitled persons under the lease offered to the vendors under the directives of His Excellency the President to all Owino Market vendors; and 

(5). Non-accountability for the Entandikwa Scheme funds since 2011.

WHERE OF by this petition the petitioners pray that Parliament resolves that:

1.	Government suspends dealings with Mr Geoffrey Kayongo and the Stalls, Spaces and Lock-Up Owners Association until they have been investigated.

2.	That Mr Geoffrey Kayongo and this association management be investigated for fraud.

3.	The Stalls, Spaces and Lock-Up Owners Association, Mr Geoffrey Kayongo, Police and their agents, are prohibited from collecting market dues forthwith.

4.	Elections should be conducted as soon as possible to elect vendors’ leaders.

5.	 Mr Geoffrey Kayongo and the Stalls, Spaces and Lock-Up Owners Association management make good any loss suffered by KCCA as well as the vendors for mismanagement of funds as outlined above.

6.	Mr Geoffrey Kayongo and the association management be required to refund all the monies collected from vendors in form of market dues.

7.	That an all-inclusive organisation made up of vendors be allowed to run the market.

8.	That investigations be carried out for purposes of ascertaining the true owners of lock-ups, shops and stalls with a view of allocating the same to vendors.

9.	Police and other security agencies stop forthwith in meddling with the internal management issues of Owino Market.

Your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray. Hereto your humble petitioners have appended their signatures.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, allow me at this juncture to lay on Table the list of over 1,219 vendors. These are the St Balikuddembe (Owino) Market women vendors. I beg to lay.

I also beg to lay a document comprising of all the resolutions that have been made during the period I have talked about. They are all included here. I beg to lay.

Allow me further to lay on Table the communication index of St Balikuddembe Market Vendors and Co-operators, which include Government correspondences, Police correspondences, respondent lawyers’ correspondences, bank documents, cooperative lawyers correspondences, court correspondence, cooperative co-operators communication, the stalls association correspondences and the IGG’s report. They are all included in this document.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Seninde. The petition and the annexures are sent to the Committee on Presidential Affairs. As you have listened to the long stressful situation the vendors have been in, we want you to handle it expeditiously so that the vendors can get some relief. Thank you very much.  

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO CONDUCT A FORENSIC AUDIT AND STREAMLINE THE MANAGEMENT OF PRDP PROGRAMMES MEANT FOR THE GREATER NORTH IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER

3.59
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving us this opportunity. This is a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to conduct a forensic audit and streamline the management of PRDP programmes in the Office of the Prime Minister.

“WHEREAS the Government of Uganda instituted the Peace, Recovery and Development Programme for Northern Uganda (PRDP) in 2007 for a period of three years with the support of donors as a strategy to develop the war ravaged areas in Northern region; and

WHEREAS the government extended the Peace, Recovery and Development Programme for another three years ending June 2015 by earmarking $455 million equivalent to approximately Shs 1.5 trillion for the project - PRDP II whereby the donors would provide $179 million while Government of Uganda would provide $152 million;

AWARE that the media has been awash with information of theft, plunder and misappropriation of billions of funds in the Office of the Prime Minister meant for post war recovery and development of Greater North;

ALSO AWARE that the officers in the Office of the Prime Minister are being investigated and some have already been interdicted for the same;

NOTING that despite various interventions in the development of Greater North, there is high discrepancy between purported money released and the actual results on the ground as per the socio-economic indicators;

FURTHER NOTING that in the North, there is still, among other things, high levels of poverty, high infant mortality, high maternal mortality rate, poor infrastructure in Education, Road, Water and Health Sectors, high prevalence of disease and deaths, low agricultural productivity and high levels of unemployment especially among the youth;

COGNISANT OF THE FACT that the spirit of affirmative action, which has all along formed the basis of post war recovery and development has generally been ignored, for instance, some districts outside Greater North still get more budgetary allocations than some districts in the North, which undermines the spirit of affirmative action;

CONSDIERING that following this disturbing development, Members of Parliament from Greater North held a meeting on 30 October 2012 in which they expressed their dismay and profound disappointment over the high level of misuse, plunder, theft and loot of monies meant for the suffering poor people in Greater North;

FURTHER NOTING that there is urgent need for Government to discuss with the donors better ways of channelling funds to respective districts in the war affected areas;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that:

1.	Parliament urges Government to conduct a forensic audit of PRDP, NUSAF I and II, and all other Government and donor programmes and projects meant for Greater North in the Office of the Prime Minister;

2.	The Public Accounts Committee of Parliament expeditiously handles the special investigation report into the financial impropriety in the Office of the Prime Minister and reports to the House immediately;

3. The Prime Minister should, as a matter of urgency, come up with a statement to Parliament regarding misappropriation of PRDP funds in his office.” 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

4.04
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to second the motion. PRDP was an affirmative action to help the people of Northern Uganda who suffered  during the war for more than 20 years. From its inception, some of us who happened to have had an opportunity to attend the meetings saw a problem. In the formation of PRDP, most of the funding (over 60 percent) was kept in the Office of the Prime Minister instead of it being sent to the beneficiaries in the local governments - the community of Northern Uganda. 

As if that was not enough, even after keeping most of the money, the same officials from the Office of the Prime Minister went ahead to take even the little which was given to benefit the people of Northern Uganda. That is why I am strongly seconding the motion. 

Madam Speaker, when you look at the people who are supposed to be benefitting from this fund, they constitute almost half of this country. You have the sub-regions of Bunyoro, West Nile, Acholi, Lango, Teso, Karamoja and Bukedi are supposed to benefit. 

When you look at the normal funding of other districts outside the PRDP - Northern Uganda, many of them are getting more funding compared to what the districts under the PRDP are getting. We have, therefore, been asking - and the people at the grassroots are also asking – we thought this was an affirmative action to help balance the equation of development, but why is it that the districts that are not benefitting from the PRDP – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I give you half a minute to conclude.

MR OCHOLA: Madam Speaker, when you look at what is happening, especially to the accounting officer – the Permanent Secretary – I am very disturbed when I see investigations taking place and he is still in office. There is no way you can investigate the lower cadres in the Office of the Prime Minister and you leave the accounting officer. Today, in the dotcom world, the Permanent Secretary controls all the votes and with the click of a button, he can see all the transactions which are taking place. How can this theft take place for the last two years and the accounting officer wants us to believe that he is not party to it? He knows it and he must step aside as investigations go on, if we are to have something meaningful for this country. Short of that, we are not fighting corruption in this country. 

4.07
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I have been at the forefront of some of these issues right from the time they first appeared on the media. Attempts to bribe Ogwang have been made and some of those suspects were arrested. Unfortunately, no report has been availed by Police to that effect. One day, I arrested one woman who came with the intention of bribing me in line with the same issues in the Office of the Prime Minister.

Madam Speaker, I request that you allow me a few more minutes so that I can share with colleagues about the rot in the Office of the Prime Minister. To begin with, there was a petition which was addressed to your office by staff from the Office of the Prime Minister. I do not know whether you got it because it was not signed. Personally, they felt I had been bribed when I did not raise the matter. It is also here in this very petition. I wish to repeat it here today - and I want all Ugandans to know that if there is anybody who claims that he has given Ogwang a bribe on this issue of OPM, he should come out and speak. 

Why am I saying this? If you looked at the rot in that office – I am happy that PAC is going to talk about it – it began with the Crisis Management Account. This account was opened by donors to specifically coordinate issues of disaster in the districts of Gulu, Kitgum, Pader, Soroti, Katakwi, Lira and Kaberamaido. How much money did donors inject into this account? The account was opened in 2006 and closed in 2008, but it is unfortunate that to-date, money, in billions of shillings, has been going to the same account. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I add you half a minute to conclude.

MR PETER OGWANG: Madam Speaker, why am I raising the issue of this account? Yesterday, we received a delegation from Bulambuli; our colleagues from that place came and said, “The Office of the Prime Minister is requesting for Shs 24 billion.” What is the work of that money? First of all, they lied to this House that 800 bags of posho and beans had been taken to Bulambuli. But the LC V Chairperson and our colleagues said it was only 200 bags which were delivered. Where is the balance of 600 bags? Now, they are asking for Shs 24 billion to relocate people from the mountains to the lower lands. If you look at the budget for that money, what do they want to buy? Saucepans, pangas - without considering substantive issues.

Therefore, when we talk about the issue in the Office of the Prime Minister, let the PAC help us. I have more details. Even in these documents, they say that I was given documents, but I have kept quiet. I want to request this, Madam Speaker – I came to your office and asked you for help. Some people in my committee were claiming that the Permanent Secretary was a whistle-blower; how on earth can that happen? (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Ogwang. From that point of saying the permanent secretary was a whistle-blower, I disagree. In my hands, I have a letter which was written by Kazinda on 28 March 2012 – this is a loose minute addressed to the PS: 

“Re: Request to borrow Shs 689,909,755 from the Crisis Management Account and Recovery Programme to facilitate the ongoing barazas. 

Reference is made to our earlier discussion, in an attempt to update the IFMS, the system has been off. Although the funds for the barazas are available on the IFMS, we are unable to process the funds to the staff conducting the barazas. I am requesting to borrow Shs 689,909,755 from the Crisis Management Account and Recovery Programme and we pay back later when the IFMS system is on. I have attached the submission for the AC/Monitoring and Evaluation.”

This is what the PS wrote to the PA – it is handwritten here – “Please borrow but ensure the refund. Signed by the PS; 28 March 2012.” This was a Crisis Management Account which had been closed in 2008. But here is the PS okaying the borrowing of this money or diversion to an account which had been closed, and this is an accounting officer who is still in the office. How can this be a whistleblower? Madam Speaker, allow me to lay it on Table. 

MR PETER OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by saying, it is true that whistle blowers are here. They have even named the person whom they are saying also took -(Interjections)- I am also going to lay it on Table. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I want to lay on Table this loose minute, which was to the PS from PA Kazinda, dated 28 March 2012: “Re: Request to borrow Shs 689,909,755 from the Crisis Management and Recovery Programme to facilitate the ongoing barazas”, and it was okayed by the PS. It is here in his handwriting okaying it. I beg to lay on Table. 

MR PETER OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I would like to request one, as a matter of urgency that there are members of staff in OPM who are willing to appear in a closed door meeting with Members of the committee and they give more information in line with the rot that is happening in OPM.

Madam Speaker, before me, is a document written by staff of the Office of the Prime Minister, P.O. Box 341, Kampala. It was written on 2 October 2010. It is a petition to you, Madam Speaker, to Parliament - for the intervention in the manner in which Police is shielding two key suspects while investigating fraud in the Office of the Prime Minister. I beg to lay this document On Table. I thank you very much.

Madam Speaker, when we talk about whistleblowers, that is what I have said that they are willing to appear behind closed doors. They are members of staff. The man who is still in office is their boss. How do you expect to come out openly to accuse your boss? They have not - they have said –(Interjections)- yes, thank you very much. 

4.16
MS CERINAH NEBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to add my voice to my colleague’s and my first question is: What is so special about the accounting officer? He has seen others being interdicted. The accounting officer of the Public Service was interdicted, the one of Local Government was interdicted because of bicycles and moreover all of them are coming from the same region. What is so special about this one whom they are trying to protect? 

Honourable members, what is happening in the Office of the Prime Minister is terrible. These buildings that you see in the newspapers that they are constructing, if they tell you how much they spend on those buildings, Oh My God! You cannot imagine. You find a small toilet where I cannot even fit and they are costing it at Shs 100 million and you wonder where all the money goes. In NUSAF I, they distributed vehicles to 22 districts. In NUSAF II, they distributed five years ago and the ones of NUSAF I are nowhere to be seen. 

Therefore, I would like to add my voice to that of my colleagues and honourable members, I request you to support me, and we add an amendment to our resolutions namely, that “The accounting officer, like other officers in the Office of the Prime Minister, should be interdicted immediately because of negligence of duty - immediately!” How can they steal money from the account when you are seeing? That is impossible. I request Members that you join me and we add this as No.4. He should be interdicted immediately.

4.18
MR VINCENT MUJUNI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the interest of time, I rise to second the motion as moved by hon. Okot Ogong. The thieving that is in this country, if uncontrolled, we shall not have tomorrow and the only way we can do it is to fight impunity. The only time we can fight impunity is now. 

Honourable members, I invite you to look at article 164, which concerns accountability. A Permanent Secretary or the accounting officer in charge of a ministry or department shall be accountable to Parliament; not to the President, or the Prime Minister, but to Parliament and the Parliament is here and now; you and I. If we feel that the accounting officer is not doing a good job, he should step aside and the time is now. Let us make a decision and we must stand and be counted.

Two, even any person holding a political public office who directs or concurs in the use of public funds contrary to existing instructions shall be accountable for any loss arising from that use, and shall be required to make good the use even if he or she has ceased to hold that office. Honourable members, we must not stop at the Office of the Prime Minister, it was a racket involving staff in the Ministry of Finance and the Bank of Uganda. We now recommend that all those involved be interdicted immediately as further investigations continue. I thank you.

4.20
MR MICHAEL MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Madam Speaker, the matter of the Office of the Prime Minister is a very serious matter. It is not something that this country should romance with. It is absurd that the Auditor-General has carried out an audit and the accounting officer in the Office of the Prime Minister is still sitting in the office. This is a very serious shame to this country.  How can we continue to sit as Government when, for example, the chiefs in the Acholi sub-region, 54 of them, had houses built for them using the hydraform machine and iron sheets were provided by Government. 

Madam Speaker, I want to you to understand and I suggest to you that the cost of these houses as per the record in the Prime Minister’s Office was over 200 million per house. Now, these houses according to - and they are “mabati”. How can we spend such money for building 54 chiefs’ houses in Northern Uganda, and the accounting officer continues to sit in that office? 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for continuing to sit and chair this august House where you have allowed Members of Parliament to express their views without fear or favour because we are doing this for the good of this country. (Applause)

Under article 164 of the Constitution of Uganda, the accounting officer is accountable for all the resources in his ministry and he is accountable to Parliament of Uganda. I would like to move and urge Members of Parliament that a motion be moved in this House that the accounting officer steps aside to allow free and fair inquiry into that ministry.

4.23
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand in consonance with the motion and with the voices who are moving for the interdiction of the PS. I want to let this House know that the former PS, Mr Odwedo, was interdicted under unclear circumstances, and the office he was serving was the Office of the Prime Minister. If there was any special reason that made the other one to go then, definitely, we should be let to know the reasons as to why this one should not. 

Otherwise, Madam Speaker, I move with a passionate heart and use the Biblical illusion of children who ask for food and no parent, even during the times of Abraham, Jacob and Esau you mention all of them, could give stones to hungry children. All of us know what devastating effects have happened in Northern Uganda. 

We have repeatedly told Government that what we want are not the structures you are giving us. What you are giving us are the primary schools, the teachers’ quarters with one room per school; you are giving us the nurses’ houses; you are giving us the PRDP roads and all these are happening elsewhere in the country. 

What we want is revamping the industries that we one time had in some parts of this region. West Nile can have whatever industry that they can have. We had Lira Spinning Mills, revamp that one so that we can employ the youth of the region. We had Soroti Meat Packers, let it be on board once again and let it work. It will accommodate our cows and it will give us and all our grandchildren jobs. Bugisu had MULCO and had very many other industries. Even the greater Bukedi, give them something that can make their lives better. The entire Karamoja region; you are removing Gum Arabica and limestone, and taking to Tororo to make cement and you still call that helping a region? We have repeatedly told Government that what we want are not those structures when we are sleeping on hungry stomachs. After putting those structures are you not doing the same in other regions? (Member timed out­.)

4.25
MR KRISPUS AYENA (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): Madam Speaker, I want to profusely thank you for this opportunity. I scarcely always wish to flog a dead horse because sensing from the mood of the House, I think the people of Uganda are totally tired of this recklessness in Government departments and ministries. I would like to blend the opinions that have been expressed here with a Biblical quotation. According to the book of Matthew Chapter 12 Verse 29, it states: “How can anyone enter a strong man’s house and plunder his goods unless he first blinds up the strong man. Then indeed he may plunder his house.” The strong man in the Prime Minister’s Office is the Permanent Secretary. Can anybody tell me that it was possible for anybody to enter the Prime Minister’s house and carry out our money under PRDP without first of all blinding the strong man of the house? The strong man of the house in this case I take it to be the Permanent Secretary. 

The Permanent Secretary must actually be accountable for this, and for that matter, there is actually no playing around the bush and suggesting whether or not he must step aside, so that we look for where our money has gone. I am only shy to say that even the Prime Minister should take political responsibility for this. (Applause) 

I will not rest until the question of the PRDP has been resolved because this is a matter that I spent a lot of my effort talking about in Juba, when it finally came to this House, you graciously passed it into a law -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute.

MR AYENA: Madam Speaker, I was talking to my brother here and he was saying, at least you could steal from anywhere else, but not from Northern and Eastern Uganda. We have suffered for 25 years and you want to heap these problems on us. I stand to support the views strongly expressed in the resolution that the Permanent Secretary must step aside so that we have a free hand to investigate him. Thank you very much.

4.29
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable for bringing this motion. I think the 40 days have come. These officers from the Prime Minister’s Office have been embezzling and misusing that money right from NUSAF I, NUSAF II and even with Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme, and there are even some structures which are not completed there. It is good that now we have exposed them. 

People of Northern Uganda have been used to developing other people. All other regions were envying Northern Uganda that all the money was going there while the money was being misused by other people. So, it is good now that we have exposed them.

His Excellency the President has been telling us from time to time that the people who are most corrupt are the permanent secretaries, the CAOS, right from the clerks up to the sub-county chiefs. These are the people who are accounting and today we have got the PS. How can we let this one go, surely? He is the very one who distributed this money to these people. How can you not know that the money has been embezzled year in, year out? He is the first culprit, he must go and they must refund this money so that people of the North whose names are being used can benefit from this money. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.30
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I also stand in support of the motion moved by my colleague hon. Okot Ogong. I condemn the act of the civil servants in the OPM because as hon. Baba Diri told you, we have always been told that the people who control money starting right from the top are the permanent secretaries, the CAOs at the district, the sub-county chiefs at the sub-counties and the town clerks in the town councils. These are people who are hands on. There are politicians like these ones who are eyes on. Sometimes they also die within, but the people who handle the money are the permanent secretaries -(Interruption)

MS NEBANDAH: Thank you my colleague for giving way. The information I want to give you is that in our committee meeting, we found out the way some of these monies were “eaten” tThey could send the money from the office of the PS straight to the district then they would go to the district and receive their package. So, they would share the money with the district officials for accepting the deal to go through. That is the information I wanted to give you.

MR NTABAZI: Have you seen, Madam Speaker, what has been happening. This is what I was saying. Now that we have the PS at the forefront, why can’t we really put this man aside and allow investigations to continue peacefully. If he is found innocent, he will come back to his office; but if he remains in the office and is protected and guarded, then there will be a very big question mark. Why are other permanent secretaries leaving while he remains? 

You know, as a mother, PRDP came and NUSAF to support the mothers in the Northern region who have been suffering, moving up and down with children; jumping and running like it happened in the West with ADF; I suffered the same thing. So, I cannot allow the mothers of this country to continue suffering when their money is being “eaten” by men whose stomachs are growing. I cannot allow this. (Member timed out.)

4.33
MR STEPHEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise with a very heavy heart because this country has been plundered by our own citizens. The issue at stake now is about the Prime Minister. I believe the permanent secretary must take technical responsibility and go. I think we shouldn’t have any argument about that. (Interjections)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the information I want to give my colleague on the issue of the permanent secretary taking responsibility, among the people who were receiving money in their personal accounts was the personal assistant to the Minister of State for Northern Uganda. He received Shs 300 million; he is called Richard Owiny. What was that personal assistant taking that money for?

MR KAGWERA: Thank you colleague for that information. I said the permanent secretary should take the technical responsibility. Madam Speaker, we as politicians should not cover people in our courtyard. The permanent secretary and the commissioners we usually talk about do not have a voice here; we speak for them. But now, the people that are supposed to supervise them are our own politicians. 

Northern Uganda has a minister who is in charge; and I am happy my brother hon. Okupa has given that information. The ministers never reported anything in the ministry. So, I need to be guided on why these ministers cannot take the political responsibility –(Applause)– it would be very unfair if we continue to condemn only the technical people yet we have our own politicians who are not doing their work. 

Madam Speaker, I was happy the other day when I saw the Prime Minister condemning the acts. I am happy about that. (Interjections) However, it is very unfortunate that a number of ministers who were previously censured in the Sixth Parliament are today Members of the front bench. Can we still stand here and say that as a country we have the political will to fight corruption? (Member time out.)

4.37
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think it is important that a voice comes from this House to the people of Northern Uganda that we do support the quick reconstruction of Northern Uganda after 20 years of suffering. I think it is important that this program goes on to reconstruct Northern Uganda. 

I have read the prayers of hon. Okot Ogong and his colleagues. Prayer No.1 talks about conducting a forensic audit in this programme. I want to state the NUSAF I and II have been audited over and over again. What is lacking is action on the part of the Executive. It is important to note that.

I also want to invite Members of Parliament to read the forensic audit report that we laid here on the Floor yesterday. It cites a number of issue that have been happening in the Office of the Prime Minster. I do not support corruption whatsoever. But we should also, remember that we need to fight it in a very systematic way. We have made so many resolutions on this Floor. You may remember that we made a resolution on the Identity cards report. You may remember that we adopted the Local Accounts Committee Report including recommendations that many officers should be interdicted –(Interruption)

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you very much hon. Bahati for giving way. You have said that the accounts have been audited over and over again. As an accountant, I am sure you know that these people have requested for forensic audit. There is a difference between general audit and a forensic audit. So, the request they have made is what we think should take place; a forensic audit. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, hon. Nsubuga. You know that I am a fellow of the Chartered Accountants; so, when I speak about accounts, I know what I am talking about -(Interruption)

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you Madam Speaker and honourable colleague for giving way. Hon. Bahati has said that we have made many resolutions as Parliament which the Executive is not implementing. But I want to remind him that we make good resolutions here and when they go to Kyankwanzi or to State House, they make other resolutions. When they come back here, they are no longer part of us. So, the information I am giving him, is that however much we talk about corruption and these strong resolutions, when they go to caucuses and set the Mutebiles free, then I do not think we can move any further. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you, hon. Latif Ssebagala; I know he is very envious of the NRM Caucus. But the point I was making is that in my opinion, since we have already got a report of the Auditor General – a forensic audit report - if we gave PAC two weeks to study the report and thoroughly investigate and come up with some resolutions, we will better be served –(Interjections)– it is better than making recommendations here without reading the report. (Interjection) 

If we take a decision now about say the PS - I have, for example, read the forensic report. On 11 December 2001, the accountant in that place transferred Shs 14.8 billion working with the Accountant General without the knowledge of the PS –(Interjections)– it is here in the report. 

So, the point I am making is that we should give the committee of Parliament two weeks –[HON. MEMBER: “Order.”]- my proposal is that if the House agrees, we should give PAC two weeks and then we come up with a resolution.

4.43
MS EVELYN ANITE (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to start on that note of hon. Bahati. I first want to inform my senior brother, hon. Bahati, that a thief is a thief, and we are not going to protect anyone. We are tired of seeing the corrupt when they are stealing our money. 

I am the Youth MP representing 28 districts of Northern Uganda. When I speak on this, it is not that I am speaking out of ignorance, for I know each and every district in Northern Uganda. Madam Speaker, I want to invite you one of these days – I am initiating a tour of Northern Uganda – if you visit Northern Uganda, what you will be faced with is nothing but poverty. The young people in those 28 districts that I represent – you cannot speak to some of them in English. They have failed to go to school; they come for a meeting with you when they are even half naked and this is because someone is ‘eating’ our money. 

Madam Speaker, we are sick and tired of the corrupt and even to just hear that someone has “eaten” money for the development and recovery of Northern Uganda is such a sad thing. 

I want to tell you, Madam Speaker, that there is a saying that “a guilty dog barks first”. Ever since the issue of the Prime Minister’s Office came out, this PS has been on TV every single day making noise, trying to protect his face, and trying to mudsling the rest of his colleagues and saying that they forged his signature. You cannot tell us that they forged your signature –(Interjections)- even from day one to the day last. I have been telling my brother that how come money has been sent into personal accounts when the PS was there –(Interjections)- information taken. (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: In the Executive Summary of the report of the forensic audit which was laid here yesterday, let me read page 1. Shs 16,222,877,100 was paid out by the Principal Accountant using responsibility that was fraudulently obtained from the Office of the Treasury. The funds were adequately probably paid off to the OPM staff. Other accounts in OPM, private companies, Centenary Bank and district accounts. There was no adequate supervision by the accounting officers contrary to the requirements for EFT payments issued by the Accountant General. Whereas the guidelines require that payments done in BoU be confirmed before effecting payments, it was observed that transfers amounting to 10.9 billion were undertaken without confirmations. So, what are they talking about?

MS ANITE: Mr Commissioner, I did not even know about that. Let me make my resolution. Now that I have even got that information, it has made me sick and tired. We are making this resolution and even the baby is complaining –(Laughter)- the PS must go and not tomorrow, or the other day but today! –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Just conclude.

MS ANITE: As Parliament, we made a resolution that the PS of Internal Affairs should leave the office. As I speak, the PS of Internal Affairs is still there in the office doing what? That means that they are not upholding our resolutions as Parliament. They are undermining your office, Madam Speaker. This PS must go. (Applause)
 
4.47
MR ATWOOKI KASIRIVU (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Okot Ogong for the motion. In 1999, I travelled to Northern Uganda with a team of other Members of Parliament. A person who never went to Northern Uganda –

THE SPEAKER: Order Members. Listen to the submission, please.

MR KASIRIVU:  A person who never went to Northern Uganda during the peak of the insurgency cannot appreciate the suffering that the people of Northern Uganda went through. You cannot appreciate. We went to Northern Uganda and we flew from Adjumani to Gulu Airstrip, but even as we flew over Kilak Hills, our blood was running cold because of the fear. Now, what about the wanainchi? 

During the night, all the children - very young children, slept outside in the cold. So, when resolutions were brought to this House to support Northern Uganda, we would support without reservation. For a person to sit in an office and begin “chewing” money which is supposed to help people recover, is not only criminal, but God will never forgive them. When I read an article written by Simon Kaheru describing Kazinda’s house – and there could be many houses in Kampala for other officers, but we have not yet known. You know honesty – 

THE SPEAKER: Information. 

MR OKUPA: Honourable colleague, I want you to take interest and go to Bugolobi. If you know where Justice Sebutinde stays in Bugolobi. A brand new house opposite her house was built in a record time of one year. A very lavish house built by Kazinda for the PS. Go and look at that house. (Interjections) [HON. MEMBER: “1.2 billion.”] [HON. MEMBER: “Whistle blower.”]

MR KASIRIVU: Madam Speaker, the good thing –

THE SPEAKER: Order members.

MR KASIRIVU: The good thing is that whatever you do in this country, people somewhere know and see, and at one time, this information will be public just as it has started coming out. So, I really want to support that a very comprehensive audit and report comes to this House, but also, action should be taken. It is possible that the PS could be incompetent and that is bad enough. If he is incompetent, then he should also leave, if theft was happening under his nose –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us get the submissions. 

4.51
MR BARNABAS TINKASIMIIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Felix Okot Ogong for his motion and as it stands, I would strongly support it, and also thank my honourable colleague, Peter Ogwang, who raised this matter in our committee. 

As a Committee on Presidential Affairs, we have been handling this matter, but it was very difficult for us to proceed, particularly on policy issues when there was no forensic report to help us to at least know our boundaries that would now be handled by the Public Accounts Committee. 

Before hon. Wadri flew out, he shared with me this report and we have agreed on how to proceed, and this caters for at least the prayer No.2, and the Public Accounts Committee within a period of two weeks will be ready with the report to this House. We have also agreed to work with them with the information that we have so far as a Committee on Presidential Affairs, to inform them such that they come here with a comprehensive report. I have read the forensic report and it indicates that 75 percent of the misappropriation was carried out under one man called Kazinda; 10.6 percent was approved by the Permanent Secretary; other officers in the Ministry of Finance, who include, the Accountant General, Mr Bwochi; also, in Bank of Uganda, a man called Milton Opio, the Deputy Director Banking, also contributed.  For God’s sake, I am pleading with honourable members, two weeks are not too many. If we have to weed out this racket; it is a serious syndicate. I am pleading with you honourable members, if you want to weed out this racket, two weeks is not too long. We shall come here with a comprehensive report and you take the decisions from an informed perspective.

I am sure and certain, honourable members, that if you give the two committees this time, we will be able to do a thorough job for you and you will admire, (Interruption)

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are discussing a very pertinent issue concerning the lives of many Ugandans. Aware that Northern region has suffered under the hands of Kony, and is now still suffering under our own hands, is it in order for the honourable member to request us to extend the suffering of the people of Northern Uganda for the next three weeks. Is he in order?

4.56
MR STANLEY OMWONYA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion moved by hon. Okot Ogong. 

PRDP programme was actually meant to alleviate poverty among the people of Greater North and bring about development in the area. It is unfortunate that a few greedy people in the Office of the Prime Minister decided to “eat” the money which was meant for this noble cause.

This is a serious matter which we as Parliament must take very seriously. We must take very serious action against the culprits. 

Madam Speaker, while I agree with the motion that a forensic audit be conducted, it should not stop there. We should also go in for a value-for-money audit so that we know exactly where all these colossal sums of money, which are purported to have been sent to the North went. You go to the North and see how poor the people are. You cannot even imagine that PRDP is really helping the people of the North. 

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you honourable for giving way. The information I want to give you is that in the report of the Auditor, on page two, the Accounting Officer authorised payment of funds to personal accounts of various staff without following prescribed procedure to the tune of Shs 34.6 billion. 

The Auditor points out further, on page 3, that the Accounting Officer violated the Treasury Accounting Instructions by failing to maintain records of accounts. It shows that there were no cashbooks and no expenditure vouchers; there was diversion of funds to activities not in the work plan; and the introduction of a new term; a term called “ghost workshops”. The Accounting Officer authorised ghost workshops. Funds were paid and signed for to people who were not RDC, LC5s, who were purported to have attended these trainings. 

Madam Speaker, we are dealing with a Permanent Secretary who is well trained and knows his work; and for us to fail to send him out of office is double standards. We have done similar things to other permanent secretaries. I don’t understand how we can sit here with this report of the Auditor and we say, let this ministry be investigated and then we allow the permanent secretary to stay in office. It would be double standards. 

MR OMWONYA: Thank you. Lastly, I would like to suggest that while this audit is being conducted, all the culprits, including the Permanent Secretary, in the name of Pius Bigirimana, must leave office. He must leave office to pave way for smooth investigations. 

I am wondering why - when you read in the papers that the Prime Minister is supporting the PS. How do you support a thief? (Member timed out.)

5.01
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for this opportunity and I want to submit as follows. I am a very proud Member of the Ninth Parliament. The Ninth Parliament has distinguished itself before the eyes of the ordinary person in this country, and for that, I want to congratulate you and also want to pat myself on the back for the work so far well done. 

Just like God did when he created the world, it was just a round figure with nothing good; he took one step back and said, that was good, he thanked Himself. He then put there oceans and rivers, but it was not complete. He looked back and said, hey, that was good. He thanked Himself. 

The people of Uganda out there thank you and me, and that is very good. That means what we are doing is very good and we should maintain the tempo. But to maintain this tempo we must be very careful.

Honourable colleagues, I want to appeal to your conscience; I want to appeal to your very important reasoning. Last time around –(Interjections)- I am submitting. I want to associate myself with this resolution, especially prayers No.2 and No.3. Number two is very important - even No.1; but mostly No.2. 

I wanted honourable colleagues to give an opportunity – after all, from the information we have already heard, we are flogging a dead horse. We only need to tie up this information properly. Even if it means one week, it is already done. It is already done. But with this Public Accounts Committee report, we will be more empowered. (Member timed out.)

MR TINKASIMIRE: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure.

THE SPEAKER: On what rule?

MR TINKASIMIIRE: I seek your guidance because I am quoting rule 62 of our Rules of Procedure. I am also quoting rules 2 and 3 – it is rule 62 sub-rules (2) and (3) – well it is rule 162. Maybe I need some glasses.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that the audit report was laid before the House and has been received by the Public Accounts Committee. But without PAC reporting to this House, we are seeing the same content of the audit report being the basis of the various arguments in this House –(Interjections)– No, there is a point of procedure.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Tinkansimiire, the audit report belongs to this House. The committee does a delegated function on our behalf. So, it is our report. It is not a secret to the Public Accounts Committee. Once a report is laid, it becomes a public document. It is for all of us and not just for the Public Accounts Committee.

5.06
MR ODO TAYEBWA (FDC, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank you for allowing this session to debate this strong issue. I want to assure you that a thief is always a thief, just as a liar was born a lair. We have tried to get these thieves here; we have made reports – you recall we made a very good report on the identity cards issue, where we recommended that even the PS of that ministry resigns, but has never resigned. 

I want to say that we should stick to our Constitution which should guide aus. Article 164(1) states thus - and let me read for you so that we don’t waste time. It states: “The permanent secretary or the accounting officer in charge of a ministry or department shall be accountable to Parliament for the funds in the ministry or department. (2) Any person holding a political or public office, who directs or concurs in the use of public funds contrary to the existing instructions, shall be accountable for any loss arising from that use and shall be required to make good even if he/she has ceased to hold that office.”

Madam Speaker, this is very clear. This permanent secretary should not be in that office because the law is here. We can even look at the political responsibility to have the Prime Minister resign immediately –(Laughter)– the way other people in some have resigned in other countries.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Odo Tayebwa. On page 2 of the Auditor General’s Report – I would like to read it to reinforce your point and for those who think that the accounting officer has no case to answer. It is stated: “20.1 billion was fraudulently deposited on the Crisis Management Account and subsequently utilised without any approved work plans. The accounting officer did not seek information from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development regarding the transfers, but went ahead and utilised funds that had been fraudulently transferred. The practice was contrary to the functions of the accounting officer as provided for under Section 14 of the PSAAR.”

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, my colleague. I think we should not even waste time on this. Let us vote. Put the question to the vote so that these people resign and we go away. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.09
MR JACK SABITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I fully concur with the motion being moved, but for avoidance of doubt I would like to inform this House that we should not forget the responsibilities of a permanent secretary. Other than being the accounting officer, when you read Article 174 of the Constitution you realise that it gives the details of the roles of a permanent secretary. Among the functions that the permanent secretary shoulders are: organisation and operation of the department or ministry; tendering advice to the responsible minister; implementation of the policies of Government; and subject to Article 64, which is being quoted, the permanent secretary is the accounting officer.

In addition to this, we have a law called the Public Finance and Accountability Act, which has been violated by the permanent secretary. When you read section 14 of this law, it states: “Pursuant to section 8 of the Act, the Secretary to the Treasury shall designate an accounting officer, in writing, with prior approval of the minister, to be personally and pecuniary responsible to each vote of revenue and expenditure. The accounting officer shall have the overall responsibility and accountability for the collections, receipt of all revenue or for the disbursement of expenditure under his or her control.”

That in itself means that in order for either the Public Accounts Committee or any other institution of Government to do its work, be it CID or IGG, the permanent secretary is supposed to step aside so that further work is done to unearth whatever has taken place in that department. Therefore, I agree with this motion that the earlier the permanent secretary steps aside, or is interdicted, the better. I would recommend that the Prime Minister, who is the Leader of Government Business, should take these laws very seriously and guard them accordingly so that the PS leaves office and work is done properly. That is my contribution, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Kivumbi. Please do not interrupt him because this is his maiden speech.

5.12
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, when a nation loses its way or when society loses its way, it is incumbent upon all upright members of that society to stand, speak out and act like so. I told my colleague that if anyone had wanted to steal and had a heart, they should never have stolen money from the people of Northern Uganda. As a young man growing up in the Luweero Triangle and as an undergraduate around 1996, I went to Northern Uganda. As a leader and chairman of the Uganda Young Democrats, I toured Northern Uganda. The suffering that I saw in Northern Uganda has convinced me, and others, that this country called Uganda has lost its way fundamentally. 

I strongly admire the contribution of the gentlemen who went to the bush in 1980. I was in Luweero when young men at that time came to speak to us. Their rhetoric left no doubt in a devil’s heart that they meant seriousness, that they were serious people. They meant good for this country. I would like to pose a question: what happened? For the short time that I have been in this Parliament, distinguished members of this society you are supposed to be fathers to a number of us, but what has gone wrong?  What happened to you? What happened to the ideals of the bush? 

People are finding technicalities and finding their way back to the front page. When in courts of law they do not substantively win their cases, their names are cleared. The battle against corruption is a moral battle. It will not be won unless the character and integrity of leaders - not even the law because there are sufficient institutions to check corruption - is personally checked. 

I am also made to understand that the way the experiment “Uganda” is constructed is bound to fail. The time that I have been outside here and the short time that I have been in this Parliament convinces me that we must try a new formula. Those who steal money from Northern Uganda have never been there. Some of the officers steal money from regions where they have never stepped and so they do not know what goes on there; they have no feelings for the people there. They are just here in Kampala under ACs. 

It is high time we thought of a way of withdrawing some authority from the centre, which has permanently failed. I am convinced that we need strong regional governments. (Member timed out.)

5.16
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I rise to support the motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to conduct a forensic audit and streamline the management of the PRDP programme in the office of the Prime Minister. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the colleagues who have initiated this motion. As someone who has gone through war - you all know that Kasese District and the entire Rwenzori Region was a victim of war by the ADF - we share the pain of what our brothers and sisters went through in Northern Uganda. It is unfortunate that we still have heartless people who want to eat and grow rich at the expense of those in pain. We have even seen some people who have grown rich at the expense of the dead and here they are posing as rich men. 

It is unfortunate that our Parliament is taken for granted. The resolutions we make as Parliament are never respected. I am at a loss as to whether these resolutions we are passing today, with the so many hearty voices coming out of the various Members of Parliament who have spoken, will be respected or will just be ignored like the many voices and resolutions that this Parliament has made. We are about to be referred to as a barking dog that does not bite. I would like to remind you that in 2008 - (Interruption)

MR KAGWERA: At that very point, my sister, hon. Kiiza, we need to change our strategies. We have been using the “hit and run”; let us use the “hit and stay” and we can get these people. (Laughter)  

MS KIIZA: No hit and run but hit and stay. In 2008, we visited the projects under PRDP in Karamoja and I saw a scenario that made me almost faint. We were lucky that the development partners wanted to save the lives of the people in Northern Uganda. 

When we went there, we were made to understand that the same people managing PRDP have a close relationship with the ones managing the projects of other partners. A case in point was a borehole in one of the areas which had been donated by ADRA, an Adventist programme. Whenever any funder who had funded water in that particular area would come, they would uproot the signpost and come running with the signpost of that particular donor. When we reached there as Government, the organisers removed the signpost of ADRA and placed that of PRDP. But the locals were smart enough to tell us, “No, they have been stealing money using that borehole; the borehole was constructed by ADRA.” 

Madam Speaker, I think it is high time we really looked deeper into these matters. We are yet to find out whether the money meant for the Luweero/Rwenzori reconstruction programme is being put to proper use. It is going to people who are not beneficiaries, who have never suffered because of war and who are growing richer at the expense of the people of Rwenzori Region. I would like to affirm that the motion is proper and I support it. 

5.20
MR ANDREW ALLEN (Independent, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to thank my colleagues for this motion. 

It is quite embarrassing to continue entertaining the people indicated in this scam. I also wonder why we keep mentioning the PS while excluding the Prime Minister. (Applause) The Prime Minister should equally take responsibility. It is very wrong to continue pursuing the PS and exclude the Prime Minister. By the way, I keep wondering why it is the Prime Minister involved in a number of scams. It is high time he stopped taking this country for a joke. Our people are really suffering and yet money keeps disappearing every other day. 

What is happening here is clear theft in broad daylight and the whole world is watching Uganda. If we do not wake up, very soon our dear Uganda will be stolen and sold off without our knowledge. These people should by now be out of their offices so as to let investigations take place. If we do not do that, history will really judge us harshly. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

5.23
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (Independent, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I am so happy with the revelation made by the hon. David Bahati. The hon. Bahati told this august House that the PS could not detect what was stinking just next to his nose by failing to detect that money was transferred from an unauthorised account without his knowledge. If you cannot detect what is stinking just next to your nose, it is scientific evidence that your sense of smell has failed. (Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Thank you, honourable friend. I just want to make some clarification. We are faced with two choices on how to approach this report. One is to get the PS to step aside and investigations go on. The second is to allow the committee to do the work within a specific time - (Interjections) - You can oppose that and you are entitled to. You should get me correctly; I did not say that I support anybody who is corrupt, but how do we approach this. The decision is for this House.

MR KAFEERO: Thank you, hon. Bahati. I actually got you very well. I was just saying that your revelation is justification enough that this man is no longer relevant in this office. Whatever has gone through his hands is stinking to the extent that Parliament also smells it but he is still persisting in office.

The hon. Tinkasimiire has just contradicted the position of the President of the Republic of Uganda whose committee he is chairperson of in this Parliament. The position of the President is and has always been zero tolerance to corruption. The figures hon. Tinkasimiire has read to us indicate that the PS has misappropriated 10 per cent of the funds under his supervision, and he is trying to convince this House that 10 per cent is not good enough and therefore he should stay in office to have another two weeks of continued misappropriation. Madam Speaker, this is not acceptable. (Member timed out.)

5.26
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to move an amendment to the prayers. I have listened to the debate and there seems to be a general consensus. There is a difference between stepping aside because you have political responsibility and interdiction. In this case, the PS has to be interdicted, and the report is very clear. 

Under Section 420 of the Treasury Accounting Instructions, it states that the accounting officer shall be responsible for maintenance of accounting records. Section 421 goes on to state that the principal accounting records shall be kept in secure rooms and under lock and key. Madam Speaker, it is very clear from the Auditor-General’s report that there is absence of records in the OPM and the person responsible for that is the Permanent Secretary, who is the accounting officer.

I find it very difficult for representatives of the people whose money has been stolen with impunity to say the PS should simply step aside. The PS actually, if we are taking political responsibility as Parliament, should be ordered to be arrested immediately and put behind bars while further investigations are going on to find out which other people are involved, because there could be bigger people involved in this fraud. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I rise to move an amendment that the PS and all accounting officers who are directly and indirectly involved in the mismanagement of the fund be interdicted and made liable to refund the money.

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If I understood hon. Bahati well, he said that there are two issues here; one is for the PS to step aside and the other for him not to step aside. What is boggling me is that this House has already passed a resolution on this. There is precedence in this House where we pronounced ourselves in that area but now we are still asking ourselves whether this PS should be interdicted or not! 

It is an agreed fact that the PS is the principal accounting officer; it is not debateable. The PS was in charge and he had all the authority to oversee what was happening under his docket. The other small accountants were following the principal accountant. What I want to know is: why are we saying that the small accountants should take responsibility and the issue of the principal accountant should be debated here for two weeks? If ministers can take full political responsibility, why can’t he take responsibility for technical accountability? Why are we continuing to discuss this?

I want to be guided so that I can follow the motion that has been moved. There is the law of justice and we should apply the same rules top to bottom. We should not continue bending our own rules in this august House. The rules say this is where we are going and we should apply them squarely. I need your guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Before we go on to vote on the motion, I invite the Prime Minister to say a few words.

MR MUKULA: Madam Speaker, there is a motion on the Floor; before we move to any other business, my view is that the motion should first be disposed of.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, the motion is that a new prayer be introduced into the resolution to the effect that - Hon. Ogwal, please re-state it. 

MRS OGWAL: I beg to move that the Permanent Secretary and all the accounting officers in the Prime Minister’s office who are directly and indirectly involved in the mismanagement of the fund be interdicted and made liable to refund the money so stolen. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to make a slight amendment to hon. Ogwal’s motion. In the OPM there is one accounting office. So we could adjust it and say “and all officers or persons involved” because – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is only one accounting officer.

MR BAHATI: Yes, but she says “and all the accounting officers”. So, it should be “the Permanent Secretary and all the other officials”.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I accept that inclusion.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the resolution be amended by the introduction of the provision as stated by hon. Ogwal. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

5.36
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I originally intended to rise and say that I support the motion. (Applause) However, with that amendment which has just come in, I will first talk about the first ones on which I have already taken a position and later see if I can take position on the last one.

The first resolution calls for a forensic audit on PRDP and NUSAF and so forth. We, as Government, do support it. (Applause) I do not think I have much to say in addition to what you are saying to justify the need for carrying out a forensic audit. However, I will slightly amend it later.

The second resolution asks PAC to expeditiously handle the Auditor-General’s report. I obviously support that. If it was possible to bring it on Tuesday, I am for it.

Thirdly, the Prime Minister is requested to make a statement regarding the misappropriation. Now, I do not know whether this House wants me to make a statement outside the debate on the report or it would make greater sense to wait for the PAC report. The idea is that once PAC studies this report, we shall get and debate a full report which has not left anything out. The reason why Parliament refers it to the PAC is because that committee will be able to call the experts, the Auditor-General and those who are named. That is the idea. If you want us to make – (Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, honourable Prime Minister, for allowing me to give you information. (Expunged) 

Madam Speaker, by the time the President appointed hon. Amama Mbabazi to be the Prime Minister in this country he knew that he had the ability to handle that office and to handle administration beyond a single ministry. I therefore want to believe that there is a big difference between political responsibility and what you are doing now to ensure that no further mismanagement of funds takes place. 

What the PAC is going to do or what the auditors may want to do is to go deeper into identifying who did what and who could have been mentioned and yet they were innocent, through looking at the document and screening it to know who has committed which fraud. That is what PAC is expected to do on your behalf. But administratively, what have you put in place to ensure that no further fraud and mismanagement takes place while we are waiting for this investigation? I am just standing to give you information. I know that you know how to administer the work but at the same time, I humbly ask you to go back to your office and sit down with your technocrats to guide you on how you are going to safeguard the little money that could still be left in your office. Thank you.  

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, the intention of resolution No.3 is that the Prime Minister should, as a matter of urgency, come up with a statement to Parliament regarding the misappropriation of PRDP funds in his office. This basically implies that there seem to be gaps in the management of PRDP in his office and so he needs to come out clearly on the ways and means he is going to address that situation. 

Madam Speaker, we had put forward a proposal before this. Currently, in the office of the Prime Minister there are very many ministers. So, in terms of administration and hierarchy in that office there seems to be a serious problem, and therefore that must also be handled. We had also proposed that for us to handle PRDP effectively there needs to be an independent and autonomous institution to handle - We discussed this before, but we had given them the benefit of doubt. Now that there is mismanagement and apparent lack of control, we need to re-examine. 

I talked to the Prime Minister yesterday and told him that there is need for a meeting between Members of Parliament and his office so that we discuss this matter. The Prime Minister agreed that as soon as possible we shall have that meeting so that we can address this situation.  

THE SPEAKER: Maybe before the Prime Minister comes up; honourable members, for the record I want to expunge the words “super minister”. Somebody reading our record will wonder whether we had a Prime Minister and a super minister. Under the Constitution, we have a Prime Minister. So the word is Prime Minister not super minister. 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I had the privilege in 2003 to be assigned by this House to chair the select committee on the humanitarian situation in the north and the north eastern parts of this country. For the first time, at least on the Floor of this Parliament, we were able to bring in a recommendation for a comprehensive resettlement plan for Northern Uganda after the war.

At the inception of the PRDP, some of us were of the very strong view that donor money should be channelled as direct projects on the ground. That was a very extensive debate and then Government of Uganda - I wish the Prime Minister were listening to me. Thank you for your kind attention. The Government of Uganda argued here that if donors maintained direct implementation of those projects, up to 70 per cent of the total sum of PRDP requirements there would be duplication, and the Government of Uganda would lose the opportunity to oversee the projects. That is why all these monies were brought and put into the Office of the Prime Minister. We believed then that the Government of Uganda had both the will and the capacity to look after this money. It is now most unfortunate that under the watchful eye of the very people who argued that the money be put into the basket fund, the money has disappeared; it is being misused. 

Therefore, I would like to appeal to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to redeem the very position they defended in 2003. They said they could watch over the money but the money has been stolen. At least let him redeem the fact that he can promise this nation or give this country an assurance that he can address and prevent further haemorrhage under his office. That is all we are asking you for under this resolution No. 3. But if you want to accept that you are totally defeated, we might as well go back to project support. You can change the policy and we will be happy because you would have demonstrated that Government has failed to watch over this money.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Last financial year when we appropriated money to different Government departments and the districts, my district, Nebbi, had in their plan that they would allocate the funds under PRDP to education, water, roads and health. However, the funds were sent with very stringent conditions. The Indicative Planning Figure (IPF) restricted them to only health, water and education. I moved to the Minister of Finance and I even ran up to the Permanent Secretary that we are talking about today. 

The comprehensive document of PRDP says any activity that is within the strategic objective of PRDP can be undertaken by the beneficiary district. This therefore comes to the question of maladministration redress. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, if you are looking at that, please look at also why Ministry of Finance is colluding with your office to always make the conditions of how the districts should use the money so stringent against their own priority areas. That is where the main issue starts from. So, please, if you are responding, this should be part of your response. Thank you very much. 

MR YAGUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In ministries there are technical officers appointed by Ministry of Public Service or appointed by the President on the advice of Ministry of Public Service. The President also appoints ministers, in this case politicians, who oversee these ministries. One year, billions are lost; second year, billions are lost; third year, billions are lost. What do these ministers do in these ministries?

The guidance I am seeking, Madam Speaker, is whether the ministers responsible for those sectors should not take political reasonability. This is the guidance I am seeking. Over time, ever since the Ninth Parliament was sworn in, we have unearthed a lot - compensations, ghosts, ghost teachers and even the problem of Northern Uganda started with fake pangas when Mao was chairman. 

When you are a political leader, there is what we call permanent sacrifice. If Shs 10 billion is lost this month, the second month Shs 20 billion, the fourth month Shs 20 billion, what use are you for us there, and you stand here and feign ignorance? I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker. Therefore I should move a motion. 

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable members, the text of the motion and the proposed resolutions do not touch the ministers. So, if there is another report, it first comes here and tells us the ministers were involved and we shall deal with them then. For now, let us deal with what is in the motion. 

MR MUKULA: Madam Speaker, as the Prime Minister comes on the Floor to speak to the motion, the donors have suspended support to Uganda because of these anomalies. I think it would be important for the Prime Minister, as he speaks to the motion, to guide Parliament and the country on the implications, the amounts, and on how long, possibly, this suspension may take. This is because donor support at this time when we are making economic recovery is very critical and has got a direct effect on PRDP.  

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The point of procedure I want to raise is that we have a motion and resolutions to consider and given that the Prime Minister seems to be in agreement with some of the resolutions, wouldn’t it be  procedurally right that we dispose of this motion and then he can make a statement after or bring a statement later. So that we do not have to -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: I think honourable colleagues have explained what the Prime Minister wanted to know regarding what they expect from his comprehensive statement. They have stated the issues - how much the donors have withdrawn, what will the effect be, what management measures have you put in place to address these issues. So, I think they have guided you on how your statement will look like when you bring it. It has no connection. So, we can go ahead and vote because now we are just seeking for the clarification. Can we vote on the motion since he has been guided on what the comprehensive statement will cover? Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I am happy to come and give a comprehensive statement about all these matters. However, in light of what has been said here in this House today and what is in the public domain, I thought Parliament would take advantage of my presence to hear some of the things that have been done and the direction we are taking. This is because I do not know when my statement will come; today is the last day, the earliest is Tuesday. I am not sure that I will be here on Tuesday actually because - (Interjections) - why don’t you want to listen to me?

Madam Speaker, let me try and be quick. I was saying that the Auditor-General’s report was laid before Parliament yesterday and I reserve my comments on what it covers in detail to the debate then, when PAC reports come to this House. However, what goes without saying, and everyone knows I have commented on it publicly, is that there was mismanagement of funds in the Office of the Prime Minister. Indeed, there was outright theft of funds. I have, in an interview with the press, expressed the government’s regrets that this happened and we condemn, in the strongest terms, these criminal actions by the officers involved. 

On the basis of the report, the following actions have been taken: For those where there is clear evidence that they were involved in theft and other criminal acts, prosecution has already commenced. The Director of Public Prosecutions has actually proceeded to institute - (Mr Nsubuga rose_) I have to agree and I will agree, so do not seize. (Laughter)

MR MATIA NSUBUGA: Okay. Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Prayer No.3 in this motion is that the Prime Minister should, as a matter of urgency, come up with a statement to Parliament. Now, that statement is what you are supposed to come up with to us so that we can look at it. When you talk like this without a statement, are you fulfilling this prayer No.3 or are you just talking off cuff?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to conclude this motion.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I am speaking as a member of this House contributing to a debate on the motion on the Floor. I was saying that prosecutions have commenced against a commissioner for disaster preparedness and management, the principal accountant and another lady in the Office of the Prime Minister. Ten other people in the accounts department and those who are involved and have been named in the Auditor-General’s report have been interdicted. 

We have also interdicted six officers in the Ministry of Finance and by next week, from the reports I have been receiving, we may have a few more joining that list. In Bank of Uganda, one officer has been interdicted. I have also indicated to the Governor that actually, I think many more people who were involved should be interdicted as well and they are looking at that. 

I did meet development partners, especially those who had contributed to the PRDP fund, who are the Irish, the Danish, the Norwegians and the Scandinavian ambassadors. We talked about this problem here - (Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do not usually like to interrupt the Prime Minister, who is my constituency neighbour in Kanungu, but I rise on a point of procedure.
 
When the Prime Minister rose to second the motion raised by hon. Cecilia Ogwal, he proceeded very well. He pronounced himself on prayer No.1, prayer No.2, prayer No.3 and we expected him to pronounce himself on prayer No.4, which was the amendment brought by hon. Cecilia Ogwal. When he reached there, then he started pre-empting the report which he is bringing next week. 

Is he procedurally right to fail to pronounce himself on prayer No.4 and now start derailing us by giving us a report which is supposed to come under prayer No.3, which will be written and which we shall substantively debate next week? Is he proceeding in the right way? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I hope the details will come in the Prime Minister’s statement. Honourable members, I want to put the question that the question be now put.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I had not finished, Madam Speaker. Really, when we say we are fighting for justice, we must be seen to practice justice. This report has been quoted many times. In fact, someone rose, I think it was hon. Barnabas Tinkasimiire, on a point of procedure questioning whether we should talk about a report before PAC presents it here. The ruling was that that is a report of the House so we could talk about it. Now that I am trying to do so, you cannot – (Interjections)  

THE SPEAKER: You know, Prime Minister, you have gone into activating resolution No. 3. Your statement is answering resolution No. 3 and yet we are asking you to bring it in the future.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: First of all, I can give you a statement now. You are saying I should not delay; I am ready and I can present from my mind. 

I was talking about the motion and I will definitely cover all the points. If this House does not have the desire to hear what you have been asking me to tell you - what measures we have taken to make the funds safer – (Interjections) – I will wait, no problem. I will now talk about – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. In our prayers, we said the Prime Minister should bring a comprehensive statement to this House. What is going to happen if the Prime Minister gives a statement before we adopt the prayers? I thought it is procedurally right for us to first adopt the prayers before he brings his statement.

What is the proper procedure? Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I thought you were very good at procedure and rules. The procedurally right way is for us to adopt the report first such that you do not deny us the opportunity to debate that statement. But what you want to do now is to hijack and deny us the opportunity to debate that statement. Procedurally, we should adopt the report then he can bring the statement. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be now put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that resolution No.1 be approved by this House –

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to add an amendment to prayer No.1. I would like to add “forensic and value for money”. What is important here is to look at the finances but also for people to know whether the money we put there was of any value to the people of Northern Uganda. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that prayer No.1 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Prayer No.1, as amended, agreed to.

Prayer No.2, agreed to.

Prayer No.3, agreed to.

Prayer No.4, agreed to.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, earlier we had an emergency and we directed the Minister of Health to come and update us on the intensive care unit at Mulago. I do not know whether we should not take it on now and deal with it.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

6.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you are all aware, yesterday there was a story in the press that two people died at Mulago Intensive Care Unit (ICU). Today, there is yet another headline, “Mulago ICU closure: three more die”. I want to report to you as follows:

Mulago Hospital has three intensive care units. There is the general intensive care unit at ward 3D. The unit has 12 beds with five ventilators, four suction machines and five bedside monitors. This unit also has a BiPAP machine for non-invasive ventilation. 

We also have the intensive care unit at ward 2C and the unit has eight beds - six for adults and two for children. It has three bedside monitors and one suction machine. 

We have the paediatric acute care unit. The unit has six beds with oxygen supply, two monitors, one infusion pump and two foot pump suction machines. 

There are also a number of high dependency units. There is one at the labour suite and it has six beds, one suction machine and two patient monitors. We also have the neurosurgery unit. It has 10 beds, two suction machines and two patient monitors. 

We also have an intensive care unit at the Heart Institute, which is shared by both Mulago and the Uganda Heart Institute. 

All these ICU facilities are fully open and properly functioning. 

Madam Speaker, the same story claimed that two patients died on Monday afternoon as a result of the breakdown of the equipment, although the story fails to mention the names of the dead and where they died from. The truth is that there were two burnt children who were brought to the general ICU ward on Monday at 3.00p.m. from the burns unit. One of the patients who had a lot of inhalation burns passed on. This was not because of the failure of the equipment; it was because of the severity of the burns which the deceased had sustained. She had 100 per cent inhalation burns and her chances of surviving were very minimal. The second child is still receiving treatment in the general ICU ward. 

It is also not true that the general ICU ward has 12 beds with no equipment. The breakdown of the equipment referred to in the stories is not true. However, the hospital experienced a temporary shortage of bacterial filters for two machines. The orders for the filters were placed on 20 September 2012 and they were later on delivered on 12th October but they were not well packaged. So, Mulago Hospital asked the supplier for another delivery, which was delivered today on 1 November 2012 as I had reported to you earlier, honourable colleagues.

Plans are also in advanced stages to increase the ICU capacity using the ADB loan which was approved by this Parliament. With this loan, the general intensive care unit is going to increase its bed capacity to 40 beds with the following equipment: 

•	Ventilators, 40; 
•	Patient monitors, 40; 
•	Defibrillators, 40; 
•	ICU beds, 40.

There was also an issue of the renal unit which was raised. I would like to report that the unit has been expanded from five to 16 dialysis machines since June 2012 and all these machines are fully functional at Mulago National Referral Hospital. 

The issue of tertiary care was also raised. I would like to report that the Ministry of Health has developed a comprehensive plan to improve on tertiary care in the field of heart diseases, cancer care and advanced referral medicine. At an appropriate time, my ministry will be giving a full report to this House.

Finally, I want to assure the nation and honourable colleagues that there is no crisis at the intensive care unit at Mulago National Referral Hospital as portrayed by the story in the press. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: I think we will just have two comments. 

6.14
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Dr Michael Lulume Bayigga): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for health for this statement, which is quite assuring. Let me first of all begin with page No.3, paragraph 4, where she gives us some information on the increased capacity that we hope to have - 40 ventilators, 40 patient monitors, 40 defibrillators and 40 ICU beds. The immediate question that should come to the minds of people who know the intensive care unit in Mulago is: where are these beds going to be put? Where is that space? 

We know very well that the ICU has a number of machines that had been donated but broke down and there was no capacity from Government of Uganda to repair them. Indeed, they are lying in the ICU just like other patients. Now we are told that we are going to have other 4O sets of equipment; we do not know where this space is going to come from and where shall we put those other machines that had broken down for which we did not have capacity to repair. 

The minister should be in position to substantiate what improvements have been put in place to ensure that those machines that had broken down are out of the ICU. She should also assure this Parliament that there is space that has been constructed where another intensive care unit is going to be put up to house all this equipment, before we take her very seriously.

When you hear about these other intensive care units for the paediatrics and so on, I think this Parliament should be assigned another duty with cameras so that Uganda knows what these intensive care units are like. As the Shadow Minister for Health together with the Leader of the Opposition and also the Committee on Health, we visited Mulago Hospital and so we are privy to the information about that place. The human resource is thin on the ground. They do not have the capacity to handle cases, and that is why in Uganda if somebody required intensive care and you cannot get it from Mulago Hospital where you are sure of not getting it, one of the immediate countries you can go to is Rwanda. They have got better intensive care units with better bed capacity than Uganda, which should have an excuse for not being better than any other country in the East African region. Kenya is another country where you can get these facilities.

So, I take this statement with a pinch of salt. I urge this Parliament to carry out its own investigations so that this country knows the importance of the intensive care units and can compete favourably with the rest of the countries or perform even better, if we are going to save lives.

6.18
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me beg your indulgence so that I put some of these things forward for the record. First, I thank the minister for bringing a response to your directive on time. 

Secondly, I think the minister never had the opportunity to read this statement because the first time she read it, on page 1 she said that Mulago has three intensive care units and then immediately she says the general intensive care unit, 3D, has 12 beds. She then goes on to page 2 and she says that it is also not true that the general Intensive care unit ward has 12 beds with no equipment. So, you do not know whether she meant the first sentence, that it had 12 beds, or she meant the second sentence, that it did not have 12 beds. I really do not know, but I think that the minister can be excused because she was here with us and they prepared the statement and rushed it in.

Having said that, Madam Speaker, I have been in social services for too long and I know the truth about the intensive care unit, the one that has the facility that closed down, that is, the general intensive care unit at 3D. It actually serves sometimes the rest of the units and that is why they bring the people with burns. 

Even the pediatrics unit, they say it has a problem. They do not have ventilators for children so sometimes they even have to bring the children into the general one. Now, the trouble with the general one, which has led to its closure up to this time when we are talking, is that it has very old equipment and Mulago is finding it very hard to procure the spares and the consumables for the equipment. That is problem No.1.

Problem No. 2 is that the equipment is inadequate. So, if the minister says that we are going to do justice to this nation, she should propose the purchase of new and additional equipment. That is what the intensive care unit requires. 

I would like to comment on the renal unit, which I am quite familiar with because I have moved in and out of that unit with a number of patients. I think that it is important, for the record, to agree with the minister that they have 16 machines. However, one is spoilt - 15 are working - but the unit has only three doctors. On a daily basis they receive over 40 patients and they need to dialyse those 40; 15 in the morning and 15 in the afternoon. Now, one doctor is attached to the private wing, the other is also the administrator and the third doctor about a week ago left Mulago because you failed to get him on the payroll for all these years. So, we have lost a professional and now you are left with two doctors dialysing these 40 people day and night. That is what is causing queues. There is only one technician to maintain all these machines. 

Madam Speaker, the patients are charged user fees for those machines. If they take you through it, you pay Shs 90,000 per visit and Shs 150,000 for consumables, because we allocate Mulago very little money. If the patients are required to go through the dialysis machine three times a week initially, on average the peasant from Kamuli and the one from Serere have to pay Shs 1 million on a weekly basis to go through the dialysis machine in Mulago, if they are lucky that the doctor can take on the 40 of them. If they are unlucky like the one of Dr Okuonzi, you pass on.

Madam Speaker, even the rich fail. The doctors have reported attrition in their patients. They reach a point where they fail to meet this and then they disappear and die. I think that the minister will help this nation if she tells us that this unit needs special attention and that Parliament should allocate money. As a minister, I think she should work hard tonight and get the other doctor who is quitting the renal unit. Get him on the payroll. What does it take you to get one doctor on the payroll to save thousands of Ugandans? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.23
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will first comment on the statement the minister has presented to the House. I know outside there, Parliament is known as having equivalents of senior six leavers but as a teacher, the words and work presented this afternoon, honestly, leave a lot to be desired. The grammar and sentence construction is very poor and yet this House facilitates ministers to do better work. So, next time, we do not expect this type of work coming from ministries that are fully facilitated.

Secondly, I watched the news in the evening and there was a lady, whose name I cannot quote here right now, who was bold and straight on the facts. She enumerated about six machines which she said had broken down. Minister, when this information comes, it helps you to get more funding for your docket, not that you should soothe and say, “we are home and dry and everything is okay”. A minister will come here and say the facilities are fully functional and yet the technocrats at the department are saying “we are not fully functional”. So, where is the problem?

Please, help Ugandans. I watched the news in the evening and the lady said these machines and the intensive care unit are in a very needy state, and that they had deficiency of over six important machines that were not functional. I just want to give this information for the benefit of those who could have been tied up in the jam and could not watch the 9.00 O’clock news.

I have also heard many times about cases of patients in Mulago. I lost a patient, a dear one, in October last year. I moved from ground floor to sixth floor, which is meant for those who can afford to pay for the facilities. I was in this intensive care unit. Even the oxygen and some services are administered in the corridors. The machines are so rusted beyond repair. On this, honestly, I give credit to the honourable minister, Ondoa Christine. When she comes here, she tells you, “This is what I have; facilitate me to do my work and do it rightly.” 

I think the onus is on this House. Let us not try to soothe situations and make them so glossy, look flowery and good and at the end of the day, we reach Mulago and suffer with our own. The situation is really bad and Government, on top of giving the doctors facilitation, should ensure that doctors are facilitated with the equipment to do their work. We have gone through most of the district health centres and they are in a needy state. Let us get these rusted machines away so that we do not contaminate patients but give them adequate facilitation.

Lastly, I am proud of the doctors trained in Uganda. They are one of the best south of the Sahara. (Applause) Most of those who go out of the country, be it South Africa, India or wherever, end up being treated by Dr Opio, Dr Ddumba, Dr Kasozi, Dr Byarugaba; they are very well trained – (Interjections) - Dr Bitekyerezo and Dr Baryomunsi. So why don’t we facilitate them to do their work? I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.28
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Where there is smoke there must be fire. In paragraph No.3, the minister agrees that they experienced a temporary shortage of bacterial filters. May I know from her what the order quantity of these bacterial filters is? This is an important question because it helps us in planning. Where we have few machines, how can we afford to run out of these temporary bacterial filters for so many days?

Secondly, Madam Minister, on average, how many patients use these machines? This can tell us whether the machines are enough or not enough. We toured Mulago Hospital and there were brand new machines which were imported but there were no people to operate them. The honourable minister in her paper is telling us that they are buying more and more machines; do we have technical people to operate these machines? (Interruption)

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. I am a member of the Committee on National Economy. As we were moving around, we went to Jinja Hospital; they had a full intensive care unit but they were lacking people to operate it.

MR YAGUMA: Finally, in the light that this is an important issue which touches the lives of our people, under our rule 50(1)(a), I want to move that our committee of Parliament on health goes to Mulago to establish the truth and makes a report to Parliament. I beg to move. 

6.30
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I start by supporting my brother’s suggestion. There are two kinds of doctors; there are real doctors and spin doctors. I hope this statement was not prepared by spin doctors – (Laughter)- to put a flowery picture to the situation. I just want to warn that it would be wrong to put a spin on issues of life and death. 

The statement presents an impression that there is no problem in Mulago and yet stories have been running in the media. The Ministry of Health has been reluctant to rebut the stories in the media until the issue was raised here in Parliament. That is why I want to agree with the honourable member for Kashari that our Committee on Health could also visit Mulago and take a look. 

When the minister, on page 2, says the stories on breakdown were not true but the hospital experienced a temporary shortage of bacterial filters for two machines, this passes as if it is casual. When you go to an intensive care unit, you usually remove your shoes. Those are measures for infection control. So, if the bacterial filters are finished, that alone is a crisis. It means you cannot maintain infection control within those intensive care units. So to me, I believe there must be a problem as is being reported in the media and something must be done.

Secondly, the minister says there are three intensive care units and she goes ahead to describe the kind of equipment that is there. For doctors who have worked in such facilities, we know that you need more equipment in such facilities for you to call it an intensive care unit where you can resuscitate a patient especially when he is in a critical stage. You described these units but I think they still need – (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Actually, they do not pass as intensive care units. Look at the acute care unit for children; some of us have worked there. I would not really qualify them as intensive care units as I know them as a doctor.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I think we have refused or failed to prioritise health in this country. One time our President made a public statement that he would never allow to be treated by a Ugandan doctor and some of us felt a lot of pain as qualified doctors. So, maybe is this the reason why Government does not take the issue of health services in this country seriously? I can see the Prime Minister looking at me, but I want to emphasize that yes, the President made that public comment that he will never go to any health facility in this country and as a medical doctor I recall that statement.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give to hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi is that besides saying that he will never be treated by the Ugandan doctors, he actually ensured that his daughter delivers from Germany while a multitude of Ugandan mothers die while giving birth to children from dilapidated facilities.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you. Madam Speaker, the equipment for medical services is not extremely expensive. I think this country can afford to equip Mulago Hospital to a standard where when all of us fall sick, we can access good services from there. (Member timed out)

6.35
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to support the motion but I also would like to thank the minister for doing your best and for pronouncing words very well.

I would like to remind this House that in 1969, when the late Dr Apollo Milton got a problem, he went to Mulago Hospital. I want you to know that some of you who think that they will never end up in Mulago, you are joking. I know this as a practicing doctor and I know what can happen to anybody while we are still here; one can get a heart attack. I am talking as a medical doctor and not as a witch doctor. (Laughter) I am talking as a trained doctor, who has worked in a government hospital, Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital, for 12 years. I want to assure you that I am a qualified doctor.

Madam Speaker, you saw me when I was a baby at Mbarara Hospital as a student. You saw me when I graduated because you were the chairperson of our council and here I am with you. But I can tell you that I left that place temporarily to tell the Ugandans about what I left behind and now let me tell you. Kindly give me some time to tell you. 

When hon. Barnabas Tinkasimiire got a problem in Mulago, I went there. While there, I saw 15 functional renal machines on sixth floor. I can agree that you have not told us a lie and if you had done so, I would tell you now. However, while the machines are there, there is one problem; I can tell you that I found only one trained male senior nurse who was running the whole unit, with 15 machines! 

You, Cabinet members, who are here, everyday you sit with the Prime Minister, for heaven’s sake, do not tell him lies because should you mislead the Prime Minister and the President, we shall get a problem. Please be honest. That is why I am very grateful to hon. Dr Ondoa because whenever she talks, she does not tell us lies. Maybe she knows that some of us who are doctors are here and we know what goes on in Mulago.

Last night I watched a news piece on NTV with footage of a doctor saying that the bacterial filters were not there for the ventilators in Mulago and they had closed. That is why people died! Let me tell you something, when one person dies, it is not a joke; it could be the next President of Uganda – (Interruption)

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you so much, my colleague, for giving way. First of all, I am not a medical doctor but I am also not a witchdoctor but a social worker. The information I would like to give is that we have a very well-built hospital in Mbarara; we had machines but the CT Scan was not working for over a year. When we got people to work on these machines, they stole some of the parts – (Interjection) - They stole the memory card. As we talk now, those who would have been handled from Mbarara Hospital are now being referred to Mulago. I think we need to tell the truth, for the truth will set us free, John 8:3. (Laughter)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I want to assure you that the renal unit – Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you very well know that I honestly respect you but I do not know whether NRM surely respects doctors who are in Parliament. If so, why don’t you use us? We are here. I can assure you that the cost of dialysis cannot be afforded by a poor person from Mbarara, Kanungu and Kamuli because the charges are abnormal.

Madam Speaker, we usually appropriate money to that unit but the way it is being run! Rt Hon. Prime Minister, since you are now becoming a bit old, because your hair has become a little white – (Laughter) – it means you need Mulago more than even these young ones need it. Why don’t you help, before you leave this office, to ensure Mulago is fully equipped by giving it enough money? By the way, you talk about building a VIP Hospital in Entebbe; why don’t you build it in Mulago? Why are you building a hospital in Entebbe and you do not put money in Mulago? (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Let me now invite the minister to respond.

6.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank all the colleagues who have made contributions. I think the time was short. If there were any typing errors, please understand that I was only doing my best to at least have a statement here within about 40 minutes or so.

Madam Speaker, I want to say that the challenges in the health sector are well known by everybody in this House. So, I hope that as we get into the next budgeting cycle, we shall have priority given to this sector.

I want to say that I am unable to respond to some of the issues that have been raised. My brother, hon. Dr Lulume, asked where the space is and I want to say, it is at Mulago Hospital. Since you are going there as the Parliament health committee to verify some of the statements I have made, I hope that you will be shown where these beds are actually going to be placed.

On the purchase of the new equipment, I will entirely agree to it, though all that is about funding. I am going to follow up on the issue of the doctor. I was not aware; I have just learnt about it after my sister, hon. Alice Alaso, raised it. I think that is it, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Just for the record, I also want to thank you for the expeditious handling of the business this afternoon.

RESPONSE BY THE LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS ON MATTERS OF NATIONAL IMPORTANCE RAISED BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION DURING THE SITTING OF 30 OCTOBER 2012

6.43
THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The first issue I want to deal with is the issue of the accusations against Uganda, that we are involved in the DRC. I have the following statement to make: 

Uganda received information from our permanent mission to the United Nations in New York alerting us of a leaked document from the UN Group of Experts on DRC, which alleged that Uganda was supporting M23, the rebel group that is fighting the DRC Government. In a presidential statement, the UN Security Council appeared to endorse the said report from this group of experts, even threatening to impose sanctions against Uganda for its alleged involvement in the DRC. 

In the report, Uganda is accused of having provided support to M23 in the form of direct troop reinforcement in DRC territory, weapon deliveries, technical assistance, joint planning, political advice and facilitation of external relations. They also claim that units of the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces and the Rwanda Defence Forces jointly supported M23 in a series of attacks in July 2012 to take over the major towns of Rutshuru territory and the Forces armee de la RDC (FARDC) base of Rumangabo. They also claim that both governments have co-operated to support the creation of expansion of M23’s political branch and have consistently advocated on behalf of the rebels. They further claim that the sanctioned individuals continue to reside in or regularly travel to Uganda. 

We were disappointed not only by the content of the report but more so by the manner in which the so-called UN group of experts conducted themselves during and after their research. Uganda Government took a decision, as indicated below, and communicated it to the United Nations Security Council and the UN Secretary-General by letter to be delivered today by the hon. Dr Rugunda who is leading a Government delegation, as I said yesterday. It should have been delivered on Monday but because of the events there, the Hurricane Sandy, it was not done because New York and the United Nations particularly resumed work today.  

Prior to this group of experts’ visit to Uganda, they indicated that they would be in Uganda for one day and indicated areas where they needed relevant information. Indeed, Government officials provided them responses to the questions they raised. 

The experts arrived on 17 September 2012 and departed the next day, 18 September 2012. They held a meeting with Government officials on the 18th and at the end of the meeting they requested to meet with chiefs of intelligence saying that they had sensitive matters to discuss with them. It was not possible to arrange a meeting at such short notice because the chiefs were engaged with other scheduled duties.  

The Government of Uganda asked the team to extend their stay in order for them to hold the requested meeting but they were unable to do so. They proceeded to Goma in the DRC from where they summoned the Ugandan chiefs to go and meet them. It was practically improper for the UN group to summon high ranking security officials into another state. When these UN experts went back to New York, we never heard from them again until we were alerted about the leaked report. 

The Government of Uganda was, therefore, surprised that issues which were neither notified to Uganda prior to the visit nor discussed in the meeting of 18 September 2012 formed the subject of the report. It was even more surprising that the UN Security Council on receiving this report simply endorsed it in total and even pronounced itself on possible sanctions against Uganda without any reference to us.

Uganda categorically denies the allegations made against her because they are totally false. For example, how could it be possible, as is alleged in the report, that UPDF were inside DRC attacking the FARDC - the Congo Army - and at the same time a battalion of more than 600 FARDC soldiers run into Uganda for safety on 7 July 2012? How could that be? Where could Uganda have attacked them from, from inside Congo, for them to run inside Congo? The logical thing would have been if an attack was from Uganda, it would have been from Uganda and they would have run away from Uganda and not into Uganda. When they run into Uganda, they were well received and the injured were given medical treatment. 

On 11 July 2012, 580 FARDC soldiers, 42 Congolese Police officers, 31 women and kids were transported using UPDF trucks in consultation with DRC Government from Kisoro to Kasindi border post where they were handed over by Brig. Patrick Kankiriho, who is the Division Commander in the area. They were received by the FARDC Sector Commander, Col. Eric Ruhorimbere, in the presence of DRC Ambassador to Uganda, H.E. Charles Lokoto-Lolombe, and the UNHCR Representative to Uganda. 

It defeats logic to say, as I have just said, that the DRC soldiers whom we were allegedly fighting alongside M23 would run to us for their safety. Curiously, the group of experts does not even mention this significant event. It should be further noted that at the height of the crisis, when nine members of the rebel M23 group fled to Uganda for safety, they were arrested in Kisoro and transported through Mbarara to Kampala where they are still under custody up to today pending further management. Both the DRC Government and MONUSCO, which is the mission of the UN to Congo, were informed accordingly. 

I must mention that Uganda’s involvement in the DRC Government/M23 conflict was a mandate received from the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR). At the height of the conflict in Eastern DRC, H.E. Ban Ki-Moon, the UN Secretary-General, personally contacted H.E. Yoweri Museveni and requested him to intervene and stop the fighting in DRC. About the same time, H.E. Joseph Kabila, President of DRC, contacted President Museveni and explicitly requested him to intervene and facilitate dialogue between M23 and the DRC Government. 

In accordance with article 23 (2) of the Pact on Security, Stability and Development in the Great Lakes Region, President Museveni convened four extraordinary summits of the ICGLR on the security situation in Eastern DRC, three of which were hosted in Kampala using Uganda’s own resources. During the summit of 8 September 2012, President Museveni was specifically mandated by the ICGLR heads of state and governments as the chair to facilitate dialogue between M23 and the DRC Government and to coordinate regional efforts to find a durable solution to the security situation in Eastern DRC. This regional initiative was approved by the African Union Peace and Security Council on 19 September 2012. 

At the last two summits, the UN Secretary General was represented by Special Representative Ambassador Abu Moussa, as well as Special Representative to MONUSCO, Ambassador Roger Meece, at which the Secretary General’s message of support was highly appreciated. On the sidelines of the UN General Assembly on 27 September 2012 in New York, the Secretary General convened a high level mini summit on DRC and pledged full support to the regional efforts. The international community also expressed strong support for the ICGLR regional efforts. During the same period, Mr Herve Landsous, the Under Secretary for Peace Keeping Operations, visited Uganda and pledged UN total support to the regional efforts spearheaded by Uganda.

In this whole situation, therefore, two aspects are not acceptable:

1. The maligning of Uganda that it supports the M23 group and that our troops have secretly taken part in fighting the brother Congolese army, including taking part along with Rwanda troops in the capturing of the town of Rutshuru. 

All serious actors should know from the past experiences that we say what we mean and mean what we say. Which troops of Uganda took part in those operations? Where is the evidence? Is it acceptable that an organ of the UN should falsely and carelessly accuse a member of the UN in this way using either amateurs or malicious actors dressed up as experts?

As already stated above, our recent involvement in the issues of DRC were at the express request of the UN Secretary General and of President Kabila when they both separately rang up President Museveni in July 2012 requesting him to intervene when the M23 rebels were threatening to attack Goma. It was after those requests that President Museveni started looking for those rebels; we did not even know the individuals involved prior to the requests from the UN Secretary General and President Kabila. 

It was not easy to convince M23 rebels to suspend operations. However, President Museveni was able to show them that political solutions are generally better than military solutions where those political solutions are possible. That is how the delegation of M23 was invited to come to Uganda on 29 July 2012. They were not even allowed through the official border entry points by the border officials who did not know about the peace efforts. They had to infiltrate through the bush because they know those areas and the peoples are the same. Since that time, Uganda has hosted three summits on the situation in Congo, that is, on 7th and 8th of August, 7th and 8th September, and 7th and 8th October 2012 using our own money.

In the September 2012 extraordinary summit, Uganda was requested to use the mode of indirect talks between the DRC Government and the M23 rebels. This is because President Museveni threatened to expel the delegation of M23 if the DRC Government did not want to have dialogue with the group they had told Uganda to invite in the first place. Since that time, indirect dialogue has been going on between the DRC Government and the M23 rebels.

When the UN decided to send MONUC to DRC in 2000/2001, Uganda offered Entebbe Airport free of charge for that operation, if only the United Nations could restore peace to the brotherly people of DRC who share with us a common ancestry and heritage as do all the other neighbouring countries. Up to now, the UN does not pay a single coin for using the facility at Entebbe Airport. Unfortunately, the UN has not pacified Eastern DRC as we had hoped. Eastern DRC is still a permanent base for genocide forces from Rwanda and terrorist groups from Uganda such as the so-called Lords’ Resistance Army and the so-called Allied Democratic Forces.

Is falsely accusing Uganda the reward for these efforts? This, we cannot accept. If these are experts as they are held to be, why didn’t they put their questions to competent people in Uganda to answer them? We demand to see that evidence of complicity in supporting the M23, which some people claim to have.

2. The United Nations Security Council adopted a presidential statement on 19 October 2012 which, among other things, stated as follows: 

In Paragraph three: “The Security Council expresses its intention to apply targeted sanctions against the leadership of the M23 and those acting in violation of the sanctions regime and the arms embargo and calls on all Member States to submit, as a matter of urgency, listing proposals to the 1533 committee.”

In paragraph 11: “The Security Council expresses its full support to the United Nations Group of Experts of the 1533 Committee and calls for enhanced cooperation between all states, particularly those in the region, and the Group of Experts, encourages further that all parties and all states ensure cooperation with the Group of Experts by individuals and entities within their jurisdiction or under their control and reiterates its demand that all parties and all states ensure the safety of its members and unhindered and immediate access in particular to persons, documents and sites the Group of Experts deems relevant to the execution of its mandate…”

In view of this, what becomes of our mediation role for which we were initially requested by President Kabila and the UN Secretary General? Why did the UN Security Council not seek the views of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region through its current chairman, President Museveni? If these African regional bodies are to be given a fait accompli by the UN, why should they exist?

Where the UN works with the region, we get good results, for example the struggle for the independence of Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Namibia and the democratisation of South Africa, Burundi, Somalia, Sudan and others. Where the region is ignored, failure is almost certain, for example the American actions in Somalia, the endless Western involvement in the Congo from 1960 to date, the recent actions of the West in Libya, disregarding the proposals of the African Union etc.

Madam Speaker, the patriots of Uganda are Pan Africans by conviction. We do not seek to carry favour with any extra African actors. Whatever little contribution we have made in Southern Africa, Sudan, Rwanda, Burundi, Congo, Somalia and in fighting the Lords’ Resistance Army in Central African Republic etc., it is out of our Pan African conviction in the tradition of Mwalimu Julius Nyerere, Dr Kwame Nkrumah, Dr Agostinho Neto and others.

Since there are actors in the United Nations system who are not able to understand that there can be principled actors in Africa and who think that all actors are looking for gold and other minerals like the imperialists who invaded Africa were doing, we have now decided, after due consultations with our African brothers in the African Union and the ICGLR, to completely withdraw from these regional peace efforts, that is, in the Democratic Republic of Congo, in Somalia and others. There are only two factors that can persuade us to change this regrettable but unavoidable course of action on our part, given the malevolent and myopic actors in some of the international institutions:
 
1. 	The UN must sort out the malignments against Uganda by bringing out the truth about Uganda’s role in the current regional efforts.

2. 	Our African brothers in the ICGLR, through the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism (EJVM), a group of real military experts as opposed to the amateurs from New York masquerading as experts, should quickly pronounce themselves on these malignments against Uganda.

Madam Speaker, it is worth noting though that our work was progressing well. At the last ICGLR summit it was decided not to hold more summits. President Museveni was only waiting for the recommendations of the committee of ministers of defence on the way forward and had, indeed, started the process of raising funds for the 4,000 troops of the neutral international force. However, given these malignments against Uganda, a country that is now in the chair of the ICGLR, another summit may have to be convened to receive the report of the committee of the ministers of defence in respect of these malignments.

If our African brothers in the ICGLR stand with us, it will put the region in the position it was in in respect of Burundi. At that time the region had to impose its own sanctions against the Tutsi faction but the UN completely refused to endorse it because some of the international parasitic forces were in cahoots with the faction, its crimes against the Burundi people ever since 1965 notwithstanding. In the end, the region was proved right and the UN eventually joined us. We had to reject endless lies by some Western actors who used to claim that Tanzania was backing the Hutu rebels and that the late Mwalimu Nyerere was pro Hutu and anti Tutsi.

In order for Uganda to continue contributing to regional efforts, we need understanding, respect and fairness from the UN or the region itself or both. Some friends say, “Ignore that report and continue contributing; we know that is not true.” This is not good enough. What do we tell the people of Uganda? Why should we continue involving Uganda where the only reward we get is malignment? Why should the children of Ugandans die and we get malignment as a reward? Why should we invite retaliation by the Al-Shabaab terrorists by standing with the people of Somalia only to get malignment by the UN system? Al-Shabaab killed 76 Ugandans on 11 July 2010 on account of our spearheading the Somalia operation.

Madam Speaker, we would only want to remind the UN about the rights of the people of Uganda, which is the reason we have been keenly spearheading the regional efforts to find a lasting solution to the insecurity in Eastern DRC. It is not in order for DRC, in partnership with the United Nations Peace Mission to Congo, to maintain terrorists against Uganda by allowing ADF to freely use DRC territory to train, receive arms and launch assassination attacks on Ugandans. Recently, three Muslim Sheikhs were assassinated in Uganda; our suspicion is on ADF based in the Eastern DRC. What is the UN going to do about this? 

Our view was to use dialogue to help Congo resolve the issue of the M23, which is a recent complication in the endless DRC situation, and then use the neutral international force and MONUSCO to get rid of the terrorists from the DRC territory. Some of the actors seem to have a different opinion. How long will the Congolese territory continue to be used as a base against neighbours? 

In light of the above, withdrawing from Somalia, CAR, et cetera becomes inevitable so that we keep watch on the DRC territory donated to the terrorists by the DRC Government and the United Nations. Madam Speaker, we are still waiting for the UN Secretary-General’s response to our letter. Meanwhile, we are preparing our seriatim response to the UN Group of Experts’ allegations. We shall inform this august House of any progress on the matter. 

I wish to add that the committee of the ministers of defence met in Goma last week and I am waiting for their report. Thank you. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I understand that there were about six issues which you were expected to respond to. Now that you have responded to item No.1, do you have the response to the others? That is what we need to agree on; when are they coming? This will enable us to agree on the schedule.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I can respond to all of them now but as I told you yesterday, we took this decision and we have been holding onto it because we wanted to deliver it to the United Nations. I have sent a delegation to the region as well so that our neighbours know about this decision. I thought it was such an important decision that it should be handled on its own and then I can come back next week and respond to the other points. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Let us hear from the Leader of the Opposition. 

7.10
MRS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Given the fact that the statement by the Leader of the Opposition had all issues as one package, I propose that it would be procedurally correct that we discuss all of them at a go. I can see that in the Prime Minister’s communication - for which I thank him for informing Ugandans about what happened and what is happening - he has made a statement which seems to be related to item No. 2, the killings whose reports are not coming out. You are correlating the death of the Muslim clerics to the ADF. We would love to discuss all of these statements at a go. So, I request that we postpone debate on this matter until the other items are equally responded to. 

7.11
MR VICENT KYAMADIDI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I thank the Prime Minister for this report. By the time the Leader of the Opposition raised issues of national importance, we were not only hijacked as a House but I think he was also duty-bound to do that. However, the issues he raised were so serious that they cannot be discussed as a single item. You cannot discuss the issues of pension at the same time with the regional war, land grabbing and murders in a single session. 

I would request the acting Leader of the Opposition, through you, Madam Speaker; this is a serious statement and given the tone of this statement, it seems like we are bound to even witness a regional war. The Parliament of Uganda cannot sit, waiting for a war to break out when such a statement has already been presented to us. 

I do not know what the interest would be. You required answers to this question and a statement has been made. The tone of statement indicates that Uganda as country is also angry and you do not know what Uganda is planning to do. It is for this reason and other reasons, Madam Speaker, that I request that this statement be discussed and members can seek for more answers because maybe the Prime Minister has more answers. I beg to request.  

7.13
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Madam Speaker, I want to agree with the concerns raised by hon. Vincent Kyamadidi that this issue is very sensitive. I have been receiving phone calls from different corners of the country. The country has been anxious to know about the involvement of Uganda referred to in the UN report. So, if we keep postponing, it will be a disservice. This is a great opportunity that we have to get clarifications from Government and discuss. This is a sensitive matter. Issues to do with security cannot be postponed. I want to appeal to you that we would rather stay considering or discussing other issues that were raised - (Interruption)  

DR LULUME: Madam Speaker, we all know that the Leader of the Opposition, in his own wisdom, felt it was necessary for these matters to be discussed. It was not Government which came out with this statement unprovoked. This statement is coming as a matter of instigation by the Opposition. We are saying that we need to digest it and you need to digest it as well so that we can ask the questions that matter. It is not the tone that matters; it is about the content and the truthfulness of the statements we are talking about. 

The Leader of the Opposition had six areas to be tackled by Government and in their wisdom they chose to have only one. We think that our statement from the Opposition was also not in terms of piecemeal questions; it was a complete statement that deserves complete answers. However, the seriousness of this matter also deserves to be given attention, due consideration and digestion so that we ask the important questions. Thank you.

7.16
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the Prime Minister for this detailed statement. I also thank the chief whip for coming up with her proposal. 

We, as Parliament, have a duty to know. The law directs that when our forces are involved outside the country, we should know. We should be briefed and we should know where we stand as a country. As you know, Kigezi, to which I belong, borders that region. I personally have been asked by many elders in at least three districts what is happening because of the movement of troops entering the Republic of Congo. That is a fact. I want to state this openly. There is nothing to fear because once there is war we are the people to suffer. Now that it has come on the Floor of Parliament, we should come out clearly and talk about it. (Expunged) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will expunge that allegation from the record until he is ready to substantiate. So, that part is expunged.

Now, honourable members, I think that in fairness to the Leader of the Opposition we need to use our time optimally. I think we should get one statement and take the whole day only on this - (Applause) - because if I take it piecemeal, the next one month will be spent on these issues because I would have to make room for this. I suggest that we get all of them and have one debate and do nothing else on that day. 

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a point of guidance. I want to be guided, for the purposes of records of this House. We were supposed to be discussing item No. 6, which is on issues that were raised by the Leader of the Opposition. Since the Prime Minister chose to bring the statement on security, which is very important, I think it would have been important if the Order Paper was amended so that Members are aware right from the start that among the information which was requested is the information on security, then we would have gone ahead. But the way we are moving now is as if we are accepting to adopt that request in piecemeal. Today -

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Ogwal, I have already advised that we should have a comprehensive statement covering all the areas so that we give it one day and complete it. Otherwise, if I am going to give each part of this document a statement, I will never do any other work.

MRS OGWAL: Can we have it tomorrow?

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, please complete your statement on the six points, deliver it and then we shall have a comprehensive debate with no other business.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

THE SPEAKER: You need to go to the canteen? (Laughter) Okay, it seems members want to go. I think we have done a lot of work today. I adjourn the House to Tuesday, 2.00 O’clock. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 7.31 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 6 November 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
