


Thursday, 22 November 2018

Parliament met at 2.44 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I appeal that we work quickly and to, as much as possible, complete the outstanding Bills so that next week, we can permit the accountability committees to take precedence.

Secondly, we have been invited to a charity run by the Good Care Uganda Foundation to support girl-child education in the country. The run will take place at Kololo Independence Grounds, starting at 6.00 a.m. The run is good for your health even if you are going to be raising money.
Thirdly, when I go to the countryside, one of the biggest complaints I encounter is the issue of water shortage - both for production and human consumption. I have been examining the loans we have undertaken as a House; we have only concentrated in the urban areas. We borrowed money from the African Development Bank for water and sanitation, specifically for Kampala sanitation projects. In addition to that, for Kampala Water and Lake Victoria from the European Investment Bank and African Development Bank.

We also borrowed water and sanitation resources again from the African Development Bank, which were all for urban areas. I appeal to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to ensure that we take interest in the rural areas because that is where the majority of people are, so that they can be alleviated from diseases.

In the public gallery, is a delegation from the National Assembly of Kenya but I have not been given their names. We also have a delegation from the Federation of Uganda Football Association (FUFA). You are welcome.

Honourable members, since last week, we have been discussing the issue of Lusanja, which came in as a matter of national concern. Today, the residents who are sleeping in tents are here to see their issues being attended to. 

Let us use 10 minutes for matters of national interest and I appeal that you do not to go into details, preambles and justifications. Just state the problem and what you want. No meandering, please.

2.48
MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. Last month, an exercise was launched at the border of Uganda and Tanzania - because it was a programme between Uganda and Tanzania - to reaffirm and expand the boundary to check confusion at the border between the two countries.

Heads of state met this year in June and decided that the technical team be on ground to see how that exercise could be implemented. The Tanzanian and Ugandan sides put up control towers to see where the real boundary can pass. Two were installed on the side of Kyotera and two in Isingiro.

When they installed them in Isingiro and because people did not know what was going on, they mobilised themselves and vandalised the control towers because nobody explained to them what was going on.

What is confusing people on the ground is that there were some allegations that Tanzania was expanding its boundary into Uganda again - like when people lost their land and were never compensated. They said they could not allow Tanzania to expand its boundaries into Uganda. 

We would like to know whether the ministry is aware of what is happening. They should be on the ground to explain to people whether this exercise is a Government programme or not. As a Member of Parliament, I have also failed to understand whether what is going on is a Government programme. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: This is a serious issue because it involves a dispute at the border.

2.51
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, the Government is aware that the activity on affirming the border is taking place. If the people are not aware, they will be informed. 

THE SPEAKER: Shall we ask the responsible minister to ensure that the public is aware of the timetable of the dates they are coming so that the people are aware about the demarcation of the Uganda-Tanzania border?

2.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable member for raising this issue. When we draw a programme through the local leadership and radios, we communicate to the public.

I will crosscheck and if the information is not being delivered appropriately, we shall make sure that the radios broadcast the information. However, the communities will also be informed through the Government system. 

2.53
MS JACKLET ATUHAIRE (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. In the New Vision of 20 November 2018, there was a story, which quoted the Auditor-General raising an issue of the loss of Shs 60 billion by National Water and Sewerage Corporation in project implementation.

As Parliament, we would like to hear from the Minister of Water and Environment how the taxpayers’ money was lost. I also heard that this money was misused. We would like the minister to come and explain. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

2.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMNET (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, the Auditor-General is an officer of Parliament. They have written a report, which will be looked at by the relevant committee and then this House will be able to get information from that. However, we will ask the Ministry of Water and Environment to come and make a statement over that particular issue. Thank you. 

2.54
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka County South, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This morning, I got information that the bridge at a point called Mwoyo, on the road running through my constituency connecting Kyegegwa District to Kiruhura is broken. There is a very big ditch in the middle of the road. It has become impassable and yet, it is a very busy road.

I request for immediate assistance. I am seeking that you order Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) to come and help us immediately since this is a central Government road. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Ministry of Works and Transport and UNRA should attend quickly to the broken bridge linking Kyegegwa to Kiruhura and come and give us an update.

2.55
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a matter of national importance. Seven months down the road, four villages in Busia Municipality have no electricity - Mawero East A, Mawero B, Sofia A and Sofia B. These villages are on the border of Kenya and Uganda. 

My prayers are that these villages that have many activities be connected as soon as possible. In case they fail to connect them, let those villages or the whole of Busia Municipality be connected to the Kenyan grid so that we get electricity from Kenya - because these people get electricity from Uganda and Kenya has never been without electricity.

Lastly, we have four districts that always run to Tororo Service Centre. We believe Busia, Bugiri and Namayingo have enough population. We need an umeme centre to solve these problems so that our people do not spend a lot of money going to fix electricity in Tororo Service Centre. 

Last year, I rose on a point of national importance on the matter of a service centre and the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development promised that within three months, Busia would get a service centre. However, up to now, it is as it was. Therefore, I pray that Government addresses this matter. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Macho, you know you talked about seven months. I do not know whether the power is off or you were promised seven months ago. I do not know if it is now off or you want a new installation?

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, power has been off now for seven months. 

THE SPEAKER: Was it switched off?

MR MACHO: Yes, there was power and it went off. The Minister of Energy and Mineral Development knows the reason. Thank you.
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, Busia border is a very busy border. Can you, please, come and explain to us next Thursday why there is no power in this area? Secondly, when are you going to connect them? Thank you.

2.58
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. Madam Speaker, on 20th and 21st October, two calamities befell my people. In the village of Yebe, 96 homes were completely burnt down. Yesterday, 21st November, the whole village of Kandege faced a serious problem with the hurricane that destroyed over 76 homes. 

These people have a myriad of problems in the lake; they do not have homes to stay. My prayer to the Government is to send assistance to help them in this serious problem.

THE SPEAKER: Can we ask the Minister for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to attend to the situation in Dolwe Island, which is suffering from the hurricane and 76 homes – Yebe, also the hurricane in both places?

The Minister for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees should go and attend to the issue in Bukooli Islands and give us an update next Thursday.

2.59
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I arise on a matter of national importance. Today, the Daily Monitor ran a story regarding the escape of the CEO of Development Channel. These are people who come disguising as investors and dupe Ugandans. We had the instance of D9 Club that came and went.

Development Channel came; each person was supposed to pay for a share of Shs 842,400 and then, they would give you a tablet. 

THE SPEAKER: A tablet for eating or this one?

MS LUCY AKELLO: A computer tablet. That is what they used to attract people. Many people ended up buying many shares in this company and I am told the CEO is Charles Lambert, an English and Nigerian, who has a dual citizenship.

Therefore, how do these dubious people access our country without any control and dupe our people when Government is watching? 

THE SPEAKER: Minister for Privatisation and Investment do you know about these tablet people?

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION AND INVESTMENT) (Ms Evelyn Anite): Madam Speaker, I am aware of the Development Channel and Lambert Charles. He came in the country one and a half years ago and opened an office in Kamwokya. He purportedly said that he was brought in the country by the President and he put a very big poster of His Excellency, the President, on his building.

In addition, he indeed got money from 6,000 young people in this country and recruited 2,000 people as employees but did not give them any appointment letters. This gentleman was brought to my office and the issue brought to my attention by hon. Mpaka - the Youth Member of Parliament for western Uganda.

When he brought the issue to my attention, I asked him how he got to know that gentleman. He told me that the man told him that he is being frustrated by Government officials and he thought that as the Minister of Privatisation and Investment, I needed to help him because he wanted to establish a manufacturing plant in Mbarara in the names of the President - a mobile phone manufacturing plant. He also said that he was going to start a call centre.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, when I continued interacting with this gentleman, I discovered he was a thug. I discovered that he was doing dubious activities. 

It is true Government took action immediately and the Financial Intelligence Authority froze his accounts. They are three different accounts plus a mobile money account, which he was using for Ugandans to deposit their money. I called the Capital Markets Authority and the Financial Intelligence Authority to my office and I made it clear to him that he was involved in illicit business.

Since the case was already reported to police, I told them to pursue him and conclude the case, getting all the other 6,000 Ugandans whom he had got money from and cause him to refund their money.

However, in these three accounts, this man had only Shs 1 million. He was getting the money and as soon as the money hit the account, he withdrew it. He would transfer some of this to Nigeria and some to Britain.

At the moment, he has been arrested and detained in one of the police stations in Naguru. This morning, I met with the District Police Commander and the Resident District Commissioner of Nakawa. The suspect is in custody and we have asked citizens to come up and demand for their money. There are two issues here; one is a criminal case and the other one is a civil matter because he has defrauded these people.

Madam Speaker, I would like to report to this House that this gentleman came with 60 young people to my office. I was overwhelmed as these are Ugandans. They were shouting on top of their voices that I should set this Nigerian free because he is giving them an employment opportunity.

I told them that I cannot be the one to tell those lies and this man does not have money to pay them and that they should desist from this activity. They indeed desisted but the gentleman went ahead and sent death threats to me and to Ms Akullo, the Head of the CIID. Therefore, he has aggravated the crime because even now, from robbing Ugandans, he is sending death threats claiming that he has the Army and police with him.

My final report is that the case is under control and the police are pursuing it. We will be getting to a logical conclusion and I shall report to the House.

THE SPEAKER: On behalf of the public, I hope that something happens. You know that groups called TEAM and DUTCH robbed people from Jinja up to Karamoja a few years ago. They have not been arrested, yet people lost their money. Let me hope that this time, something will happen.

Honourable members, we have in the public gallery, a delegation from Kyangwali Sub-county in Hoima District. They are here to observe our proceedings and they are represented by hon. Kaahwa and hon. Mpamizo.

3.07
MS TOPHACE KAAHWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance pertaining the issue of land eviction in Kyangwali Sub-county, Kikuube District. This issue started way back in 2013 and we have presented it on the Floor of Parliament several times.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much; the last time you directed this issue to be handled by the Committee on Presidential Affairs and indeed, the committee is handling it. They have visited the place twice and the work is on-going.

However, this issue is very urgent because the people are being evicted at the moment. They are demarcating land that belongs to other people and they have land titles. Where they are pushing our people - some of them are being pushed into people’s gardens and this has caused chaos.

Madam Speaker, the minister’s action to evict people undermines the parliamentary directive to stop the eviction. It undermines the committee’s work because the committee is working as evictions are taking place in Bukyinda. People have nowhere to run and they are running to us, their representatives.

We pray that the minister should be directed to ensure that ministry officials stop eviction of the people because it is too much. Our people are being beaten and they are suffering. 


The committee should urgently report back to this House for the debate of its report.

Finally, the minister should update the august House on the actions taken in seven days. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am disappointed that sometimes the Office of the Prime Minister does not have sensitivity to the rights of the citizens of Uganda. We sat here and discussed that issue and asked Government to restrain itself but the evictions are going on. They are evicting Ugandans.

I had the opportunity to talk to the President about it. The Prime Minister was saying that everything was okay and I said, “No, things are not okay in Kyangwali.” It cannot be that the Members of Bunyoro are mad to come repeatedly to Parliament to complain about this issue.

The President, in addition to our committee, said he is sending a fact-finding mission and I am going to check whether he has sent it. It is very disappointing that the state is the one pushing its citizens. I do not know where you want the Ugandans to go. You are creating land for refugees - you are evicting citizens to create land for refugees in this country making them homeless? 

Anyway, Prime Minister, we want answers and we want you to take care of the people of Uganda first. When the President was taking oath, his oath involves the welfare of the people of Uganda. The people of Kyangwali are part of that welfare and we want to see the President take an interest in the welfare of his people. 

That is why even the people of Lusanja are here. All these are Ugandans being evicted left, right and centre. Prime Minister, would you like to say something?

3.11
THE DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, last time, I briefed the House and the situation still stands as I did. According to our information, the Government has not taken any land from the public for refugees.

Madam Speaker, you have also appointed a committee, which is about to report. Kyangwali is in this country and if what we say is not believed, then people should go and see for themselves on the ground what is happening.

However, as the Office of the Prime Minister, we have no intention of taking any land from the public or citizens for refugees. The land for refugees is there and it has always been there. Therefore, your committee should probably come and tell us what they have found. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Restrain the Office of the Prime Minister officials until we have had this debate here.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: We shall find out what has come up again. Otherwise, we shall try to find out and let you know.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

REPORTS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE FOLLOWING LOCAL GOVERNMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2015

WABINYONYI SUB-COUNTY

THE SPEAKER: No, item No.3.

3.13
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the reports of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of: 

i) 	Wabinyonyi Sub-county in Nakasongola District,
ii) 	Zirobwe Sub-county in Luwero District, 
iii) 	Nyimbwa Sub-county in Luwero District,
iv) 	Kasanje Sub-county in Wakiso District.

I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those are sent to the Committee on Public Accounts for perusal and report back.

REPORTS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE FOLLOWING LOCAL GOVERNMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2017

3. 14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the reports of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the following local governments for the year ended 30 June 2017:

    1. Butemba Town Council 
    2. Lwengo Town Council, Lwengo District
    3. Kalangala Town Council 
    4. Kalisizo Town Council, Kyotera District 
    5. Mityana District Local Government 
    6. Rakai Town Council 
    7. Lwengo District Local Government
    8. Nsiika Town Council 
    9. Kyamuhunga Town Council 
    10. Ibanda District Local Government
    11. Rukungiri Municipal Council
    12. Muhanga Town Council 
    13. Mponwe Lhubiriha Town Council 
    14. Bushenyi District Local Government
    15. Rushango Town Council 
    16. Rukungiri District Local Government
    17. Rubirizi District Local Government
    18. Kagarama Town Council 
    19. Kebisoni Town Council 
    20. Sheema District Local Government
    21. Isingiro District Local Government
    22. Rubaare Town Council 
    23. Mpigi Town Council 
    24. Kakumiro Town Council 
    25. Butogota Town Council 
    26. Kamwenge Town Council 
    27. Kisoro District Local Government
    28. Buhweju District Local Government
    29. Kyegegwa Town Council 
    30. Katuna Town Council
    31. Kyenjojo District Local Government
    32. Kyegegwa District Local Government
    33. Kibuku Town Council 
    34. Kibaale Town Council 
    35. Kaberebere Town Council 
    36. Mitooma District Local Government
    37. Sanga Town Council 
    38. Katerera Town Council 
    39. Ishongororo Town Council 
    40. Ntungamo District Local Government
    41. Rubirizi Town Council 
    42. Kazo Town Council 
    43. Bweyale Town Council 
    44. Entebbe Division A – Entebbe Municipal Council 
    45. Ntoroko District Local Government
    46. Gombe Division Council 
    47. Kabuyanda Town Council 
    48. Sheema Municipal Council 
    49. Mbarara Municipal Council 
    50. Kisoro Municipal Council 
    51. Kiruhura District Local Government
    52. Kabale Municipal Council 
    53. Kasangati Town Council 
    54. Katooke Town Council 
    55. Hoima District Local Government
    56. Bundibugyo District Local Government
    57. Ngogwe Sub-County, Buikwe District 
    58. Mpunge Sub-County, Mukono District 
    59. Busukuma Division – Nansana Municipal Council
    60. Bunamwaya Division – Makindye – Ssabagabo Municipal Council
    61. Igorora Town Council 
    62. Mukono Central Division – Mukono Municipal Council 
    63. Buyanja Town Council 
    64. Kira Division – Kira Municipal Council 
    65. Entebbe Division “B” Entebbe Municipal Council 
    66. Nansana Division – Nansana Municipal Council 
    67. Kabarole District Local Government
    68. Butuntumula Sub-County – Luwero District
    69. Bweyogerere Division – Kira Municipal Council
    70. Hamurwa Town Council 
    71. Mukono Municipal Council – Central Division
    72. Ngando Sub-County – Butambala District

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Bahati. All these are sent to the Public Accounts Committee of Local Government for perusal and report back. 

PRESENTATION OF REPORTS OF PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATIONS ABROAD

REPORT OF THE DELEGATION OF PARLIAMENT TO SEATTLE, WASHINGTON, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA TO ATTEND THE 30th UGANDA NORTH AMERICA ASSOCIATION CONVENTION, 30th AUGUST TO 3RD SEPTEMBER 2018

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as hon. Kamya comes, join me in welcoming a delegation of countries participating in the Third General Meeting and Conference of African Organisation of Public Accounts Committees. They are there in the gallery. We have the following countries: Uganda, Cameroon, Zambia, South Africa, Malawi, Namibia, Zanzibar, Egypt, Kenya, Sudan, South Sudan, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Tanzania, Nigeria, Liberia, Mali, Chad, Botswana, Sahrawi and Lesotho. You are all welcome. 

3.21
MR HENRY MAKUMBI (NRM, Mityana County South, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have the honour to present this report from a team that you sent to Seattle, USA to represent Uganda, particularly the Parliament of Uganda.

Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda of l995provides for the functions of Parliament as to promote the democratic governance of Uganda as well as oversight over Government ministries, departments and agencies with the aim of ensuring that the welfare of the citizens of Uganda is observed.

The Ugandan Diaspora comprises all people of Ugandan origin living and/or working outside Uganda. It also includes Ugandans who may have lost their citizenship through acquisition of other citizenships. Ugandans in the Diaspora are estimated to be 1.5 million, according to the UN Human Development Report, 2009.

Parliament recognises the contribution by the Diaspora to Uganda’s national development and therefore, endeavours to participate in the activities and conventions of the Diaspora such as the UNAA Convention. 

It is upon this background that a delegation composed of Members and staff of Parliament, headed by the Rt Hon. Speaker, travelled to Seattle, Washington, USA to attend the 30th UNAA Convention. A list of the delegation from Parliament is hereby attached in Annex A.

UNAA is the largest formal association of Ugandans in the Diaspora. Founded in l988, UNAA is a private community organisation consisting of Ugandans and friends of Uganda in America. UNAA's objective is to stimulate and encourage nationwide acquaintance and fellowship among members.

The 30th UNAA Convention was held in Seattle, USA from 30 August to 3 September, 2018, under the theme: "Technology, Science and Innovation."

The convention was attended by a great number of participants from the USA and Uganda. 

There were a number of activities in the convention that took place such as the trade and investment forum, Uganda Regional Forums (Northern Uganda Forum, Bunyoro-Kitara Meeting, Bamasaaba Association Meeting), the political forum, tours (Microsoft and Boeing), official opening and summit launch, where the Rt Hon. Speaker gave a keynote address and other social events. Parliament of Uganda had an exhibition stall, where parliamentary legislation materials as well as visual-audio materials were exhibited.

The convention also had exhibition stalls where potential entrepreneurs - both from outside and within the Diaspora - were brought together to exhibit their products and services. Stakeholders from Uganda included Government entities such as the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control, Bank of Uganda, Post Bank, Uganda Revenue Authority and private stakeholders such as National Social Security Fund and banks like Housing Finance Bank, Equity Bank and others. 

Several meetings were held, namely:

1) 	The Trade and Investment Forum

This forum took place on 30 August, 2018 and was officiated by Ambassador Mull Katende and attended by the Speaker of Parliament, the Government Chief Whip, the Minister of Public Service, Members of Parliament, local business entrepreneurs from Uganda, the Diaspora community and some potential investors.

The main objective of this forum was to facilitate the meeting, networking and formation of dynamic business relationships aimed at promoting trade and investment between Uganda and North America. 

The morning session mainly focused on trade between Uganda and North America. There was identification of products made in Uganda that can be exported to the US and US made products that have a market opportunity in Uganda.

The afternoon session was dedicated to identifying achievable investment opportunities in Uganda, especially the potential technological investments like the use of silos for storage of food and food-related materials.

The themes of the forum included the following:

    a) Economic empowerment through trade and investment
    b) What can Ugandans do to develop their Country?
    c) Discussion of what Uganda can produce to export to North America
    d) Presentations and discussion about AGOA
    e) Trade financing

Remarks by the Ugandan Ambassador to the US, Mr Mull Katende

He welcomed members and gave the background to the meeting as connecting business partners and the Ugandans who could form investment partnerships. He emphasised that the forum was important for luring potential investors to Uganda.

The Ambassador also urged the organisers of the convention to facilitate the diaspora to come together and contribute to the development of the country through social economic programmes.

Remarks by the representative of UNAA executive

Mr Peter Mukunya, Secretary-General of UNAA, welcomed members to the trade and investment forum. He informed members that the trade and investment forum was started in Seattle in 2004. He informed the meeting that UNAA was evolving and it is focused on connecting USA businesses to Uganda – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chair, you are just supposed to read the highlights. Thank you.

MR MAKUMBI: Madam Speaker, there was a very serious concern to do with the challenges that were observed in that forum. I would wish that you accord me the opportunity to go through them so that Members get to know them because this will form the basis for discussion. 

The forum identified several challenges and a few of them are listed below: 

    i) That Uganda is in a debt burden of approximately 35 per cent of GDP
    ii) Power challenges to do with electricity supply
    iii) Endemic Corruption rates, which was discussed even at that forum
    iv) The challenge for Uganda is to ensure that the young people are educated - the low education levels 
    v) The bureaucracy in licensing businesses in Uganda.

Recommendations

It was observed by the participants that Parliament should consider reviewing the Torture Act.

There is need for concerted efforts to fight corruption in Uganda because it is scaring away investment. 

Ugandans should form themselves into an investment vehicle in order to benefit from the available opportunities. 

Conclusion 

The convention provided on opportunity for Ugandans in the diaspora to interact with their leaders and to seek clarity on what is currently taking place in Uganda. 

The Government officials on the other hand got on opportunity to inform the diaspora of the progress of Government projects and of the available opportunities in Uganda and how the diaspora could benefit from them.

The diaspora also got the opportunity to apply and obtain dual citizenship. National identity cards and other consular services were provided by the Uganda Embassy in Washington. The Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control and National Identification and Registration Authority were also present. 

The conference ended with emphasis on Ugandans in the diaspora to work together as well as cooperate with Uganda as a team rather than as individuals in order to get the best out of the available opportunities. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker. I lay the report on Table.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Makumbi. Honourable members, I think it is time we had a sitting to discuss the issues of the diaspora because each time we go there, they make requests, which have not been handled. Among them, they have been talking about the right to vote from wherever they are. They have been asking for a one-stop centre where they can arrive in Uganda and get help. They still have issues about payment of visas and so on. There are laws they want us to handle to facilitate better trade.

Therefore, I would like to propose that we have a sitting before Christmas to discuss the reports - probably of the last three - and pick out the areas, which have not been handled so that the Government can advise us because whenever we go there, they ask for the same thing and we have no answers. 
I would like to propose that we have a debate on that issue before we close for Christmas. Thank you very much.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWERS 

Q46/03/10

MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE MAJEGERE (Independent, BUNYA County  EAST, Mayuge): “In 2012, Government built and launched Bugoto Landing Site Fish Facility in Mayuge District. However, the fish facility has never been put to use and is wasting away. Even then, the facility lacks basic requirements for fish storage, such as an ice-plant. The askari, a one Mufuta Muhammed and a porter, a one Mwanje Halid, who are responsible for guarding and maintaining the facility respectively, have not been paid for their services since 2012. 

Will the Minister explain to this august House:

    i) The purpose of establishing Bugoto Landing Site
    ii) Why the facility has not been put to use since 2012?
    iii) How much it cost Government to establish the facility
    iv) Whether the ministry carried out adequate assessment before, during and after construction of the facility
    v) Whether the contractor met the civil and architectural specifications of building the facility
    vi) Whether there are any steps being taken to make the facility operational. If so, at what stage are they?
    vii) Why the askari and the porter who were deployed at the said fishing facility have never been paid their salary arrears since 2012; and when will this be rectified?”

THE SPEAKER: Where is the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries? Let us go to item No.6

RESPONSES BY MINISTERS TO QUESTIONS RAISED BY:

I) Hon. Latif Sebaggala, MP Kawempe North on the dire situation of evictees from Lusanja, Mpererwe Parish, Sekanyonyi Zone, Kawempe North and the need for Government to urgently aid them. (Rt Hon.Prime Minister And Leader Of Government Business)

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, question No.6 (i) on the issue of Lusanja? Okay, can we go to question No. 6(iii) on the livestock quarantine? 

III) HON. CHARLES ILUKOR, MP KUMI COUNTY, ON THE NON-FUNCTIONALITY OF ATUTUR HOSPITAL.

3.35 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Joyce Moriku): Madam Speaker, given the importance of this matter, a lot of development took place. The Ministry of Health team, led by the Assistant Commissioner (clinical), is in Kumi District, in Atutur Hospital. We have been having discussions with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on how best we can handle this matter. However, a lot of positive developments have taken place.

For this matter, I kindly request that you allow us to give a collective comprehensive report together with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We will bring it on Tuesday. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. honourable members, you asked for answers but this is a multi-sectoral activity. On Tuesday, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and you, must come with a solution.  

IV) HON. ISAAC JAOKINE, MP UPPER MADI ON THE STALLED IMPLEMENTATION OF THE WORLD BANK FUNDED PROJECTS FOR SELECTED SECONDARY SCHOOLS IN ARUA DISTRICT

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a statement to Parliament on stalled implementation of World Bank funded projects for selected secondary schools in Arua District and alleged diversion of funds from Anyiribu Seed Secondary School to Pawor Seed Secondary School.

Reference is made to a submission on the Floor of Parliament by the honourable Member of Parliament from Upper Madi County concerning the stalled construction projects for Okollo Secondary School and Uleppi Secondary School in his constituency.

The two schools above were beneficiaries of the APLI World Bank supported project. The project ran from 4 November 2009 to 31 July 2014. 

Okollo Secondary School
Roba Engineering Company Limited was awarded a contract worth Shs 286,016,500 to construct the following:

    1. A two-classroom block 
    2. A two-room multi-purpose science block 
    3. A five-stance VIP latrine 
    4. A complete four classroom block.

The entire contract sum was disbursed to the school but the contractor abandoned the project, leaving the two-room and multi-purpose science block incomplete. The school failed to account for Shs 59 million at the project closure. This explains the failure to complete the construction. The issue was forwarded to the Inspectorate of Government (IGG) and Criminal Intelligence and Investigations Directorate (CIID) for further management.

Uleppi Secondary School

Cimeel Engineering Ltd was awarded a contract worth Shs 259,711,600 to construct the following structures at Uleppi Secondary School in Arua District:

    1. Two classroom block
    2. A two-room, multi-purpose science block
    3. Five-stance VIP latrine complete
    4. A complete a four classroom block

Funding for this project was to be released in two installments each accounting for 50 per cent of the contract sum. This was done for purposes of accountability. As a result, the first installment of Shs 129 million was released to the school on 5 August 2011.

In the early days of project implementation, however, our ministry officials realised that there was a multi-purpose science block under construction funded by Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA). To avoid over-provision or duplication of facilities, an on-spot reassessment was carried out and the ministry decided to revise the scope of works, substituting the two-room multi-purpose science block with a fully furnished library.

The contractor strongly opposed the change, claiming that he had already purchased items for the mechanical installations in the science block and had invoices and receipts for them. The contractor eventually abandoned the site, citing breach of contract. This standoff stalled the project from late 2011 to June 2013.

In a communication from the ministry's Construction Management Unit dated June 2013, the scope was changed with guidance given to the school and the supervising consultant.

This information was relayed by the acting Head Teacher and the contractor in August 2013, informing the contractor that the new scope was to be adopted at the original contract price and not at his adjusted rates, to which the contractor replied with his acceptance of this arrangement.

By that time, however, the contract had expired and the final installment of Shs 129 million was not released. The contractor also failed to meet the conditions for contract renewal despite reminders by the supervising consultant. Consequently, the contractor could not claim payments and eventually abandoned the site.

An assessment of schools with incomplete infrastructure at closure of the APL1 project was carried out and a list of schools classified as critical was compiled with estimated cost implications for completion. These incomplete school structures were being funded for completion in phases under the development of secondary project that was unfortunately closed at the end of Financial Year 2017/20l8. 

My ministry plans to have these facilities completed under the upcoming World Bank funded project (Uganda Secondary Education Expansion Project).

Regarding the alleged diversion of funds from Anyiribu Seed Secondary School to Pawor Seed Secondary School, the ministry planned to first complete Pawor Seed Secondary School. However, it is not clear why and how the local government decided that the funds were for Anyiribu Seed Secondary School. The ministry has a standard set of facilities that make a complete seed school. 

Unfortunately, due to the limitation of resources, this could not be achieved for the seed schools that started last financial year, among which is Pawor Seed School. My ministry shall have all these schools completed this financial year before embarking on new ones. Madam Speaker, I submit.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Isaac Etuka, do you have any supplementary? 

3.43
MR ISAAC ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi County, Arua): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable minister for the response to this question about the stalled project. However, when he said that the contractor abandoned the site due to other reasons, particularly of the school failing to account for some amount of money, Madam Speaker, it is not true. 

Secondly, now that the projects have been timed out, it is not very clear when the ministry is going to complete this project. 

Thirdly, this was a loan obtained from the World Bank. The minister is not clear about what now happens to the funds lost because there seems to be no value for money. Therefore, I request that the minister comes up with a clear statement on that. 

Then on the issue of Anyiribu Seed Secondary School; it was the same Ministry of Education and Sports that clearly communicated to Arua District Local Government that the funds be used for construction of Anyiribu Seed Secondary School. 

It was upon that communication that the local government went ahead to advertise and award contracts. Now that the contract for Anyiribu Seed Secondary School has been awarded and a part of this money has already been released to the district local government - Shs 233 million - as it is released on quarterly basis. What should the local government do? Now, the contract is awarded for Anyiribu Seed Secondary School and the minister here is saying that this money was meant to be for the second phase, when it was the same ministry that directed that the local government to advertise for that. 

I gave a copy of the advert and all the documents pertaining to this seed secondary school to the ministry. I think maybe the minister has not gone through that. I beg that the ministry revisits its decision of saying that the project be stalled like that.

This is the constituency where there are only three secondary schools and Okollo Secondary School is the only A-level secondary school in this constituency but the projects have totally failed. I beg that the ministry sends a team to the ground to see what exactly the school is going through. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, any rejoinder?

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, at the ministry, we plan and when money is sent to the district, that information is accompanied with a letter giving details of where this money is supposed to go.

This is exactly what we did. However, when they got down there, it is the local council that chose to baptise this money something we had not intended to do. When he says that we communicated, I have attached all the correspondences here. It was very clear where that money was supposed to go. It is because of the politics at the local district level that they chose to change our directives.

I would like to pray that they strictly follow our guidelines, the written instructions that come from the Ministry of Education and Sports.

About the funds that were not accounted for, Madam Speaker, I have already stated very clearly that when this happened, the matter was handed over to police to investigate. The IGG was also involved and we are yet to hear the outcome of the investigation. 

Otherwise, for us as a ministry, we have plans to complete all those structures that have not been completed yet. I submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let us ask our Committee on Education and Sports to follow up this matter and report to us when we are going for the Budget Framework Paper on the progress of this project.

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (NORTHERN UGANDA) (Ms Grace Kwiyucwiny): Madam Speaker, last week, hon. Achiro asked a question over high suicide incidences in Pader District and the need for attendant investigation and appropriate intervention. 

I investigated these facts and established that there are, indeed, cases of suicide in Pader District. The reported cases of suicide in Aruu North since January 2018 are as follows: Lapur Sub-county, seven cases; Lagur sub-county, four cases; Acanga Sub-county, two cases. In Aruu South Constituency, there are the following: Ogom Sub-county, one case; Uranga Sub-county, one case - giving a total of 15 registered cases. 

The immediate causes established are mainly domestic conflicts between children and parents and wife and husband, arising from various issues including early marriages, early pregnancies, land and related property conflicts. 

It was also established that much of the suicide is committed by use of drugs or pesticides in cotton because that area grows a lot of cotton. A quick scan in the Acholi sub-region showed no suicide cases in Gulu during the year but a higher prevalence in Omoro District, especially Koro Sub-county. Mainly husbands kill their wives and children and also end up killing themselves. 

It was further established that many suicide cases are not reported to police as the victims are quickly buried. 

It has also been confirmed that many of the Non al Organisations (NGOs), which had carried out psychosocial support and counselling programmes have since closed their programmes and it has now emerged that there is growing need for psychosocial support and counselling.

I have, therefore, taken the following steps: I am working with the regional security and district security officers to establish the scope of the matter and the final report will be given to me next week. 

I have also called an NGO meeting in northern Uganda to help reactivate psychosocial support and counselling programmes in northern Uganda starting with Pader and Omoro districts. 

I will meet the LC V Chairpersons next Tuesday in their regional meeting to discuss how we can further address this issue and in addition, request them to take it up and include psychosocial support and counselling in their plans and budgets.

I will interact with the cultural leaders and religious leaders and call for their intervention to counsel and inculcate cultural values in order to strengthen the family institution amidst the remnants of challenges from the long conflict in northern Uganda.

Finally, we have discussed in my office that it is an urgent need to address psychosocial support and counselling. For this financial year, we are going to try and adjust our budget in order to address this. Next financial year, we are going to put a fully-fledged budget item for this particular issue. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Achiro for raising this. We are satisfied. I would like to thank the Minister for northern Uganda. She has actually come with an action plan. Indeed, we need to thank her and support her, especially when she comes with a budget for this issue.

I do not know whether we could quickly do the motion of FUFA just for contribution and then we go to the Investment Code Bill.

May I invite hon. Hamsom Obua to present? Please, keep it short.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT CONGRATULATING THE UGANDA CRANES FOR QUALIFYING FOR AFRICA CUP OF NATIONS (AFCON), 2019

3.54
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, I rise under Rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament, congratulating the Uganda Cranes for qualifying for Africa Cup of Nations (AFCON) 2019. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? (Members rose.)It is seconded by the entire House. (Laughter)

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker: 

“WHEREAS the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda 1995, under the provision of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy XVII, mandates the State to promote recreation and sports for the citizens of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS Article 8A of the Constitution of Uganda provides for governance, based on principles of national interest and common good, enshrined in the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy;

AWARE THAT on Saturday 17 November 2018, in a football match played at Mandela National Stadium Namboole, the Uganda Cranes vanquished Cape Verde National Football team 1-0 and thereby qualified for the 32nd edition of Africa Cup of Nations finals 2019 in Cameroon, a biennial international football championship of Africa organised by the Confederation of African Football (CAF); 

FURTHER AWARE THAT this conquest places Uganda as Group L leader with 13 points, followed by Lesotho (5 points), Tanzania (5 points) and Cape Verde (4 points) with one game at hand for all the participating countries;

COGNISANT OF THE FACT THAT Uganda joins other qualified countries for this event such as Cameroon (the host), Madagascar, Senegal, Egypt, Tunisia, Nigeria, Mali and Morocco in the first African Cup of Nations expanded from 16 to 24  teams or countries; 

NOTING THAT this qualification presents a rejuvenated opportunity for the Uganda Cranes to be eligible for a monumental and megalithic tournament such as World Cup;

FURTHER NOTING THAT Government of Uganda needs to take centre stage in enabling the realisation of the dreams of the Uganda Cranes in particular and the sports sub-sector broadly through adequate funding, preservation of public playgrounds and entrenching of physical education in the school curriculum;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that;

    1) Parliament of Uganda pays glowing tribute to the Uganda Cranes for qualifying for the 2019 Africa Cup of Nations finals in Cameroon;

    2) Parliament of Uganda urges the Government, through Ministry of Education and Sports and the National Council of Sports, to prioritise development of regional sports facilities (stadia) in Uganda.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Where is the seconder? Is the seconder not here? Hon. Allan Ssewanyana, please, use three minutes. Take the Floor and let us have a lady. I do not see hon. Peter Ogwang. Let us have hon. Safia Nalule.

3.58
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to second the motion, congratulating the Uganda Cranes on its qualification to the Africa Cup of Nations.

I would also like to thank Parliament, under your stewardship last time, when Parliament contributed some huge sums of money to the Uganda Cranes when they qualified for the last Africa Cup of Nations. That money gave energy to the players and the federation at large. I was very happy last time, when you and some Members of Parliament attended almost all games in Gabon where the Cranes participated. The same heart should be taken to Cameroon in 2019.

Uganda Cranes qualified for the Africa Cup of Nations but Uganda has potential to produce very many sportsmen and women if the issue of sports arenas is re-emphasised here in Parliament. I would like to commend the ongoing investigations by the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) over the mismanagement of the construction of John Akii Bua Stadium. 

This has reenergised the sports fraternity and they now have positive thinking towards Parliament in your affection towards sports. There are so many other arenas that are being mismanaged which would, in many ways help in developing sports at large.  

I would like Parliament to re-emphasise accountability in FUFA. This is a very big problem. Our federation has a problem of accountability and if Parliament helps us with that, then football will develop at a high speed.

We have the Under-23, Under-21, Under-17 and the Women’s National teams. They also need to qualify for the Africa Games and the World Cup in their capacity. However, FUFA only concentrates on the Uganda Cranes because they think when they give you the Cranes and then they mismanage the others, you will always congratulate them. Please, Parliament, re-emphasise accountability.

Recently, a poorly facilitated Under-23 team went to South Sudan on Tuesday and lost 2-0. These boys were only given $200 as allowances. This is not good yet, it is this team that feeds the national team.

Parliament should also keep a close watch on the FUFA to stop the ongoing wrangles among its members. There was a recent wrangle between the federation and the Super Division clubs over sponsorship. Members of Parliament, we would like to qualify for AFCON or even the World Cup in future. However, if this wrangle is not resolved, more problems will arise.

I would like to thank the Government of Uganda for fulfilling its pledge of the $1 million that they gave to the players. (Applause) Because of the mistrust by the Government and the President, this money has this time been wired to the players’ various accounts. (Applause) These players confirmed this today morning.

There is mismanagement of funds in the FUFA and I heard the president of FUFA yesterday complaining over not meeting the Minister of Education and Sports. Please, do not meet the federation because these people are mismanaging football and only giving you Uganda Cranes as a brand to see but beyond it, it is a problem.

The Government should also provide loan facilities to form a microfinance association for all football clubs that play in the National League and the Second Division because it is these people who nurture and develop talent for the country to use at the national level. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

4.03
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, Persons With Disabilities): Madam Speaker, I stand to second the motion and to thank Government for supporting the Uganda Cranes. It has taken years - since the 1970’s - since the Uganda Cranes last qualified for AFCON.

THE SPEAKER: We were with them until last year. They were in Gabon.

MS NALULE: Thank you, for the information. I rose to support the Uganda Cranes because many Ugandans have gone for sports and won gold, silver and bronze medals except that we have not been able to recognise every one.

Last year, there was a disabled athlete who won a gold medal in the Paralympic games and this raised Uganda’s flag high. I would like to request the Ministry of Education and Sports to continue supporting sports because it does not only creates employment for Ugandans but raises our flag high. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a very good motion and I know that there is nobody objecting but we have other work to do. I would like to put the question that the question be now put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do pay tribute to the Uganda Cranes on their performance in qualifying for the AFCON. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I pledge that we shall be with you in Cameroon. Honourable Prime Minister, the point raised by hon. Nalule - there are many athletes and I am told that the President had promised that those who get gold would receive Shs 5 million per month, silver would receive Shs 2 million and somehow, it is not cascading down.

They keep coming to my office to demand for their salary. Please, remind the President and if the pledge was really made, then the athletes should be supported. Thank you very much.

RESPONSES BY MINISTERS

4.06
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, the question about Lusanja raised by hon. Latif Sebaggala is an important point. As all of you know, when this happened, His Excellency the President and a number of other political leaders went to comfort the people.

Government has made food and other basic requirements available but there is still a problem and the honourable First Deputy Prime Minister of Uganda, Gen. Moses Ali chaired a meeting to sort out this matter.

They have asked the Attorney-General of Uganda to give us a way forward and he said that he will be ready within a week. So, on Tuesday, we should be able on behalf of Government to get the legal opinion on how to sort out this matter and close that chapter, which is very embarrassing to the whole country. Thank you.

4.07
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have heard the response from the Prime Minister but I request him come with us to visit the people of Lusanja.

It has been raining and when you see these people’s suffering, you cannot believe that they are also Ugandans. I told them that the Speaker has handled the issue and has directed the Prime Minister to come and give a response today.

They have been represented up there but I request that as we wait for a fully-fledged programme, I would like the Prime Minister to answer these three questions:

You have talked about the beans and posho that are being given to them but the toilets were destroyed and there is a sanitation problem in Lusanja.

Secondly, six families are residing in one tent; the senior fours finished their exams. They went to school when their families had homes but they have come back to find tents while the students from other classes are soon returning too. How are we going to handle the situation? 

There are around 80 students who are expected to return home for holidays. How are we going to handle that situation?
	
Finally, yesterday, when I visited Lusanja, they told me that Kiconco who was behind their eviction is guarded by police and the army and he has bought many iron sheets ready to seal off the site.

Can the Prime Minister arrest our fears that Kiconco is not coming back tomorrow to do damage to the already affected people as we wait for Tuesday?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I think the most important thing is to address the food, water requirements, toilet facilities and tents.

The department of relief is doing what it can to respond to that challenge and as I have already said. The First Deputy Prime Minister has already tasked the Attorney-General of Uganda to give clear guidance on how to proceed and on Tuesday next week, a statement will be made.

I propose that we let the relief department in the Office of the Prime Minister handle the urgent needs as outlined by hon. Sebaggala as we wait for the Attorney-General to guide this House and the Government.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, Kiconco is threatening to evict them tomorrow. The police and army are already at that place and the iron sheets have been bought.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, I am told that the area is due to be cordoned off with iron sheets tomorrow.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, there is nobody who is above the law in this country. After the sitting of this session, we will liaise with the Ministry of Internal Affairs to handle this situation and I am confident that it will be properly handled according to the law.

4.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the 19 September, 2018 during plenary, hon. Lilly Adong the Woman Member of Parliament for Nwoya District sought for an explanation on the absence of an issuance point for computerised driving permits, in particular, for classes of commercial motor vehicles also referred to as CM on the driving permits and commercial heavy vehicles also referred to as CH on the driving permits.

The Ministry of Works and Transport woks in collaboration with Face Technologies Limited, a private company contracted by the ministry to design, print and supply computerised driving permits on behalf of Government. They currently operate seven permanent deriving permit processing centres in the country at the following locations;

One in Kampala, Kyambogo at the Head Office, Gulu, Mbarara, Jinja, Arua, Mbale and Fort Portal, with the exception of Jinja all the above permit processing stations are situated at regional centres.

The ministry could not establish permanent processing centres in each district due to the high operational costs associated with rent, workers, internet among others.

However, in order to address the challenge of having fewer permit processing centres in the country, the Ministry of Works and Transport acquired mobile driving permits processing work stations/ kit, which can be taken to any part of the country to process driving permits but subject to availability of internet services. 

The mobile work stations can be accessed from the ministry upon request by interested driving permit applicants who are required to first organise themselves in a sizable group of at least 30 persons. Upon making all the required preparations, the ministry in collaboration with Face Technologies will then make arrangements to deliver the mobile kits at the agreed group’s location where interested members of the public can go and process their driving permits subject to fulfilment of statutory requirements, which include completion of training from a licensed driving school, passing a driving test and payment of applicable driving permit fees. 

The driving permit fee structure is available and it can be accessed from the ministry and it was also sent to your iPads.

Clarification on acquisition of driving permit classes TH and CM. 

Prior to a driver acquiring driving permit classes CM and CH, they are required to fulfil the following statutory requirements;

    1. Undergo training in a driving school licensed by the ministry to train drivers for such classes of motor vehicles.

    2. Undergo driving tests after training in a driving school to ascertain their competence to drive such vehicles.  Unfortunately, there are no licensed driver training facilities in Nwoya District where applicants of such classes of driving permits can go for their training sessions.

Besides, a driving test for all permit class extensions including class CM and CH are conducted only in Kampala by the Uganda police at the inspectorate of motor vehicle driving testing facilities in Naguru. This is intended to ensure quality of driving tests and hence competence of the drivers before they are issued with driving permits.

Recommendations and advice

Madam Speaker, in view of the above submission, I wish to guide that prospective drivers in their respective constituencies who wish to acquire driving permits to follow the steps below;

    1. First undergo training to drive motor vehicles of such classes from a licensed driving school. A list of driving schools licensed by the ministry to train drivers of class CH and CH is available for circulation to honourable members.

    2. For beginners, classes of driving permits such as class D, those are saloon cars, class S, those are agricultural tractors and class C, those are motor cycles. Applicants of such driving permits can contact their local leaders to liaise with the ministry to arrange for the delivery of the mobile driving permit processing kit in their respective areas subject to the number of applicants in those areas.

    3. For permit class extensions, which include classes CH and CM, all applicants for such classes are required to undergo driving tests in Kampala at the Uganda Police Inspectorate of motor vehicles drivers testing centre in Naguru. The requirements for examining all the learner drivers for class extension in Kampala is intended to enhance the quality of the driving tests and hence the competence of drivers. More information on this arrangement can be obtained from the Ministry Works and Transport or from the Uganda Police Force which is currently conducting the driving tests on behalf of the Ministry of Works and Transport. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Adong is not here so there will be no supplementary question. Honourable members, that is interesting information to take back to your constituents. Please, pick it up and assist our young people to train for the jobs.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INVESTMENT CODE BILL, 2017

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, yesterday, we had done some work and we were at committee stage, so let us complete this Bill.

Clause 15

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 15 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we would propose to amend in sub clause 1 by deleting the word “seven” appearing in the third line of the clause and substituting it with the word “five”.

The justification is that seven days is a long time to process a license given that being business, competitive index recommends licenses to be issued within a shorter period. I beg to move.

MR OBUA: Let me thank the committee. But I want to amend and my justifications are two on the number of days –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is no more spontaneous amendment. If you want to amend, you circulate the amendment to us first in writing. I put the question that clause 17 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

MR MUYANJA MBABAALI: Madam Chairperson, yesterday, this Bill came up but I had just stepped out. I wonder whether I could make any more amendments much as we are at clause 17 and we go back a few clauses.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I am sorry. Our practice now, if you want to amend any law, any Bill here, you circulate it, inform the Clerk, the Clerk distributes it to the members and gives it to the chairperson and the committee. We shall not allow spontaneous amendments any longer. And if you are away doing something, that is too bad.

Clause 18

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 18 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 19 as follows; in sub clause 2, by deleting the entire provision.

The justification is the provision is redundant in view of sub clause one, which provides that property belonging to an investor shall not be compulsorily taken possession of except in accordance with the Constitution.

In sub clause 3(e) by renumbering and deleting the words under sub section 2 and substituting them with the words “upon compulsory acquisition” under sub section one. 

The justification is that this is a consequential amendment following the deletion of sub clause (2).

In sub clause (4) by renumbering and deleting the words “and three”

The justification is that it is consequential amendment. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 19 be amended as proposed. Do you have an issue with clause 19?

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The chairman proposed that sub clause (2) is deleted but if you read sub clause 2 (a) in the original Bill, it says, “Where there is a registered business enterprise of an investor or an interest, prompt payment or fair and adequate compensation shall be done prior to the taking of the possessions of the property.”

I feel this clause is very important just to safeguard clause 1 in case of compulsory acquisition, as they are saying. If it is deleted, then –(Interruption)

MR MUGOYA: Madam Chairperson, the information I would like to give my colleague is that under Article 26 - the spirit of Article 26 is primarily captured by the wording in the Bill. Currently, we do not have a law to enforce the spirit of Article 26, which provides for adequate compensation prior to acquisition by Government. Therefore, I would like to support my colleague’s proposal.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson and I would like to appreciate my colleague. I, therefore, propose that we leave that provision. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you badly want this out of the law?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, sub clause 1 prohibits compulsory acquisition. Sub clause (2) is providing for a window that in case compulsory acquisition occurs - that is why we are proposing deletion because clause 1 does not provide for compulsory acquisition. If I may read -

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is provided for except in accordance with the Constitution. There are conditions under which it is provided; that is what the Constitution says.

MR MUSASIZI: “(1) A registered business enterprise of an investor or an interest or right over any property or an undertaking forming part of the enterprise shall not be compulsorily taken possession of or acquired except in accordance with the Constitution.”

And (2) says, “Where a registered business enterprise of an investor or an interest or right over property forming part of that enterprise is compulsorily taken possession of or acquired, the following provisions shall apply -”. Our view is that when you have won, then (2) will not apply.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are not dealing - not everybody has a copy of this Constitution. People will not be walking around with this Act in their pockets to do their investments. This is a quick reference point; does it harm us in any way to state the rights of the investors?

MR MUSASIZI: In this case, Madam Chairperson, I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. I put the question that clause 19 do stand part of the Bill?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 21 by –

    1) renumbering the current clause as 21(1)
    2)  inserting a new sub clause (2) to read as follows; 

“The funds collected under sub clause (1) shall be managed in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.” 

The justification is to conform to the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 that provides that the revenue collected or received by a vote, state enterprise or a public corporation shall be paid into and shall form part of the Consolidated Fund or be received into a public fund established for a specific purpose where this is authorised by an Act of Parliament. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I hope you are not leaving (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f) to stay because our practice has been that whatever monies they get must be appropriated by Parliament.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, clause 21 is about funds and expenses of the Authority. The expenses have got to be appropriated by Parliament. However, where the Authority makes money, we have to define and provide for which monies the Authority makes and what happens when it makes it. That is why we are providing that if the Authority makes money, then it must be managed in accordance with the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act.

Therefore, provisions concerning how other funds can be received in the Authority, for instance the fees, the grants or gifts have got to be provided for. However, how it is managed when it comes is when we bring in an amendment that it should be taken to the Consolidated Fund as per the requirement of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I would like the chairperson to clarify on point (f) which says, “…money borrowed by the Authority with approval of the minister.” That one is not clear because it does not fit within the explanation that you have given.

Aware that the minister has no authority to approve money that should be borrowed by the Authority and that it is only Parliament which has those powers; what do you say about (f)?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, can you also address sub section (c) because you want the minister to be the one to approve loans and not Parliament.
 
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, paragraph (c) talks about loans, grants, gifts or donations to the Authority with the approval of the minister. Paragraph (f) talks about money borrowed by the Authority with the approval of the minister.  

If we read this together with clause 27 on borrowing, it reads, “Subject to Article 159, of the Constitution and the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, the Board may, with the approval of Parliament, borrow money as may be required for meeting its obligations or for discharge of the functions of the Authority under this Act.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, what you are doing now is giving part of the power to Parliament and part of the power to the minister. You cannot do that.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, section 21 defines which monies the Authority has. It is not giving any powers but it is defining the sources of revenue and expenditures. It is not defining any -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, it means that if the Authority wants a loan; they do not have to come to Parliament. This is what the Bill is saying. It means the minister can sit in his office and authorise the Authority to borrow money without coming to this House. That (c) and (f) say -

MR ANGURA: Madam Chairperson, let me suggest an amendment-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not know what you want to amend. In the past, all these have been outlawed and we said all should proceed under the Public Finance Management Act. You now want to leave them here - interest on earning, money borrowed, how will they borrow without our approval?

MR ANGURA: Madam Chairperson, I suggest that we replace the word “approval” with “recommendation” such that the minister will recommend and then Parliament will approve.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Who has the authority to authorise loans? Is it Parliament or the minister? This is not right. We cannot allow the minister to sit there and approve loans without coming to Parliament.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I do not want us to lose clause 21 in its entirety. Since clause 27 provides for terms of borrowing, we could delete (c) and (f) and retain the rest because we have to categorise the sources and expenditure - we have to define the funds in this law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister of Finance, you are in charge of the Public Finance Management Act and you know what we have been doing but you are also seated there happily and we are here arguing with the chairperson. This is your Bill.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, to avoid the details, we could say that funds of the Authority shall be managed in accordance with the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 because it has got all these provisions.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, (c) says, “Loans, grants, gifts or donations to the Authority with the approval of the Minister -” and (f). I am of the view that in the spirit in which the chairperson wants to ask Parliament to clear this, we would substitute the word “minister” with “Parliament”. Honourable chairperson, with (c) and (f), would you be comfortable replacing the word “minister” with “Parliament”? 

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, money borrowed is the same as money loaned but in (c) it is true that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development approves grants and donations. Any institution, which gets a grant according to the Public Finance Management Act, seeks the authority of the minister. 

Therefore, if we removed the word “loans” in (c) and then replace the word “minister” with “Parliament” in (f), I think that should have no harm so that we say, “money borrowed by the Authority with the approval of Parliament.”

Then in (c), delete “loans” because it has already been covered in (f) because money borrowed is actually loans. Therefore, if you delete “loans”, it is okay; the minister approves grants and donations according to the Public Finance Management Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, are you allowing spending at source under 21 (b)?

MR BAHATI: Clause 21 (b) is already covered by (a) because money appropriated by Parliament includes all the resources they receive and how it is appropriated.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. It says monies accruing to the Authority, including fees or charges received by the Authority. Therefore, should they receive the fees and use it?

MR BAHATI: No.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chairperson, can you read out what you want us to pass as an amendment?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, our amendment on clause 21 is that insert a new sub clause 2 to read,  “the funds collected under sub section 1 shall be managed in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: On page 15, you wrote – “…clause 21 be amended by renumbering clause 21 (1).” That is what you wrote here. All these are there and you are adding a new sub clause.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I am taking time to –(Interruption) 

MR OLANYA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to seek clarification. He proposes, in (c) that the word “loan” should be removed and we start from grants, gifts or donations to the Authority with the approval of - are you retaining the minister or Parliament? Are you saying “minister” should be replaced by “Parliament”?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, let me illustrate; we have an institution called an Authority and the Authority has funds. Which funds does this Authority have? It could have money which has been appropriated by Parliament; it may collect fees and fines. It may get a grant or a donation and it may earn interest or it may borrow or dispose of an asset and realise gains.

Therefore, we are saying that it is important to categorise the funds which can come to the Authority and that is why we are in support of paragraphs (a) (b) (c) and (d) among others.

However, there are issues which have risen. Should the minister have powers to authorise borrowing - to authorise and approve loans by the Authority? The answer is “No” because the power to approve loans is by Parliament. Therefore, we can propose something. 

Basically, (c) and (f) are related - power to authorise loans should be left with Parliament but if this Authority acquires a loan, the loan forms part of the money of the Authority. The process through which this loan should be acquired should be in accordance with the existing laws and the Constitution.

Madam Chairperson, this is the issue we find ourselves in; if, for instance this Authority earns fees or interest, should it spend at source? The answer is “No” because the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 provides that all monies collected by Government entities and votes must be deposited in the Consolidated Fund and the process of expenditure must be through appropriation by Parliament.

That is why we are proposing to insert a new sub clause that provides that once these monies are available to the Authority, then the Authority should not spend it without due process by Parliament. That is the only issue we have. Once we understand this and appreciate it, we can be able to move, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chairperson, would you then like to change the headnote? Would you like to say, “Funds of the Authority” instead of “Funds and expenses of the Authority”? This is the headnote. Would you like to delete the word “expenses”?

MR MUSASIZI: Much obliged, Madam Chairperson.

MR NZOGHU: I would like to ask the chairperson to clearly state the sub clauses one by one so that we agree on each of them. 

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. For purposes of clarity and achieving harmony with my brother from Kasese, starting with the headnote, I would like to propose an amendment that we delete the words, “and expenses.”

Henceforth, the new headnote will read, “Funds of the Authority.” 
Then, “The funds of the Authority shall consist of the following: 

    (a) Monies appropriated by Parliament for purposes of the Authority; 
    (b) Monies accruing to the Authority including fees or charges received by the Authority in the carrying out of its functions;
    (c) Grants, gifts or donations to the Authority with the approval of the minister;
    (d) Any revenue derived from the sale of property, movable or immovable, by or on behalf of the Authority;
    (e) Interest on earnings;
    (f) Money borrowed by the Authority with approval of Parliament;
    (g) Any other money or assets received by or made available to the Authority for purposes of performing its functions under this Act.”

Madam Chairperson, we also propose to insert a new sub clause (2) to read as follows; “(2) the funds collected under sub section (1) shall be managed in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act.” (Mr James Kakooza rose_)

THE CHAIRPERSON: No spontaneous amendments. 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: I am seeking clarification. What does the minister approve? I think we should leave out, “…with the approval of the minister” because it is redundant. We are explaining the funds of the Authority and what it consists of. We do not need to put “approval of the minister.” What is it for? 

You are listing the sources of money for the Authority but the approval of the minister gives it another meaning. It is even irrelevant; so, it should be left out because you are listing the funds consisted in the Authority. What is there for the minister to approve? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, supposing Uganda has no relationship with Taiwan and the Authority makes contact with Taiwan and they are giving them a donation. Don’t you think the minister should come in to tell them whether to accept the money or not? 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: They are just simply listing.

MR BAHATI: I am sorry that we did not come with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 but the law in section 44 requires us – ‘Attorney-General’, do you want to give information? 

Section 44 of the Public Finance Management Act reads, “Authority to receive grants; the minister shall receive the monetary grants made to Government or to a board by a foreign Government, international organisation or any other person. Monetary grants received under section (1) shall be paid into the Consolidated Fund and once deposited, shall form part of the Consolidated Fund.”

Therefore, it is the minister that must receive it. What has been happening is that if a department or a ministry other than the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development wants to get a grant, it has to seek authority from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to receive it on behalf of Government. 

MR ANYWARACH: Let me proceed like the minister. If we are talking about grants, they can be managed, as stated under the Public Finance Management Act but this sub section (c) is to the effect of even loans.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have removed the loans. 

MR ANYWARACH: How about the gifts and donations? Would they fall under the same definition of grants as under the Public Finance Management Act? If gifts and donations fall under grants, then actually it is in good spirit that this must be with the approval of the minister. However, if we want it to read exactly as it is in the Public Finance Management Act, then we should just leave grants only without the gifts and donations. 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: For good flow or for somebody who reads, clause 21 states, “the funds of the Authority shall consist of grants, gifts, donations to the Authority -” and you leave it at that. However, when you put, “with the approval of the minister”, it carries a different meaning. 

I agree with the chairperson that all funds of the Authority must be run according to the Public Finance Management Act, as the Constitution warrants. That is the correct way but when you put, “approval of the minister”, it gives it another meaning. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to persuade hon. James Kakooza to look at this provision from this angle; what if this Authority went to China or America and got funds without the Authority of the minister, would this constitute part of the funds of Government? 

It is important that at every stage, we have a control mechanism. Internal controls are there in institutions to provide cheques and balances. Therefore, I would like to persuade hon. James Kakooza to concede on this proposal and we maintain the minister’s approval. 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, the practise of Government is that even if the minister receives that kind of money, he must declare it –(Interjections)- you do not need to approve it. If a donation comes to Government, it should be declared. You do not need the minister to approve it, as it suggests here. 

In the headnote that the chairperson has proposed to amend, we are listing the funds of the Authority – but when you include approval of the minister, it means something else. If you amend it, you would be substituting for clause 2 - you say all the funds which are acquired by the Authority must be run according to the Constitution and the Public Finance Management Act. It gives it proper meaning and flow when one reads clause 21.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us look at this globally. I do not know which Act we have that lists prohibited organisations from which we should not get money. I do not know whether you know it? 

There are institutions from which we are not allowed to get money. Suppose this Authority gets money from that one and says, we have now got our money. Shouldn’t it be the business of the minister to say, I do not accept this money? Yes.

Honourable members, regarding this donation, we had a battle here in the First Session in relation to books donated to us through the Ministry of Education and Sports, which were training children about homosexuality and they were in this country. It was until the public complained that the Government woke up. However, they were here as donations and I think the minister celebrated. Books were donated to Uganda. Honourable members, we are leaving that one –

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I still insist on this is because politicians should not be involved in collecting money from other sources. Technocrats are the accounting officers. You are a representative of Government and the moment you are part of that, it risks being abused. 

If this money comes to Government, it must be put into Government’s basket. The means of getting that money is known by Parliament, by the Constitution and the Public Finance Management Act.

MR MPUUGA: Madam Chairperson, hitherto I had bought into hon. James Kakooza’s reasoning until I read the provisions in section 44(3)(a) and (b) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. In fact, it clearly impeaches his reasoning because under this provision, the minister has powers to even direct that the money goes directly to the project. 

Section 44(3)(a) and (b) reads,

(a) “The minister may grant an exception in writing from the requirements of sub section (1) and (2) where it is in public interest to do so.
(b) The person responsible for the administration of the monetary grant informs the minister of the purpose of the grant and remittance, deposits and domestic disbursement of remitted grants before the grant is remitted”. 

In other words, hon. James Kakooza argument would simply cause a conflict of laws. This really clears the matters.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have made a number of amendments. I put the question that clause 21 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23

MR LUBOGO: I would like to propose an amendment on clause 23 –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is the copy? Show me a copy of that amendment.   

MR LUBOGO: Madam Chairperson, you have to guide us properly because we are going to lose out on this when we are trying to –

 THE CHAIRPERSON: No, I am sorry. This Bill has been with you for several months. If you wanted to amend it, you should have filed the amendment with the Clerk and it would be distributed to us. I do not have your amendment; we no longer allow spontaneous amendments.

I put the question that clause 23 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.


Clause 26

MR ANYWARACH: Clause 26(2) says all money received on account. It should be “all monies” received on account of the Authority shall be deposited in a bank. I beg to move that we amend it by replacing “money” with “monies”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The technical officers will attend to that. I put the question that clause 26 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31

MS NAUWAT: Madam Chairperson, this is an annual report and according to what has been written here, we seem to be looking only at a particular problem. I imagine that in activities, there are at least some achievements that should be captured upon which the Authority can build on.

I would like to propose that we include achievement somewhere and insert it as follows. On the third line, it reads; “indicating any particular achievements or problems-” I do not know whether the word “problem” is there and if it is good enough or we would talk of challenges?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Under the Company’s Act, what are the contents of an annual report? What are the elements that must be in an annual report? Attorney-General, what should be contained in an annual report?

MR MUGOYA: I do not know whether I should now refer to myself as the Attorney-General or not. Of course, when filing returns, we must indicate the status of management by indicating the names of the directors, the company secretary and you must also indicate the financial status of the company or the legal entity for which you are filing the annual returns.

In this report, you must also briefly indicate the challenges. These challenges may be the problems as clearly indicated here. In the unlikely event, you can also indicate the achievements but ordinarily, those are the crucial areas that we must file with the Registrar of Companies under the current Form 20 of the Company Act. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to draw your attention to the second paragraph; a statement of these activities in the proceeding financial year. Can’t that include your achievements?

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 31 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is a small issue; clause 35 gives authority to the minister to alter the currency points but I do not think the minister can alter that because they are set by an Act of Parliament. I think there is a problem here. We can amend other schedules but not schedule 1 since it is about currency points and it should be another Act of Parliament not by certain persons. There is a small error there. 

We can stay schedules 2 and 3 or maybe delete it. 

Clause 35

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose that clause 35 be deleted.

The justification is that schedule 1 is on currency points and the minister has no powers to amend the currency points.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 35 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, deleted.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Schedule 1, agreed to.

Schedule 2, agreed to.

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to insert a new Schedule 3 as follows; “Schedule 3: Priority areas;
    1. Agro-processing
    2. Food processing
    3. Medical appliances
    4. Building materials
    5. Light industry
    6. Auto mobile manufacturing and assembly
    7. Household appliances
    8. Furniture
    9. Logistics and warehousing
    10. Information and technology
    11. Commercial farming
    12. Tourism. 

I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I am not sure of this; you are reading a list of priority areas but I also have another list of priority areas.

MS ANITE: Madam Chairperson, I would like to add as follows on the list of priority areas proposed by the chairperson of the committee. He stopped at 12 but I would like to add; 

    13. Steel Industry 
    14. Chemical industries
    15. Textile and lead industry 
    16. Oil mining industry 
    17. Paper production
    18. Mining industry 
    19. Glass and plastic products industry
    20. Ceramic industry
    21. Construction and building industry
    22. Real estate development industry
    23. Packaging industry
    24. Transport industry
    25. Light and energy conservation industry
    26. Pharmaceutical industry and finally 
    27. Telecommunication industry. 

The justification is that as Government, we look at these as our core priority areas and we would like to attract both domestic and foreign investors to come and partner with Government in developing these priority areas.  I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, I would like to know, in the old list the light industry is listed as No. 5 but you are adding light and conservation industry. Is it the same or is it different?

MS ANITE: It is actually the same but I would like to propose an amendment that it should read, “Light and energy industry”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, should we leave out “Conservation”? 

MS ANITE: Yes.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I am at crossroads on the light industry being a priority area. I would like an explanation from the chairperson as to why this is so.

In my view, considering the desire of Government to actually advance and manage the sector of the industry in a manner that does not tamper with or damage the environment, I do not know how the plastic industry and the light industry also become priority areas. In my view, even the local people can actually handle with their minimal resources. How do they become priority areas?

MS ANITE: Madam Chairperson, first of all, the reason we want the light industry is to encourage the domestic or local investors to be able to get these incentives that we have put in the law.

Secondly, by light industry, we are talking about the LED light and we only have one company here manufacturing that at the moment. That is insufficient to satisfy the demands of the market and therefore, we want to encourage more investors to go into that manufacturing. 

In view of the second question that he asked about plastics –(Interruption)

MR OTIENO: Madam Chairperson, the language in here - when we talk of “light industry” we are talking about heavy industries and light industries. However, the minister is confusing light industries with some factories or processing units of lighting materials. This is not the language for this kind of sector. If you are talking about a light industry, then you are talking about industries that require less investment; that is what the language is in terms of investment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your proposal?

MR OTIENO: It should be “lighting industry” not light industry.

MS ANITE: I thank the Member for the clarification but the meaning is the same - (Interjections)- so I accept that it should be lighting industry. This is not in the context of light duty work but it is lighting industry.

The other is to do with the plastics products. It is true that Parliament took a decision to ban plastic materials but not with all the microns. The ones we are promoting are those with higher microns and we are very clear about that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: May I ask my honourable friend from Busongora; in Busongora, do children buy jerricans when going to school? Do they use jerricans and basins or tumpecos? 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, they use them but my point of contention was that given the pronouncements by the President about plastics, does this also fall under priority areas? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What about the jerricans? Are we going to stop using the jerricans and go back to debes? (Laughter)

MR NZOGHU: The challenge, Madam Chairperson, is that this has not been specified because it is just talking about plastics. It is an open thing.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the minister has authority to make regulations; so, if there are areas to further regulate, it will be done according to the law we have passed.

Honourable members, I put the question that the Third Schedule be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Third Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT AND PRIVATISATION) (Ms Evelyn Anite): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT AND PRIVATISATION) (Ms Evelyn Anite): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Investment Code Bill, 2017” and passed it with amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT AND PRIVATISATION) (Ms Evelyn Anite): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE INVESTMENT CODE BILL, 2017

5.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT AND PRIVATISATION) (Ms Evelyn Anite): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Investment Code Bill, 2017” be read a third time and do pass. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that “The Investment Code Bill, 2017” be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE INVESTMENT CODE ACT, 2017”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes. (Applause) Should we go upstairs? (Laughter)

5.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT AND PRIVATISATION) (Ms Evelyn Anite):
Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to, first of all, thank you because you have been one of the champions – if not second after His Excellency the President – in championing the cause of promoting investment in Uganda for both local and foreign investors.

Madam Speaker, I would like to commend you because when you went to open the six factories in Namanve, Luuka Plastics which is one of the biggest factories employing over 2000 Ugandans, was actually brought and promoted by you and it was by your efforts that 10 acres of land were given to that investor. We thank you very much.

Furthermore, I would also like to thank you because time and again, you have been promoting particularly local investors. This Bill that we have passed today is an eye opener to our domestic investors that as opposed to investing their money in downtown which is small scale trade and also construction and real estate, they should invest the money in manufacturing, which is the way to industrialise our country and create jobs.

That said, allow me to also thank my colleagues for your enthusiasm towards supporting this Bill. We have done a noble cause for our country. I believe that with the incentives that we have given and offered to our domestic and foreign investors, we will be able to improve and ease the way of doing business in Uganda because our ranking has been bad, according to the World Bank report. This is mainly because our laws were not favourable to the investors.

Now that we have a favourable law, I would like to thank my colleagues for this legislation because our investment climate is going to greatly improve by this legislation. I thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I would like to thank the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I know they have so much work, especially on money-related Bills but they have still been able to handle these sector issues. We thank you very much, hon. Musasizi and your team.  

I would like to thank the Members for giving support during the sittings.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

5.21
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister is ready for question time. I wonder whether it is in order to start Question Time after 5 O’clock. However, since you have authorised, I am at your disposal.

MR MAJEGERE: Procedure, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: What rule are you addressing? (Laughter)

MR MAJEGERE: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has come and he is on the Order Paper. Can he -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have already called for Prime Minister’s Question Time. Last week, I indicated that the Members who asked questions last time will not ask today so that we allow other Members to speak. If you asked last time, just stay peacefully. We shall use 45 minutes. I am putting an embargo on those who were here last week.

Let me start from this side with hon. Johnson Muyanja. No preambles; simply go straight to the point.

5.22
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last time I asked about the National Forestry Authority opening up boundaries. Hon. Prime Minister, our people in almost seven villages of Mpata and Nakisunga are said to be living in forests and this is not true. 

We requested for the boundaries to be opened up and the Government Chief Whip, who was here then, promised to follow it up but up to today, nothing has taken place. What is the situation now?

THE SPEAKER: As the Prime Minister comes, hon. Tumuramye, you asked a question last time. Please sit. You are on last week’s list.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the question by hon. Muyanja is very valid, not only in Mukono but there have been other areas actually where the National Forestry Authority and the Wanainchi have had clashes. We are mobilising the necessary resources, especially in the budget we are now working on, to give the required funds to the National Forestry Authority to ensure that boundaries are opened and the clashes between the people and the National Forestry Authority come to an end.

5.24
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Parliament of Uganda has been appropriating a lot of funds to the Land Fund under the Ministry of Lands.

Will Government explain to Parliament how one can access that fund and who has so far benefitted from it? I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, a substantial amount of money has been spent over the last 10 to 15 years through the Uganda Land Commission to buy land mainly from absentee landlords; so that the locals who are already settled in those areas can be secure.

It is true that the formalities of the Land Fund are being finalised and we expect the ministry responsible for lands to come to this House and give us a specific progress report on the formalisation of the Land Fund. Otherwise many people have benefitted and it has secured many tenants who were being threatened with eviction by landlords. 

5.26
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A disaster happened in Buvuma where one person died and property was destroyed. When I went to the ministry, I was told that the Prime Minister ordered that all the money for disaster preparedness should be directed to Bududa as priority and yet when we appropriate money here, we consider the whole country. May I know whether that was what the Prime Minister directed?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is not correct that the Prime Minister gave a directive, as my sister has quoted but it is also true that when there was a problem in Bududa, Cabinet passed Shs 30 or so billion to ensure that we resettle people in Bududa.

The case of Buvuma has been brought to our attention and appropriate action is going to be taken. The normal funds for emergencies of this nature like Buvuma are available and Buvuma will benefit from that.

5.27
MR GEORGE KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there is an outbreak of Hepatitis B in Bbale Constituency in Kayunga District.

Hon. Lugoloobi raised it on the Floor and I wrote a letter to the minister on this concern and to date, people are dying of Hepatitis B. It is causing conflict in families because there is discrimination. What plans do you have to vaccinate the people in Bbale and Kayunga District and hopefully treat them.

Secondly -
  
THE SPEAKER: Strictly one question, you must choose a priority.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the question of Hepatitis B is very well known in this House and has been discussed many times. It is true that it is spreading from the traditional areas where it was concentrating. Government is mobilising more money for vaccines and treatment.

5.29
MR EDWARD SSEMBATYA (NRM, Katikamu County South, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In Bbowa Polytechnic Institute in Katikamu South Constituency, the girls’ dormitory caught fire in August 2016. Early this year, I reminded Government as a matter of national importance and they promised to take immediate action. However, up to now nothing has yet been done. May I know from the Prime Minister when action will be taken? My people think I am not working. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, may I use this forum to assure the people of Katikamu that their honourable Member is actively working and that the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Office of the Prime Minister are going to liaise to ensure that action is taken to support the people of Katikamu and the school.

5.31
MS ROSE AYAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is in relation to a Government project which was implemented. There was road construction which was done between 2012 and 2016 and it covered the extension from Vurra-Arua to Oraba. 

Since completion, some of the people whose land was encroached on have not been compensated to date. Why were some of them not paid and what are the plans by UNRA to make sure that the compensation process is completed in time? Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

DR RUGUNDA: The problem of compensation in Vurra is known. There has been a problem about both verification and some of the genuine landlords were not available at the material time. 

However, Government and UNRA are doing further verification to make sure that those who are verified are paid as quickly as possible.

5.32
DR NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, most urban centres in Uganda are in a sorry state, with the exception of a few. There is litter, environmental hazardous material, animals. The image of our country is in peril as I speak.

Is the Prime Minister aware that this is happening and if so, what plans does Government have to rectify this situation that has potential to put off tourists and keep us embarrassed to a degree we do not deserve?

DR RUGUNDA: I am certainly not aware of the situation that has been described by my good friend, Dr Nsaba Buturo. What I am aware of is that there has been remarkable improvement in many urban centres in Uganda, including Kisoro Municipality which is in the vicinity of the constituency of hon. Nsaba Buturo.

Government is mobilising more money to ensure that the second phase of USMID comes and in an expanded manner in terms of more towns and municipalities so that they can be improved and the road infrastructure be put in place. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Nsaba Buturo should lead in telling the people of Uganda - the visitors and others concerned - that urban authorities in Uganda are rapidly improving clearly for the better.

5.34
MR EMMANUEL SSENGO (NRM, Gomba County East, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what steps is Government taking to curb the rampant consumption of marijuana in this country? On Monday, I attended a burial near Mpigi; a young man, after a small argument, took out a knife and stabbed his friend and the intestines came out. The stabbed man is being treated. This is one of so many incidents where people are stabbing others and the argument is that they are marijuana consumers. 

When you move around Kampala, you will smell marijuana in many of these places but it seems Government is taking it lightly when actually this is a time bomb. I wonder what the Prime Minister has to tell this country regarding this very serious social problem.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, marijuana and other drugs are becoming a real problem in our society although I must quickly point out that in some countries, marijuana is being developed as a drug.

However, the main problem that hon. Ssengo is talking about is drugs especially among our young people. All of us need to sensitise the young people to know that drugs are dangerous to them and to the country and that they should desist from these drugs.

Finally, Uganda used to be a transit place for drugs from East to the West and the like. However, today unfortunately, Uganda has become a consuming state and the victims are the young people that hon. Ssengo is talking about. Therefore, we are at war with the drugs; let us pray our role to sensitise and to expose the drug lords so that this menace can be firmly dealt with and defeated.

5.37
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, last month in October, a hailstorm destroyed food crops and removed roofs of houses and latrines in schools and people’s homes. In Abuku Sub County in Koboko District in three parishes – Gborokolongo, Nyori-cheku and Unyokunga. 

These people are not harvesting any food and hon. Asiku raised the issue here and you promised to send somebody to assess and support those vulnerable people who have nothing. May I know when are you supporting them? I was there and they asked me where their support is. If you are helping other people, what about them? May I know when you will support my people in Abuku? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, when there is a problem of this nature like my sister Baba Diri has raised, we send a team to do inspection and see what measures should be taken. I will crosscheck with the department responsible to see what follow up action has taken place.

5.39
MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Omoro): Rt. Hon Prime Minister, in 2014, the Government of Uganda engaged itself in initiating a broader framework – the National Transitional Justice Policy. Almost five years down the road, looking at the effect of the armed conflict in certain parts of the country that are still trying to drag our people back, may I know when the draft National Transitional Justice Policy will be passed and put to use to address some of the negative effects such as the one we have registered in the House today on suicide cases in Northern Uganda?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the National Transitional Justice Policy was discussed and passed by Cabinet about a month ago and I expect that the minister responsible will bring it to Parliament soon. It has made great progress and we believe it is appropriate for our country and in fact, it has been in practice used by our society. Therefore, it is formaliSing what has been taking place in our communities.

5.40
MR HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, may I know the plan we have as Government to bring about balance and equitable development in terms of sub regional accessibility by tarmac? 

Arising from the fact that the New Vision of Monday, November 19 2018 quotes a report presented to the Rt Hon. Speaker by the Equal Opportunities Commission and it places Lango Sub Region as the least in the whole country in terms of accessibility by tarmac at 13 per cent, followed by Karamoja at 17 per cent and Acholi sub region at 33 per cent. Those doing better includes Tooro at 88 per cent, Ankole at 70 per cent and Buganda at 64 per cent. 

What plan do you have to bring about this region that superintended over the independence of this country but whose tarmac accessibility is at 13 per cent and the least in the whole country? Thank you   

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is a very important question by my brother, hon. Obua. I saw my elder sister, Cecilia, hitting the chair very hard. Fortunately, Dokolo is not one of the areas that are not covered. Nevertheless, there is a clear programme to ensure that the areas that are not properly served by improved and paved infrastructure are covered as quickly as possible. Lango, without any doubt, is one of those areas that are going to massively benefit from this.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, just a follow up; are you going to bring a contingency development plan for those areas? You should tell us because we want to see a real plan for those areas, which have been neglected and this is a report of the Equal Opportunities Commission.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, we will have to first of all thoroughly look at the report, study it closely –(Interjection)- Yes, we do not want to just come to this august House and give half-baked information. We will then come and give this august House a very well-considered response and programme of action by Government, following that report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on that note, I direct the Equal Opportunities Commission to bring a report before we go for Christmas. We should discuss it so that the Government is aware and plans for the next budget.

5.44
MS VIOLET ADOME (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, sometime back Government brought up a programme for the youth codenamed the Youth Livelihood Programme, whose purpose and objective was to create jobs and employment for the youth. However, this programme has not met its objective.

In Katakwi District that I represent, there are so many youths without jobs and as such, they have resorted to betting, gambling and taking marijuana. I wonder what comprehensive programme Government has to address the problem of unemployment among the youth? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, you can literally summarise the economic programme of Government as a programme to empower and employ the youth. When the President and all of us are calling for investment and investors; when we say, let us have power and industrialise, let us have infrastructure and quickly develop all  sectors, let us promote tourism; all we are talking about, in a nutshell, is creation of jobs.

Therefore, the Government programme is going to create jobs for these young people. We have been carrying out the Youth Livelihood Programme to help the youth but ultimately, the answer is development of the economy, creation of more jobs through industrialisation and other Government programmes.

5.46
MR PAUL AMORU (NRM, Dokolo County North, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, in 1997, Government introduced the Universal Primary Education with a major promise to first deal with the issue of access and then later on systematically improve quality.

More than a decade after that, there is already a problem of declining enrolment but also the issue of quality remains a big problem especially up country. What measures does Government have in place to deal with the issue of enrolment, access and quality to Universal Primary Education?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, this is a very important point.  The fact of the matter is that we have scored a big victory because more and more Ugandans have been able to get access as you rightly said.

However, it is true that there are still challenges in terms of quality of education. Government has embarked on a programme starting with the 20 poorly performing districts. One of the discoveries has been that the quality of education has come down because of absenteeism by teachers and subsequently absenteeism by students.

However, a biometric monitoring system has been introduced in these 20 districts and so far, within a period of about a year or so; we have started monitoring better results. Therefore, Government is doing whatever we can to ensure that young people do not only access education but get quality education.

THE SPEAKER: As I invite hon. Sempala, can the Prime Minister avail us that list for information of those 20 districts so that we are also able to carry out oversight. We want to know those 20 worst performing districts where you have introduced biometrics. You can send it to the Clerk to distribute it to the Members.

5.49
MS NABILAH NAGAYI (FDC, Woman representative, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Kampala is a horror story when it comes to traffic jam. It doesn’t even have rush hour -(Interruption)-

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, over the years, you have trained us to follow procedure. The methodology of addressing the House has to be to the Speaker and not the Prime Minister.

Is the Member in order to address the Prime Minister when you are in the Chair? According to the way we do things, it seems not right. May I also note that it is a practice many of us keep doing. We may need an induction course at some point to know what procedure says.

THE SPEAKER: I will have to continue doing induction courses but you should address me and he will answer.

MS NAGAYI: Thank you. Through you, Madam Speaker, I would like to address the Prime Minister on the issue of traffic jam in Kampala. We had got hope when we got the Express Highway through Munyonyo to Entebbe. 

However, because of the lack of access through Lukuri and Salaama roads, Ggaba Road is a stop when it comes to traffic. May we know whether a contractor has been got for those roads to ease traffic toward the Entebbe Express Highway so that the benefits of the express highway do not become a problem as the traffic is causing access problems in Kampala especially on Ggaba Road?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I agree with hon. Naggayi that we must optimise the investment in the express ways that we have created and are still building and the flyovers that we expect to be in Kampala soon. I will ask the minister responsible for works to come so that she can give the plan of improving the roads that you are talking about.

Some of them, I must say, are in a very bad shape and if improved, they would make a dramatic difference. Lukuri Road and Salaama Road are some of them and you could quote a few more others. Therefore, the minister responsible will come and give a statement to this august House on the improvements and when they are going to be made. 

5.52
MR HERBERT KINOBERE (Independent, Kibuku County, Kibuku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you will recall that in February this year, I brought to your attention the issue of the beds which were picked in health facilities in 2015. You did followed up with the Ministry of Health where you contacted the state minister for general duties.

She assured me, through your letters which I have, that by June I would have the beds taken back to the health Center IV in Kibuku. These beds were supplied by Sino Africa in 2015 and later on they claimed that they were of poor quality and they left patients sleeping on the floor.

I submitted these documents to your office and I appreciate that you responded to me with an assurance that we shall have beds of good quality taken back. I also mentioned to you that if good quality fails, I rather have poor quality beds than patients sleeping on the floor.

Hon. Prime Minister, I request to know what the status of the beds is. I have that document here; it shows that this supplier was even paid but there is no evidence that after picking these beds which are not yet taken back to the health facility, the money was brought back to the Government. I request to know the state of these beds.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I will ask the Minister of Health to come to this House next week and give a report on the beds.

5.54
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the House that although Dokolo was among the districts to be considered for the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE), the old persons in Dokolo have not been receiving the money.

Secondly, I would like to know whether this House formally approved the age of 80 years and above. I remember when the matter was discussed on the Floor, it was decided that by the time anybody in Northern Uganda reaches 60 or 70 that person is already dead. Very few people survive the severe poverty that that population is facing.

Therefore, I would like this House to pronounce itself on the issue of age. Definitely if you are going to put Northern Uganda-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are asking questions and providing solutions; I do not know what you want the Prime Minister to say?

MS OGWAL: I am asking the Prime Minister to explain why Northern Uganda is being considered for 80 years and above when we do not even reach there and why the SAGE money is not reaching Dokolo District. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, if somebody were asking or writing names of people aged 80 in Dokolo, I do not think one should rush to a conclusion that Northern Uganda has a different age as far as SAGE is concerned.

However, Madam Speaker, this matter has not been discussed in Cabinet. We are going to review this issue of age of 80. This issue is not official as far as I am concerned. Therefore, we are going to review it and the minister responsible will come to this august House and inform the House of the Government position on this matter -(Interjection)- Hon. Nzoghu is right in asking for time, I expect the minister to do so within the next two weeks.

5.57
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister about the Government policy on equitable development in the country in the electricity sector. The Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, hon. Muloni, is quoted in the Observer of 2nd October this year saying that Uganda produces excess electricity. 

However, the part of the country where I come from - West Nile - does not experience this excess electricity. Is West Nile in Uganda where this electricity is in excess or are we in another country? Where is the excess electricity going, hon. Prime Minister?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is true we are producing some power but it is also true that we are building capacity to make sure that this power that is being produced reaches the people of Uganda and if necessary, our neighbors.

Really, producing excess electricity is not the issue; the issue is developing capacity to distribute the power. Is the West Nile region getting a raw deal or not? To the best of my knowledge, there is a programme to cover the whole country and West Nile being part of Uganda, will be adequately covered.

6.00
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, how long is the Administrator General supposed to administer the estate of a deceased person? Are you aware that when people are formally appointed to manage their own estates are finding it very difficult, next to impossible to access their estates from the Department of the Administrator-General?

MR RUGANDA: Madam Speaker, my understanding of the matter is that the Administrator-General will only be responsible for the administration of the estate when the official letters authorising the person and family have not been given. However, as soon that has been done, the Administrator General relinquishes that responsibility. I do not see why anybody in that office should stick to administering an estate when the legitimate persons are available. However, if there are specific cases where there are question marks, we are ready to receive the details of these so that Government can pursue the matter.

6.02
MR DAVID KALWANGA (Independent, Busujju County, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I request that you give me chance to ask two questions because they are very crucial.

First, many students in my constituency did not sit for examinations because of examination fees. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, is the Government aware that head teachers and government schools are charging 100 per cent of late registration fee? Is it part of your programme to limit some of these people to access education? 

Secondly, what steps has the Government taken to incorporate the old manual land titles -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is one question. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, his first question did not come out clearly. With your Speaker, can he repeat it?

MR KALWANGA: In my constituency, many students did not sit examinations because the late registration fee was doubled to 100 per cent. Is it true that the Government is conniving with head teachers to limit education to some of the less privileged students?

DR RUGUNDA: Obviously, you know that there is no way Government can conspire with negative elements. Therefore, that is not true. However, if there has been unlawful increase in examination fees or any other fees, we would want to get detailed information and we will pursue it and ensure that if there is an anomaly, it is quickly corrected.
6.04
MR SAMUEL OKWIR (Independent, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. In 2011, the President pledged a hospital in Alebtong District. In 2016, he made the same pledge. Recently, there was a loan passed here to uplift the status of health facilities. I would like to know from the Prime Minister when Alebtong District will be accorded a hospital so that our people can also benefit, like other districts. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, Government, through the Ministry of Health, is upgrading health facilities in a phased manner depending on whether it is a Health Centre III, IV or so. Therefore, Alebtong is in this comprehensive national programme of upgrading the health facilities and it will definitely not be left out.

6.05
MS LUCY ACHIRO (Independent, Aruu County North, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Two weeks ago, the Minister of State for Lands, Housing and Urban Development, hon. Persis Namuganzi, went to my constituency in Pader with a company called Blue Rose Holdings. They planted two mark stones; one in Amokolagwai Primary School and another behind Pajule Health Centre in Lacani. 

I would like to know if Government is running such a programme because I heard it is on land administration. As a leader, it really bothers me why someone would come to my constituency without informing me or the local communities and therefore, – 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, you are asking whether the Prime Minister is aware of that programme and whether it has been sanctioned. 

MS ACHIRO: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, are you aware of that? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, as my colleagues may perhaps also agree with me, I am definitely not aware. Thank you. 

6.07
MR HAROLD MUHINDO (FDC, Bukonzo County East, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The farmers in this country were blessed by the bumper harvest of maize and Government released money to stabilise the prices. I would like to know from the Prime Minister what criterion was used for the districts that have so far benefited from this money. Probably from the status report, how many Ugandans have benefited from the stabilisation fund for the prices?  Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the operationalisation of the funds was under the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry and I believe the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Government will come to this august House and inform the honourable members of the performance of this fund. I think next week is already too congested; so we better make it two weeks from now.

6.08
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. At the last UN General Assembly, this country was represented by our very able Prime Minister and so well. What was missing in action was the country’s No. 1 diplomat and my good friend, hon. Sam Kuteesa. He had issues and the Government promised to investigate and report. Did the Government investigate his challenges after his tour of duty? Do you find his conditions tenable as the country’s No. 1 diplomat? 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I saw these reports in the media. All I can say is that hon. Sam Kuteesa was really not a permanent representative - as the President of the UN General Assembly, he did very good work, negotiated SDGs so Uganda was really high in the international map of negotiation. 

With specific issues being raised, one would need to find out what happened because the Ugandan Government was not complaining but there were others who were complaining. If they pursued those complaints, I do not have any information.  

6.10
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Today, through an organisation called UGANET, we were told that as a country, we do not have policies on palliative care. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, are you aware of this? When is the Government of Uganda considering putting in place a palliative care policy for Uganda? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, first of all, without any doubt, Uganda is the leading country in Africa in as far as palliative care is concerned. In fact, only about two years ago, Uganda hosted a major international conference on palliative care. 

I will need to crosscheck whether it is an old policy or if it needs to be reviewed but Uganda is more than happy to handle any issue that deals with palliative care because we are the authority on the continent. 

6.12
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last year, H.E the President directed that for every financial year, Shs 5,000,000 should be allocated for compensation of the lost animals of the Acholi Community. 

This financial year, 2018/2019, that money was not reflected. I would like to find out why Government is not following the presidential directives of compensating the Acholi community for their cattle. 

DR RUGUNDA: I would like to salute hon. Olanya for being a champion of rigorous implementation of presidential directives and I urge you to continue with this spirit. It is in the same spirit that I will go back to see why there was a hitch at the implementation of this presidential directive and let the House know. 

6.13
MR GORDON BAFAKI (NRM, Kazo County, Kiruhura): Madam Speaker, allow me demand a comment from the Prime Minister on the instant fall of milk prices. Even when production of milk is very low due to gradual distinction of cattle as a result of tick related diseases, especially in Kiruhura and Kazo, Government has kept a deaf ear in the last five years.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, Government has been rigorously following the issue of cattle diseases, especially tick-borne diseases. We all know and have heard statements from the honourable Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and his team.

Secondly, prices of milk are not determined by the Government but by the market. Rules of supply and demand determine the market. We believe that ultimately the producer will benefit from this arrangement of market forces.

THE SPEAKER: We have used the 45 minutes. The Prime Minister’s Time is 45 minutes. Those who have not got the opportunity to ask questions today will get next time. 

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE NATIONAL BIO-TECHNOLOGY AND BIO-SAFETY BILL, 2012 AS RETURNED BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT

THE SPEAKER: Do we still need the ministers? Let us get the report.

6.15
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Mr Fred Bwino): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As you have indicated, the committee presented a report but it is quite a while and I would like to suggest that I update the House before we can probably have a brief discussion.

THE SPEAKER: Did you debate it?

MR BWINO: No, it was not debated.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, give the highlights.

MR BWINO: Thank you. Madam Speaker, on 4 October 2017, Parliament passed a Bill for an Act entitled, “The Biosafety Act, 2017” and transmitted the assent copy to His Excellency the President.

The President, however, returned the Bill on 2 January 2018 in accordance with Article 91 of the Constitution of the republic of Uganda.

In his message to Parliament, the President asked the House to consider 11 concerns he raised and to review the short title of the law as well as sections 3, 15, 16, 25, 26, 35 and 36.

On 11 January 2018, the Minister for Science, Technology and Innovation moved a motion seeking to reconsider the Bill in accordance with Rule 142. The Bill was subsequently referred to the Committee on Science and Technology which carried out its mandate and reported to this House on 3 April 2018.

To refresh the House, allow me to give a summary of the committee’s report as follows:
    1) On the need for the law to recognise original preservers, developers and multipliers of ancient and livestock with unique genetic configuration whenever genetic engineering work is done. On this, the committee reported that:

a) 	General issues related to the patents are adequately handled under Section 8(3) of the Industrial Property Act, 2014.
b) 	That issues of access, sharing and benefit of genetic resources are similarly and adequately handled by the National Environment (access to genetic resources and benefits sharing) Regulation, 2005.
c) 	For emphasis, the committee proposed amendments to the Bill to cater for the agreements between those involved in genetic engineering and original preservers, developers and multipliers of ancient crops and livestock.

 2)  On the allegation that there is apparently, reference to a plan to have genetically modified plants grown in irrigated areas of Mobuku. On this, the committee reported that:

a) 	There was no such plan submitted to it.
b) 	That Mobuku was only selected for field trials because in its natural setting, the area has a rain-free season of two to three months and its irrigation regime provided a control for the field trials.
3) 	On the need for the law to provide for measures to prevent genetically modified seeds from randomly mixing with the indigenous seeds. The committee reported that it has provided for containment of confined field trials in green houses as well as measures to isolate genetically modified seeds from indigenous ones in open field conditions.

4) 	On the need for the law to clarify that influence from GMO materials should never mix with genetic materials. The committee provided for containment and isolation measures to curb this.
 5) 	On the use of poisonous and dangerous bacteria as inputs in genetic engineering. The committee observed that a gene from bacteria maybe used for genetic engineering but safety measures have been provided for in the law to ensure that the use of genes from such bacteria does not cause harm to humans, plants, animals and the environment.

6. 	On the clarity of labelling and punishment for failure to label GMO materials. The committee reported that it provided for amendments to ensure conspicuous and adequate labelling of GMO materials as well as punishments for failure to label properly. 

7) 	On vagueness of the term “modern biotechnology”. The committee recommended that it has provided for an amendment to limit the scope of the law to genetic engineering of crops and animals and exclude human cloning from genetic engineering.

8) 	On the suggestion that the home for genetic engineering should not be prescribed to be the Ministry of Science and Technology. The committee provided for the President to make the final decision on the home for genetic engineering in accordance with safety and effectiveness of developing the new science as suggested by the President.

9) 	On whether NARO has already released some GMO materials to the public. The committee reported that NARO or any other institution has not released any GMO material to the public.

10) 	About a special gene bank which the President called (Noah’s Ark) where all Uganda’s unique indigenous materials (for plants and animals) will be kept uncontaminated with any GMO, for future use if there is any crisis within the genetic engineering efforts. The committee reported that:

a) 	Three gene banks already exist in the country, which are the National Animal Genetic Resource Centre and Databank, the plant Genetic Resource Centre which is also called Botanic Garden and the National Crop Resources Research Institute at Namulonge.
b) 	The committee also reported that it has provided for an amendment to task the Genetic Engineering Council which is proposed in the Bill to establish a separate gene bank for indigenous plants and animals, in collaboration with the existing gene banks in accordance with the suggestion by the President.

Furthermore, the committee reviewed the short title as well as clauses 3, 15, 16, 25, 26, 35 and 36 suggested by His Excellency the President but it also revealed, consequentially, clause 1, clause 2, clause 6, clause 7, clause 9 and clause 41.
All in all, 19 new clauses were proposed to cater for the issues raised by the President. Besides, one schedule is proposed to be deleted while another is proposed to be introduced.

Finally, two honourable members, hon. Nsaba Buturo and hon. Thomas Tayebwa wrote to you on the 9th of April suggesting a number of amendments.

As you recall, Madam Speaker, you wrote back to these colleagues guiding them that they should harmonise their proposed amendments with the committee before coming to the House. 

I would like to report that the committee and the above mentioned Members have harmonised the said proposed amendments as per your guidance. The harmonised amendments have been uploaded on the iPads and will be presented at the committee stage as part of the committee position.

As I wind up, I would like to report that this afternoon, I received a communication from another honourable member who wrote to you and you guided him to give his proposed amendments to the clerk for circulation to the members. I believe that he has done so but when he came to me, I, as of necessity, consulted with the other colleagues that had proposed amendments about these new amendments.

What we have found is that one of the amendments is consequential. It is introducing a term that we introduced in our new amendments but we did not provide for the interpretation clause. Therefore, we think that it is okay to define that term. However, when it comes to committee stage, we shall adequately comment on those amendments. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I think we should be cautious how much of the areas we touch. The President came back to us on particular issues. I do not think you have the right to propose additional amendments. 

We are just going to respond to what he said. You cannot create new areas. You must respond to just those he indicated because the rest had been agreed on. They are already part of the law. So you cannot amend the other parts which he did not bring back.

6.27
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. I am just giving further information. 

When we processed the Bill here, Madam Speaker, you put a question on every provision. To change that, once a vote is taken, if you want to rescind, you need to mobilise two thirds to rescind. Every process was voted for and passed. Even third reading was voted for but the President is the only one with the provision to return the Bill. 

The Speaker has guided very well. I just wanted to add on this for Members to keep their minds on this provision. Once we have surpassed the committee stage, then the Bill has gone. 

MR NZOGHU: Rule 24 about the quorum. I do acknowledge the sensitivity of this Bill, and considering that His Excellency the President, in his wisdom realised that there are critical areas that we must focus on as the chairperson has highlighted; and also considering what the Government Chief Whip has talked about in terms of quorum, I look around the Chambers and I see that we do not have the requisite quorum.

In the circumstance, therefore, Madam Speaker, I would feel that the matter which the President returns must be given utmost attention and consideration. I do ask whether it wouldn’t be procedurally right for this matter to be put on a day where we have the requisite quorum so that we consider each item meaningfully.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what we are going to do is to debate. Do you need 100 ears in order to listen? We are debating the report. That is where we are heading.

Honourable members, you have heard. The debate should be confined to the areas that the President returned. Clerk, please, read out the provisions.

THE CLERK: The President returned the following items: the title, clause 3, clause 15, clause 16, clause 25, clause 26, clause 35 and clause 36.

THE SPEAKER: That is the area where the rules allowed you to go. Do not go into any other area.

The report has been signed by the necessary minimum numbers for Members. It is eligible for debate.

6.33
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to confine myself on the proposal by the committee to criminalise those researchers that – the provision for strict liability.

As you read this Bill, you realise that the processes of science go through rigorous process. 

Madam Chairperson, today, when I met you as you were going for some function at midday, I was also proceeding to Namulonge. There were youth that do genetic engineering at Makerere University for their first degree. I have met them and some were pursuing their masters and PhDs. They were trying to interact with youth on the cassava value chain. 

However, one of the concerns they raised is about the strict liability on a scientist or the corporate body who shall intentionally produce, through genetic engineering, crops that will harm the society. They were wondering how a scientist, one who has come to solve a problem - and the normal research period for a variety to be produced is around nine years - through those rigorous nine years produce something that will endanger society. 

For such results to be allowed by Government to go to the society with intention to harm its own people is, I think, impossible. Even in normal science and normal propagation where my father was a cytogeneticist for plants, he could not do it even without technology. He could not do it. 

Today, they were discussing the cassava value chain but what was pointed out is that at one time, cassava disappeared from Uganda and they had to import varieties from Nigeria, Brazil and South Africa to help us propagate cassava that we are all now enjoying in the names of NASE 1 to NASE 9. They now have new varieties for cassava.

So, they cannot intentionally harm the public. They were wondering about this provision. It has been done. That strictness was done in Ethiopia. Today, they have liberalised the law because it would make anybody fear to even venture into research. This technology is already being used –

THE SPEAKER: Which clause are you addressing? Clause 35?

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, it is clause 35 where they intend to bring in the personal liability on such genetic engineering. Therefore, I appeal to Parliament that please, much as we want to be so strict, this will be under an institution. I do not know how you can criminally prosecute an institution.

Yesterday, we said that we cannot because this will be an institution –(Member timed out)

6.37
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think mine is more or less related to what my colleague has raised. I think the idea is to be mindful of the effort that the scientists are also trying to bring on board by their genetic engineering.

When you look at clause 35, I had come up with an amendment or propose that we insert the issue of basing on the circumstances of the case in question. Therefore, somebody can be subjected to strict liability and the issue of the fault that has been caused.

Therefore, we suggest that we look at the amendment to read, “…based on the circumstances of the case to be subject to fault-based liability”. The issue is unless there is a fault that can be proved that it was intentional, then it would not be necessary to victimise someone who is trying to do this innovation. Madam Speaker, that is what we wanted to look at.

6.39
MR RICHARD OTIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The President was concerned about the preservation of our indigenous crops and his fear, which I also share, is as to how we can prevent the indigenous crops from disappearing at the onslaught of these modified crops.

That is why the President also talked about the Noah’s Ark policy. Unfortunately, it seems to be a very tall order because even in the recommendations, the committee is talking about proposals that a modality should be worked out. It says that the council – something like that – should work out a strong modality that should guarantee that our indigenous crops do not disappear.
That alone creates more fear and I do not know how the committee or this House is going to help us. I would have been very comfortable if there was a concrete measure put in place, other than just a suggestion that there should be a strong modality worked out.

I think why the President was concerned about this is that you know, the GMOs may be good but if you go to these countries where they are coming from, nobody consumes these products – (Interjections) – Yes! No, I am the one on the Floor. Everywhere you go, they must – 

THE SPEAKER: Which clause are you dealing with?

MR OTIENO: On extinction of these indigenous products. 

THE SPEAKER: Which clause? Is it clause 3, 15, 16, 25, 26 or 35? They are six.

MR OTIENO: Madam Speaker, I am following the concerns of the President. I thought they are in line with these. I have not followed it in the –

THE SPEAKER: He wanted you to address those specific clauses. That is why he wrote them. The general debate was done. We passed the law. Focus on clauses 3, 15, 16, 25, 26, 35 and 36, please.

MR OTIENO: These are in line but, Madam Speaker, thank you – (Member timed out.)

6.42
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the President for returning this Bill back to us. That means we need to pass a law which satisfies everybody. I have read these comments of the President. They are similar to the ones raised by the Civil Society Organisations.

It means that when we amend here, we are pleasing everybody. It is very important that we pass this law so that we, first of all, regulate the type of Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs) which we are going to produce. Definitely, we have to know exactly what you are modifying and where you are getting the genes from when you do research.

That one will help us so that we do not go around and use human genes in cloning, which definitely is very bad. So, once we have passed this law, we shall know exactly what they are doing in cross genetics.

We shall also make sure that the products we have are good for human beings. I would like to assure the Ugandans that Genetically Modified Organisms or plants which will be produced will never harm anybody because they will have gone through thorough trials. Even if it means trying with animals, it will be done just like any other research.

Therefore, nobody should fear that genetically modified organisms or plants will bring destruction to us. People everywhere are consuming them and nobody has died. Most of the food that we eat is genetically modified. Whether you like it or not, we are already eating them.

We thank God for this Bill so that we can regulate genetically modified organisms like any other country. We should not waste a lot of time; we can even go to committee stage and if there is quorum, we could pass this law now. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the instructions were clear; to review the six clauses. Let us hear what the committee has done in response to the President’s request at committee stage.

I put the question that the Bill be read for a second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL BIO-TECHNOLOGY AND BIO-SAFETY BILL, 2012 AS RETURNED BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT

Clause 3

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairman, can you report on clause 3?

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Mr Fred Bwino): Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In clause 3, we proposed some amendments, in line with the concerns raised by the President. Clause 3 is about interpretation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us go to clause 15.

MR BWINO: Madam Chairperson, we did not -

THE CHAIRPERSON: I would like to remind members that in the last sentence of the letter, the President said, “Finally and therefore, I am requesting the Parliament to consider the points I have noted above and review the following clauses of the Bio-safety law (i) the title of the law; sections 3, 15, 16, 25, 26, 35 and 36.”

MR BWINO: Madam Chairperson, the committee looked at clause 15, which is about stages of research. All it does is list the stages so there wasn’t much. Instead, the substance of the concerns by the President is in clause 16, which is about approval for each stage of research. There was nothing to amend in clause 15.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. I put the question that clause 15 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16

MR BWINO: Madam Chairperson, we proposed some amendments:

1. 	We replace sub-clause (2) with the following: “(2) The competent authority shall, before the approval of any stage of research, require the applicant to obtain written confirmation from the relevant institution on whether the indigenous animal or plant variety is preserved in a national indigenous gene bank.”

We also propose to insert the following new sub-clauses immediately after sub-clause (2):
“(3) Every stage of research shall require a bio-safety quality certificate issued by the competent authority.

(4) The competent authority shall establish the criteria and procedures for the request, issuance, review, extension, suspension and cancellation of a bio-safety quality certificate referred to under sub clause (3).”

The justification is to ensure that the applicant wholesomely and explicitly bears the burden of confirming whether the animal or seed variety under research is preserved in a national indigenous gene bank. This was one of the concerns by the President.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Wait, please. Do you have two sets of documents?

MR BWINO: I am presenting to you a harmonised position after discussing with the people that you sent to us, as a committee. Those amendments are in the report. We have put the amendments proposed by the committee and those proposed by the other members that you sent to me and we came up with a harmonised position. Therefore, what I am reading is the harmonised position.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 16 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25

MR BWINO: Madam Chairperson, we did not find any area to amend in clause 25. Instead, we found it in clause 26.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 25 does stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26

MR BWINO: Madam Chairperson, we propose the amendment of clause 26 starting with the head note. We are proposing that the head note reads as follows: “Labelling of genetically engineered materials.”

We also propose amendment of sub-clause (1) as follows: that we delete sub-clause (1) and replace it with the following. “(1)The person involved in the research, development, general release, importation, exportation, transit or trade of Genetically Engineered Material (GEM) shall-

    a) conspicuously label the GEM with the words, “Contains genetically engineered material; 
    b) indicate the characteristics and origin of the GEM.”

The justification is to create traceability of the GEM and allow regulators to safeguard against harm. This provides for a more elaborate labelling to enable consumers make reasonable choices.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the head note be amended as proposed. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 26 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 35

MR BWINO: Madam Chairperson, clause 35 is on page 18 of the harmonised amendments. We are proposing to amend clause 35 by replacing the entire clause with the following:

“A proprietor or an individual developer of Genetically Engineered Material (GEM), under this Act, shall be strictly liable for any damage, harm, inconvenience or loss caused to the community livelihood, indigenous knowledge systems or technologies, environments, bio-diversity, eco-systems, species of flora and fauna or human and animal health.”

The justification is to provide for strict liability for damage, harm and inconvenience. 

Madam Chairperson, I would also like to state that this is one of the areas where you sent somebody who had an – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the members wrote to me because I had instructed that if you have amendments, inform us. I did not actually read. I sent them to you so that you can examine them. If they touch on the areas, which the President wanted, let us know. If their proposals are not in conflict, let us know. I sent them because you are the one to deal with them. It was not because I recommended them.

MR BWINO: Madam Chairperson, that is our harmonised proposal. I would like to – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does it capture the fears?

MR BWINO: It does but the other members would like to insert something.

MR WOBOYA: Madam Chairperson, we had proposed to insert a sentence after “shall” to read, “based on the circumstances of the case, be subject to strict liability”.

The issue here is that the circumstances may differ. That is why we are saying that we bring in this insertion but it is subject to members’ discussion. 

What we are proposing is: “A proprietor or an individual developer of GEM, under this Act, shall, based on the circumstances of the case, be subject to strict liability for any damage, harm, inconvenience or loss caused to the community livelihood, indigenous knowledge systems or technologies, environments, bio-diversity, eco-systems, species of flora and fauna or human and animal health.” The issue here is based on circumstances of the case. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t you leave it as it is? You are now criminalising somebody for developing the engineering. The original provision was saying, “an activity relating to” but now you are saying that if you make it, you are in trouble. That is what this proposal is saying. 

Let me read what they have said: “A proprietor or an individual developer of Genetically Engineered Material, under this Act, shall, be strictly liable for any damage, harm, inconvenience or loss caused to the community…” You are saying here that if you are developing and as long as there is any damage - That is what you are saying.

MR BWINO: Thank you very much. The issue here is caution. This being a new science, Ugandans are saying that they are not sure about it. Much as the procedures are rigorous enough to filter out any bad effects, the proposal to introduce strict liability is a sort of caution.

However, when I read the proposal, I left out some words; “after general release”. This means that during the experimentation period, Government is controlling and is not allowing these materials to get in contact with the public. Therefore, the materials are protected and cannot harm the public. However, if there is harm, after the general release, the developer can be liable for that harm. That is why – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You did not say that in your amendment because that would clarify the situation. Read it fully now.

MR BWINO: Thank you. “A proprietor or an individual developer of Genetically Engineered Material, under this Act, shall, after general release, be strictly liable for any damage, harm, inconvenience or loss caused to the community livelihood, indigenous knowledge systems or technologies, environments, bio-diversity, eco-systems, species of flora and fauna or human and animal health.”

The justification is to provide for strict liability for damage, harm and inconvenience after general release.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, when this proprietor gets a product or comes up with this technology, there is a process that confirms that this technology is safe. He does not do it alone and end there. There is a competent authority, which we are mentioning in the Bill. Therefore, to me, putting it on the proprietor is a bit too much for us.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But the Bill had - let me read what the original Bill said. Why am I struggling when the minister is here? You are the owner of this Bill; you read what you had proposed first.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Madam Chairperson, the original Bill, as sent to the President, reads as follows: “A person responsible for an activity relating to GMO, under this Act, shall be liable for any damage, harm, inconvenience or loss caused to the environment bio-diversity, eco-system, species of flora and fauna or human and animal health.” That is the way it was. When we discussed in Cabinet with the President, we maintained that and only added, “… as a result of his or her negligence.”

However, Madam Chairperson, this is where there is a lot of contention; the issue of liability and whether it should be fault based or strict liability. Of course scientists the world over and the general trend now is to move away from strict liability. This is because strict liability almost gives a blanket cheque that even when it is not directly related to the particular activity, you can actually be held responsible under civil liability. 

Therefore, in order to compromise on this, there was a proposal - because there are others who strongly believe that the words “strict liability” should be included – that we just add, “… shall be strictly liable for deliberately causing any damage, harm or inconvenience.” That is what would help.

Keeping the words “strict liability” as it is without qualifying it would mean that most of these scientists will stop work. This is because even after general release, the proprietor or developer can still be held responsible for any inconvenience that can be caused.

Therefore, if we are to keep the words “strictly liable” then we need to qualify it, as proposed by the Member, on where circumstances are or add the words “deliberately causing” in order to keep our scientists because they have developed this. 

By the way, colleagues might want to know that there are circumstances where genetic engineering tools are the only solutions to a given problem such as viral diseases. If you get cassava mosaic or any viral disease, you have no conventional tool. You might have cryptic insects like the army worm where you do not have any conventional way - You might have salinity or other biotic stresses. 

Even now for ticks, we are trying to get Cubans who are using genetic engineering for anti-tick vaccines. Therefore, if you add “strict liability” there without qualifying it, there would be no work.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, I would like to see whether we can solve this as follows - suppose we go back to the old proposal and say, “A person responsible for an activity relating to GMO under this Act shall be liable for any deliberate damage, harm, inconvenience or loss caused …” Would that be helpful?

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, we must look at this clause from two angles. There is an issue of protecting and facilitating our researchers on one side. There is also an issue of protecting our population. That is the balance that we are trying to achieve.

I think what the chairperson had proposed; that we leave “strict liability” - Madam Chairperson, as a lawyer, you know that strict liability is very cautious; saying as you move, be sure. However, we are also saying, let us not restrict the researchers. Let us put it in the way the chairperson has proposed; “after general release”.

Personally, the words “strict liability” are very important because I know for sure - I support science but I know cases where some products were produced and given to pregnant mothers who produced children without limbs. We have examples.

Therefore, the fact that we have put a system in place of going through these researchers - Researchers should not be worried; we are not saying that we are stopping the research or criminalising researchers. We are just putting a caution so that when you are engaged in this exercise, you know that there is a caution. We must protect the researchers but we must also protect Ugandans as well. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you state what you want us to say? What do you want the provision to say? Speak it out.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, let us not stifle innovation for God’s sake. This country belongs to all of us, including scientists. 

We have always taken medicines and there are side effects. When you say “strict liability”, that means even for side effects, the innovator shall have strict liability.

Honourable members, this science passes through a process and we are the ones who have elaborated the process. At the end of the release - and you have said it in the law - after release or confirmation by Government, why do you go to the individual and not Government? Please hear us here. It is not a matter of - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, even in situations of strict liability, it is a question of evidence. You do not just say, you made this and therefore you are liable. You have to go to court and prove that you drunk the ingredient, something happened to you and this must have been the cause. That is when the court says, it is negligence. 

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Chairperson, the honourable Minister of Science and Technology was in the last meeting we had and it is a surprise that he wants to take us back to what we did not agree. What the chairperson is reading is what was agreed in that meeting we had where minister and his scientists were. Therefore, it is surprising that he now wants to take us back. What the chairperson is reading is the report we came up with.

Secondly, some of us were very much opposed to what we are seeing now until the phrase “strict liability” came in. We are therefore supporting, believing that indeed it will enable both sides to benefit. This is the area, which very few of us know about.

However, the minister should not change from the position we have agreed upon and which the chairperson is representing.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, please help us.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Madam Chairperson, hon. Nsaba Buturo knows very well that since that meeting - even the chairman accepts that there are some minor modifications that have been occasioned on the harmonised text.

Therefore, adjusting the text does not mean that you are significantly changing. In addition, one gets information. For example, when I checked “strict liability” and what it means - You know, the people who are against the Bill want strict liability there.

Countries like Ethiopia and Tanzania have moved away from that. I checked and it says, in criminal and civil law, strict liability is a standard of liability under which a person is legally responsible for the consequences following from an activity even in the absence of fault or criminal intent on the part of the defendant.

You see, in the absence of fault or criminal intent, you can be blamed even for other circumstances. That is why I am saying, we can keep the words “strict liability” as agreed but either add “where circumstances permit” or add the word “deliberately” in order to allow our scientists to continue doing research and helping us where we have challenges while exercising caution by the words “strict liability” being there.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, there are two issues that we need to address as far as this proposal is concerned. One, do we need to create an offence or are we creating a responsibility on the proprietor or an individual developer? If our intention is to create an offense, let us say so in the provision. The clause should be to the effect that somebody who damages or harms shall be committing an offence and we prescribe it as an offence and the consequences.

If we want to create an obligation, in the sense of “polluter pays principle” then let us say so. If you damage the environment, cause any harm or inconvenience, you must restore.

However, the way it is drafted here and the proposal being made, it is vague in the sense that we do not know what we actually want to achieve. Do you want to create an offence or an obligation on the developer?

On the concept of strict liability, legally speaking strict liability is a very broad term. In strict liability, you do not need what we call the mens rea; the mental element of it. Whether you know or you do not know, you are deemed to have committed the offence or crime. 

Therefore, in dealing with this, we must have that at the back of our minds. Do we want to make it so elastic to compel the developer, the individual or the proprietor to be liable for any consequence, whether they knew of it or not? Ideally, that is what the concept of “strict liability” is about.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Help us and propose. I do not think that the intention is to create an offence; I think it is responsibility. State what we should do quickly.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, I did not come to the House when the Bill was being debated but this would be my proposal: I propose that, “A proprietor or an individual developer of genetically engineered material, under this Act, shall be responsible for restoring any damage, harm, inconvenience or loss caused to community livelihood, indigenous knowledge systems or technologies, environment …” That would be my proposal about the restoration. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The Minister of Agriculture, make a proposal please.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, I wanted the previous speaker to understand this and maybe improve on his submission. In the Ugandan setting and regarding what we went through- what we are doing now is not going to get out what we discussed earlier. We put a competent authority in this law and this developer is answerable to Government. Even under the NAADS Act, when a product is released to the public, it belongs to Government; it no longer belongs to the developer. Therefore, if you want to punish, maybe you will punish everybody.

Therefore, under the circumstances, if you can improve on what you have just said by including, “deliberate” -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, all this is a question of evidence.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Even if it is deliberate, the competent authority - because you cannot release a product without others going through it. They must prove that what you have produced -

MR BASALIRWA: You cannot talk about strict liability and also talk about deliberate. Once you talk about strict liability –(Interjection)- Yes, it is a point I am making because the proposal you are talking about is adding the word “deliberate”. You cannot talk about “deliberate” and “strict liability” in the same sentence. They do not match. Once you talk about “strict liability”, you are really telling somebody to be super cautious in one way or the other.

MR SSEMPIJJA: I said we remove “strict liability” and include “deliberate” at the end. This is because by the time a product is released, it no longer belongs to the proprietor but it belongs to everybody who has participated.

MR ANGURA: Madam Chairperson, research takes a process and we have also acknowledged here that there are so many checks and balances through this process. By the time we finally release this product, we assume that it has gone through all the necessary checks and balances. Why can’t liability be taken by those who have released the product that they want to test on us and we get into challenges? 

I think we should accommodate this as it is. Let us not create a situation - the super process should be able to give us a result that will not give us challenges. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now what do you want us to do? Do not just debate, propose. What do we do now?

MR ANGURA: Madam Chairperson, I propose that what the committee adopted, after harmonisation, should be considered.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Madam Chairperson, I have a slight amendment to what was being proposed. We can say, “A proprietor or an individual developer of genetically engineered material under this Act shall, based on the circumstances of the case, be subject to strict or fault-based liability for any damage, harm, inconvenience or loss caused to the community livelihood, indigenous knowledge system or technologies, environment bio-diversity, eco-system, species of flora and fauna.” 

The standard of liability is usually either policy based or strict liability. Therefore, it would be okay for us to bring it as a compromise and to support science. It will be up to the judge; that based on the circumstances of the case, this would be subject to strict or fault based liability. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Angura raised an important point. To whom does this research belong? Is it for the state or the individual? If it is the state, why are you looking for me? Why are you following me? You asked me to produce, I have gone to the laboratory, I have produced it, it is yours and now you are looking for me. Why? 

MR BWINO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to clarify there. First of all, it is not true that all genetically engineered materials will belong to the Government. Private companies will get involved in research and they will produce genetically engineered materials, which will belong to them. 

However, the Government has a responsibility to screen the process and ensure that by the time a product is released, it is safe. 

I have been listening to the debate – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can I release the product without the Government? 

MR BWINO: No, it is not possible. Through this law, the Government is putting in place a very rigorous process through which researchers will go before a product is released to the public. 

However, I have listened to the debate and there is something that I have picked that enriches what I have proposed; the fact that cause must be proven. This is not clear, from what we have proposed. Somebody proposed that the committee’s harmonised position can remain. However, an addition at the end would read, “… provided cause and suffering are proven.” This is what I got from the debate.

THE CHAIRPERSON: May I ask whether this is for mischief makers only? Is it intended to catch mischievous people who are organising things and releasing them? Is it for criminals?

MR BWINO: Madam Chairperson, if strict liability is allowed, it catches those that have a deliberate intention to harm and those that do not. As long as, at the end, the product, after being released, has some adverse effects, whether you deliberately caused it or not, you would be caught. 

Nevertheless, this seems to be a contradiction because the Government has already put in place a very rigorous system to ensure that before any material comes out, it is safe.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank you so much. This document we are reading is harmonised and because it is harmonised, that means that all sides seem to have a common understanding. In my view, if we go against what has been agreed as a bare minimum, we are likely to cause more chaos and this might drag us for a long time. 

In criminal law, they say “strict liability” is mens rea and mens rea does not have to be proven. In criminal law (1) and (2), you will understand that properly. 

For purposes of harmony, I would propose - because I am sure that we belong to a group that was opposed to this Bill 100 per cent. We had to adjust to this understanding after rigorous understanding between the two parties. This Bill is meant to regulate and not promote GMOs. This means we must talk about strict liability. There should be a red line there. If you step on the red line, it means you have stepped on fire. 

In my view, we should go with what has been harmonised by the committee and the other team led by hon. Nsaba Buturo and my other colleagues. If we are going to start afresh, we are going to unveil and begin a fight that may not help us, as a team. Thank you so much. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do not threaten the House. 

MR AMORU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My position is to support the harmonised position. The reason I am saying so is, when you see the steps that are being taken, including listing the procedures and then going as far as preserving - we first have to preserve the indigenous gene before we even attempt to engineer it. This means we are engaging in a dangerous business. I think it is fair to risk punishing the proprietors or people who indulge in this practice rather than to open a window that will lead to much suffering for Ugandans. 

My view is, if you want to engage in engineering or modifying a crop or product, you should then realise that it will come with dire consequences if something goes wrong. We do not want to relax in that area and at the end of the day, endanger the lives of Ugandans. Therefore, I support our present position, which has already been harmonised. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does it include the addition after general release?

MR AMORU: Sure. 

MR ONZIMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. As members have observed, I do not depart much from the previous submissions. When you look at this Bill, we are looking at regulating GMOs. When we were debating, there are issues members had even raised about some crops like cassava. For example, some members said that after six months, you find that cassava is already rotting. Others were saying, when you plant a seed, after you have harvested it, you cannot replant it. There are a number of challenges.

Nevertheless, when you look at the intention, which is all about promoting production, if the scientists are sure of what they are doing, why should they fear this position, if there is nothing we are hiding? If we are talking about productivity, have our crops failed to produce? Have they failed to yield better? Some time back, we had very good yields. 

In my view, this law we are trying to put in place is to ensure that our community is protected. When you go to other countries, they have de-gazetted areas for GMOs and they are not supposed to mix with indigenous crops. 

Therefore, I think that we should go back and take the position of the committee. The issue of strict liability must apply because once you go into this business, you must be sure of what you are doing. You cannot just go there and try. Members, we should not leave a situation that will expose our community to danger.

Madam Chairperson, I go with the view and position of the committee.

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are discussing this Bill again because His Excellency brought some amendments. When we are discussing these amendments, we must bear in mind what he put down. We are talking of a harmonised position; who are those who harmonised the position? Have you included the President in your position, which has been harmonised? 

To be neutral, let us take the position of the minister where he says, “under some circumstances”. Definitely, our researchers will not do something deliberately. In any case, they are some people who may be doing it deliberately so that they are treated differently.

For example, when a person kills in the course of defending himself, we call it manslaughter. When it is intentional, we call it murder. Therefore, let us state these circumstances so that in case the GMOs become harmful, we can ask, under what circumstances has it become that way so that we can judge the developers fairly. This is rather than saying “strict liability” and we crucify them yet they had no intention of producing something harmful to human beings and to the environment. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to draw your attention to the President’s letter. The issue of strict liability is your own importation. Let me read what he said in paragraph 10: “The consumer must be protected. If a developer of GMOs produces dangerous material that harms the environment or people or animals (wild or livestock), that developer must be held accountable.” He did not say strict, he said accountable and it is already in the law.

In addition, I do not know whether you expect that once somebody has died, this body will say, this is strict liability. He wants accountability but he did not talk about strict liability. The President just wants to identify who should answer.

MR OKWIR: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. It is true that we are discussing a very pertinent issue that touches the lives of human beings. Since it touches life, when we are designing in engineering, we use worse case scenarios. A developer of a genetically modified organism should be extra cautious of the effect that will come at the end when the product is released.

When you take a step, you should be extra cautious because it touches life -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please, can you state what you want in the law? Don’t argue; tell us, from your perspective, what we should state in the law.

MR OKWIR: There should be a strict liability.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Speak the sentence in full.

MR OKWIR: The way the committee has presented it should be the harmonised position that we should take.

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to start from the point where it is intentional and a situation where it is not intentional. These are two scenarios. 

We also have private proprietors and scientists from Government and this is yet another scenario. 

We then come to the authority, which is supposed to regulate and they are there in the middle.

Now a product is released and there are undesired consequences or destruction to the public or to human life leading to loss of life. Given that scenario, who do we criminalise in such a situation? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I keep saying that this is a question of evidence and we shall take the matter to court. The judge will hear and say, “Based on what I have heard, you are the one.” You cannot just declare strict liability; it is a question of evidence. You must go to court first and present evidence.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are looking at three levels. The first level is the one of the scientists; the second level is the authority, which would be validating the technologies and the third level is the consumer and that is where I fall.

I know that all of us understand what is happening in this country to the extent that you find some individuals conniving even in matters where you do not expect them to connive. If we do not become very clear about who should take particular responsibility and we open it, it means that we have opened the box and anybody can jump in.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, please make your proposal.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, my proposal is premised on what the committee stated and I would like to reread it - If we lose the words “strict liability”, we would rather even delete it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you backing the committee fully?

MR NZOGHU: Fully and I am saying no amendment on that one. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay.

COL. (RTD) MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This position, which we are holding on, was arrived at by leading scientists, the committee members, the Cabinet and NARO. Therefore, why are we trying to divert from this position, which was arrived at after a long time? (Applause) 

I would like the two ministers of Agriculture and Science, Technology and Innovation to tell us the truth as to why they are diverting from what was arrived at by scientists and Cabinet. Otherwise, I agree with this harmonised position. 

MR SEMATIMBA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My humble position is as follows; you guided this august House and the committee that we must only deal with the matters that the President raised. This is because all the other matters have already become law literally. 

The President did not say anything about strict liability. Therefore, I wonder, if we understood your guidance, why we are debating something that should not be debated. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, he just said the consumer must be protected. If a developer of GMOs produces dangerous materials that harm, the developer must be held accountable. That is all. He did not give the level of strict, limited etc. These are your own creations. We need to conclude this matter.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, the President goes ahead, in the final analysis, to say, “Finally and therefore, I am requesting the Parliament to consider the points I have noted above and review the following clauses of the Bio-safety Bill… ” The President said that we should review clause 35 -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Did he mean strict liability? In the present clause 35, you had not addressed the developer; you had addressed somebody responsible for an activity. I think what he wanted was to create a responsibility for the developer. Therefore, you could add a new clause to say, “… the developer will be accountable …” but there was nothing about strict or not strict. He wanted to see the developer being identified as the responsible person. Maybe you should not delete the other one but just add another one, maybe 35 (2) and say, “… a developer …” 

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, the idea of strict liability is a very good one and seems popular and palatable. What we need to understand or get clarification on is, once we say “is strictly liable for any damage”, what exactly do we mean? Do we want this developer or proprietor to be imprisoned? Do we want them fined? Do we want them to restore the damage? What exactly do we want to achieve from this aspect of strict liability? You can place a statement in legislation and that statement is vague and a developer exploits it to their advantage.

Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose that when we are talking about strict liability, let us be very clear on what we want. If a developer, for example, has harmed the community, what is the consequence? That is the question I was raising earlier on. What do we want to achieve? Do we want to make this a penal provision? Do we want to place an obligation on the developer or we want to do both? 

If we are certain on that, we will understand what we mean by strict liability or what we want to define strict liability to be. Everybody who is talking about strict liability is not defining it. Are we talking about imprisonment, fining or restoration? Let us be very clear on that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to refresh my knowledge on the Law of Torts because this is where it falls. I am therefore proposing that we stand over this clause and we go back and read. We will then come back and conclude. Let us go to clause 36. The lawyers, go back and read the Law of Torts so that we can -

Clause 36
MR BWINO: Madam Chairperson, we propose to rephrase paragraph (f) of clause 36 as follows: “Deliberately uses a Genetically Engineered Material (GEM) to harm or injure human or animal life or the environment commits an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to life imprisonment.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 36 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, as amended, agreed to.

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: There is something I would like to clarify because clause 35 – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have stood over it. Go and read Winfield and Jolowicz on Law of Torts.

Clause 3

MR BWINO: Madam Chairperson, in clause 3, we have a number of proposals for amendment:
    1) We propose to insert the following definitions:
    i) “The national indigenous gene bank” means any genetic resource centre established under any law for the purposes of conservation of indigenous varieties of plants and animals.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What was the President’s issue on interpretation?

MR BWINO: The concern by the President on this is contained in concern number 11 and I can read it for clarity: “Again, by copy of this letter, I am directing the Minister of Agriculture to work out, maybe with NARO, a plan for Noah’s Ark where all our unique indigenous material, for plant and animal, will be kept uncontaminated with any GMO for future use if there is any crisis within the modernisation efforts.” This proposal is what the President called a ‘Noah’s Ark”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Was that for you or for the Ministry of Agriculture?

MR BWINO: Madam Chairperson, without a legal backing, the minister may not be able to implement that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you have the provision in the body? 

MR BWINO: Yes, we do.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where? Which clause?

MR BWINO: That is why we said that we have some consequential amendments and one of them is about that “Noah’s Ark”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, do not do engineering. The President was specific about the areas he wanted handled. This one was instructing the minister, by copy of this letter, to work. He did not ask you to design a “Noah’s Ark”. Instructions were to the minister.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, I received these instructions, by copy of this letter, but also in Cabinet and we are doing exactly what the instructions told us to do. These instructions were not for Parliament; they were for us and we have to do our work to keep the indigenous varieties. 

We have banks, which we have already mentioned here. We have the NAGRC and data bank as well as the plant bank at Kawanda. We have all this so people should rest assured about this.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if something is not in the body of the law, let us not go into it. The museums were not part of the law. 

I put the question that clause 3 do stand part of the Bill.

MR BWINO: Madam Chairperson, we have some other proposals under clause 3. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t we do them together? Let us do them together when we finish clause 35, in case you design other things, which we need. Let us finish clause 35 and then finally come back.

MR BWINO: Much obliged.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.55
THE MINISTER OF SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.55
THE MINISTER OF SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered clauses 16 and 26, stood over clause 35, considered clause 36 and had begun considering clause 3. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.56
THE MINISTER OF SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, unfortunately, the Attorney-General is not here. So, the lawyers in the House will have to do some extra work on this issue of strict liability. I will also do my own reading so that when we take a decision on clause 35, we are sure of what we really want to achieve.

Otherwise, I would like to thank you so much for the work done. House adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 7.56 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 27 November 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 

